federal power marketing administrations ( pmas ) are part of the department of energy ( doe ) . as requested , this report presents the results of our review of three power marketing administrations' ( pmas ) cost recovery practices , financing , and comparison to nonfederal utilities . the objectives of this report were to determine ( 1 ) whether all power - related costs incurred through september 30 , 1995 , have been recovered through the pmas' electricity rates ( chapter 2 ) , ( 2 ) whether the financing for power - related capital projects is subsidized by the federal government and , if so , to what extent ( chapter 3 ) , and ( 3 ) how pmas differ from nonfederal utilities and the impact of these differences on power production costs ( chapter 4 ) . the primary focus of our review was to determine whether all power - related costs incurred through september 30 , 1995 , have been recovered through the pmas' electricity rates ; whether the financing for power - related capital projects is subsidized by the federal government and , if so , to what extent ; and how pmas differ from nonfederal utilities and the impact of these differences on power production costs . increased competition may impact the pmas' status as a low cost supplier . some costs related to producing and marketing federal hydropower are not being recovered through power rates by the three pmas . unlike most other federal agencies , pmas are required by law to recover through rates funds appropriated for power - related costs . almost all of it is hydroelectric power generated by multiple - purpose dams built and operated by other federal agencies . fourth , certain costs for environmental mitigation have been legislatively precluded from cost recovery . several key laws have resulted in an increasingly competitive electricity market . we identified five main power - related activities for which costs are not fully recovered . copies will also be made available to others upon request . in addition , we were asked to provide information on federal energy regulatory commission ( ferc ) oversight of the pmas . southeastern's appropriated debt has remained relatively constant . the five pmas sell electric power within 34 states — to all states except those in the northeast and upper midwest . ious have adopted sfas no . the objective , based on our agreements with congressional requester staff , was to determine whether all power - related costs incurred through september 30 , 1995 , had been recovered through electricity rates . they sold about 3 percent of the nation's electric power output in 1994 . pogs and ious have more direct control over capital budgets . nationwide , there are five pmas — the three on which this report is focused , plus the alaska power administration and the bonneville power administration . because the cost of the abandoned transmission line has not been included in rates since construction was discontinued over 26 years ago , we believe doubt exists about whether these costs will ever be included in rates . private sector accounting standards have required similar reporting for pensions beginning in 1987 and postretirement health and other benefits beginning in 1993 .
this is an outline of two federal statutes: the electronic communications privacy act ( ecpa ) and the foreign intelligence surveillance act ( fisa ) . congress crafted both to preserve the ability of government officials to secure information critical to the nation's well - being and to ensure individual privacy . the courts play an essential role in both . both evolved out of the shadow of the supreme court's fourth amendment jurisprudence . fisa authorizes the collection of information about the activities of foreign powers and their agents , whether those activities are criminal or not . fisa has no such concern . it modeled parts of fisa after features in ecpa . ecpa protects individual privacy from the intrusions of other individuals . there are differences , however . ecpa's only concern is crime . prominent among its enactments are: the usa patriot act ; the intelligence authorization act for fiscal year 2002 ; the 21 st century department of justice appropriations authorization act ; the department of homeland security act ; the usa patriot improvement and reauthorization act ; and the foreign intelligence surveillance act of 1978 amendments act of 2008 ( 2008 fisa amendments act ) . although early american law proscribed common law eavesdropping , the crime was little prosecuted and by the late nineteenth century had "nearly faded from the legal horizon. . after the court held that the president's inherent powers were insufficient to excuse warrantless electronic eavesdropping on purely domestic threats to national security , congress considered it prudent to augment the foreign intelligence gathering authority of the united states with the foreign intelligence security act of 1978 ( fisa ) . congress enacted the first federal wiretap statute as a temporary measure to prevent disclosure of government secrets during world war i . later , it proscribed intercepting and divulging private radio messages in the radio act of 1927 , but did not immediately reestablish a federal wiretap prohibition . as used in this subchapter: ( a ) "foreign power" means — ( 1 ) a foreign government or any component thereof , whether or not recognized by the united states ; ( 2 ) a faction of a foreign nation or nations , not substantially composed of united states persons ; ( 3 ) an entity that is openly acknowledged by a foreign government or governments to be directed and controlled by such foreign government or governments ; ( 4 ) a group engaged in international terrorism or activities in preparation therefor ; ( 5 ) a foreign - based political organization , not substantially composed of united states persons ; ( 6 ) an entity that is directed and controlled by a foreign government or governments ; or ( 7 ) an entity not substantially composed of united states persons that is engaged in the international proliferation of weapons of mass destruction . in title iii , ecpa begins the proposition that unless provided otherwise , it is a federal crime to engage in wiretapping or electronic eavesdropping ; to possess wiretapping or electronic eavesdropping equipment ; to use or disclosure of information obtained through illegal wiretapping or electronic eavesdropping ; or to disclosure of information secured through court - ordered wiretapping or electronic eavesdropping , in order to obstruct justice .
as agreed with your offices , our objectives in this report are to describe ( 1 ) the advantages and disadvantages credit card use presents to college students and available bankruptcy data , ( 2 ) the results of key studies showing how college students acquire and use credit cards and how much credit card debt they carry , ( 3 ) universities' policies and practices related to on - campus credit card marketing , and ( 4 ) the business strategies and educational efforts credit card issuers direct at college students . controversy and media attention have surrounded these issues in recent years , and several state legislators and members of the u.s. congress have introduced legislation related to college students' use of credit cards . eighteen year olds can enter into a financial contract for a credit card in their name — without the consent or signature of a parent or guardian — in most states . whether or not credit card debt is a cause of bankruptcy filings has been the subject of academic research . banks issuing credit cards are subject to oversight by federal bank regulators to ensure compliance with federal laws and regulations . to meet this request , we examined ( 1 ) the advantages and disadvantages credit card use presents to college students and available bankruptcy data , ( 2 ) the results of key studies showing how college students acquire and use credit cards and how much credit card debt they carry , ( 3 ) universities' policies and practices related to on - campus credit card marketing , and ( 4 ) the business strategies and educational efforts credit card issuers direct at college students . these universities had both centralized and decentralized policies regarding solicitation . consistent misuse of credit cards by college students — particularly combined with student loan debt — could lead to substantial debt burdens . to address your request , we conducted structured interviews of about 100 officials at 12 universities and colleges around the country , including student deans , bursars , comptrollers , financial aid officials , student union directors , alumni association officials , credit union officials , and student government representatives . because of inexperience with credit and finance , some college students may not be financially literate and may be at greater risk of substantial debt burdens than more experienced consumers . but only two athletic departments had credit card relationships . some credit card issuers were not comfortable discussing certain issues , citing the confidential and proprietary nature of information such as the criteria the companies use to evaluate applications . we selected a variety of universities based upon their status as public or private institutions , geographic region , admissions policy , size and composition of the student body , cost of attendance , and other factors . in response to complaints about aggressive marketing techniques , a few universities had adopted policies restricting credit card solicitation on campus . credit card issuer participation in our study was voluntary because we do not have a legal right of access to any account data or business information of credit card issuers . complaints about the marketing practices of credit card vendors at student unions have influenced universities' policies on solicitation .
to help unaids achieve progress toward its mission and to help demonstrate this progress , we recommend that the secretary of state direct u.s. representatives on the cosponsors' executive boards to request the respective cosponsor: to accelerate its efforts to integrate hiv / aids into the work of its agency , and to hold country - level staff accountable for ( 1 ) participation in theme groups and ( 2 ) the results of theme groups' efforts to help host countries combat hiv / aids . in this report , we ( 1 ) assess unaids' progress , especially at the country level , toward increasing the coordination and commitment of the u.n. and global community ; ( 2 ) assess unaids' progress in providing technical support and information and in developing a monitoring and evaluation plan to measure results ; and ( 3 ) identify factors that may have affected unaids' progress . the secretary of state and the administrator , usaid , request that the unaids secretariat and cosponsors improve unaids' monitoring and evaluation efforts in order to determine the results of its overall efforts and measure progress , especially at the country level . in january 1999 , unaids launched the international partnership against aids in africa to enhance national and international efforts against the epidemic in africa . despite efforts by the international community to reduce the spread of human immunodeficiency virus / acquired immunodeficiency syndrome ( hiv / aids ) , aids is now the fourth leading cause of death in the world and the primary cause of death in sub - saharan africa . in 2000 , the united states classified hiv / aids as a threat to national security , and the congress approved approximately $466 million for international hiv / aids efforts in 2001 . according to the joint united nations programme on hiv / aids ( unaids ) , more than 36 million people are living with the virus worldwide , and more than 21 million have died since 1980 . five years after its creation , the secretariat has yet to implement a monitoring and evaluation plan that would enable unaids to determine the important results of its overall efforts and measure progress toward achieving its objectives . however , while unaids' cosponsors have recently intensified their commitment and efforts to integrate hiv / aids into their strategies and programs , their slow response has made it more difficult for unaids to achieve its mission . this is particularly important because unaids' donors have indicated that future funding increases for unaids may depend on its effectiveness in showing results at the country level . furthermore , given the scale of the pandemic , hiv / aids has grown beyond a public health problem to become a humanitarian and developmental crisis . unaids , funded in part by the united states , is one important international effort against hiv / aids . we found that u.n. cosponsors had not increased funding to integrate hiv / aids into their programs as expected and that unaids had not been effective in coordinating the u.n. response at the country level or in helping developing countries respond to the worldwide epidemic . our report affirms that unaids has contributed to increased commitments and funding for aids efforts by the u.n. and national and international entities .
this act creates the temporary assistance for needy families ( tanf ) block grant , a fixed federal funding stream that replaces the aid to families with dependent children ( afdc ) program and a number of welfare programs in which federal funding matched state spending and increased automatically with caseloads . specifically , you asked us to report on ( 1 ) how state budgetary resources , including federal aid , have been allocated since states have had access to tanf funds , ( 2 ) what plans states are making to assure programmatic stability in times of fiscal and economic stress , and ( 3 ) the extent to which states have used , or plan to use , the program's federal contingency fund and the loan fund which are available for downturns or other emergencies affecting states . in 1996 the congress made sweeping changes to national welfare policy in passing public law 104-193 , the personal responsibility and work opportunity reconciliation act ( prwora ) . this report is part of a series of gao work reviewing the implementation of federal welfare reform . you asked us to review states' fiscal decisions for the tanf block grant and to address whether states are taking steps now to prepare for the effects of future economic downturns on their welfare programs . in this report , we focus on the fiscal aspects of welfare reform . in a related report , we responded to a request from you and the chairman of the senate committee on finance to monitor states' efforts to implement programs to meet the stated objectives of title i ( tanf ) of prwora . in that report , we described states' efforts to require and encourage welfare recipients and potential recipients to assume greater personal responsibility , examined how states are providing services to support the objectives of tanf , and reviewed early reported data to assess states' progress . currently authorized through federal fiscal year 2002 , the tanf block grant represents an entitlement to states of $16.5 billion annually . prwora also creates two safety - net mechanisms for states to access additional federal resources in the event of a recession or other emergency — the $2 billion contingency fund for state welfare programs ( contingency fund ) and a $1.7 billion federal loan fund for state welfare programs ( loan fund ) . states currently have more resources available for these programs under tanf than would have been available under the old financing system , but future fiscal demands are uncertain . a number of factors unrelated to states' savings decisions have influenced the levels of these funds , including cash management practices , slow - starting programmatic spending , and caseload declines . federal funding under the tanf grant is fixed , and states are required to maintain a significant portion of their own historic financial commitment to their welfare programs as a condition of receiving their full tanf grant — referred to as their maintenance of effort requirement ( moe ) .these two funding streams — federal tanf and state general funds for moe — represent the bulk of the resources available to states as they design , finance , and implement their new low - income family assistance programs .
the department of housing and urban development ( hud ) , through its federal housing administration ( fha ) , annually insures billions of dollars in home mortgage loans made by private lenders . our objectives were to examine ( 1 ) the deployment of staff at the department of housing and urban development's ( hud ) homeownership centers , ( 2 ) the training provided to center staff , and ( 3 ) the centers' monitoring of their contractors . compared with private mortgage insurers , fha is more likely to insure loans for low - income and minority borrowers . in 1997 , hud issued its 2020 management reform plan , which provided for downsizing and reforming the department , including its single - family mortgage insurance program . to carry out its mission , fha relies on private lenders to determine borrowers' creditworthiness and to make and fund loans . finally , fha relies on contractors to help assess lenders' compliance with its requirements , monitor the performance of appraisers , and manage and sell the properties it acquires through foreclosure . although hud has substantially streamlined fha's single - family mortgage insurance programs , human capital issues remain a concern . these problems increased hud's insurance risk and limited its ability to recoup losses upon foreclosure . fha's mission is to expand homeownership in the united states by assuming 100 percent of the risk for the mortgages it insures . without careful oversight of these lenders , appraisers , and contractors , fha is vulnerable to mismanagement and fraud . in the absence of such procedures , hud has not been making the most efficient use of its monitoring resources . the department recently incorporated risk factors in its monitoring of lenders and appraisers and has begun to incorporate risk factors in its monitoring of management and marketing contractors . since we have made a number of recommendations in the past designed to improve hud's oversight of its contractors , we are making no new recommendations in this report regarding contractor oversight . our previous work at the centers has shown that their monitoring of contractors has been inadequate . the centers' failure to develop effective selection procedures for reviewing contractors' work , including procedures that incorporate risk factors into contractor oversight , has affected the centers' ability to monitor their contractors . although hud has begun to use our human capital self - assessment checklist to assess its human capital plans for the department as a whole , it has not developed a strategic human capital management plan for the homeownership centers . as part of its 2020 reforms , hud consolidated the single - family program's field activities — such as processing mortgage insurance and overseeing lenders — at four new regional homeownership centers and specified resources for the centers . finally , to determine how well the centers have monitored their contractors , we reviewed reports on our prior work at the centers involving hud's oversight of appraisers and lenders and its experiences with management and marketing contractors and similar reports issued by hud's inspector general . the plan stated that the homeownership centers would , among other things , ( 1 ) provide faster , more uniform , and more efficient services to clients , lenders , and borrowers ; ( 2 ) improve hud's risk assessment , loss mitigation , and quality assurance activities ; ( 3 ) increase hud's production of single - family loans to targeted populations ; and ( 4 ) cut the processing time for insurance endorsements from 2 weeks to 1 day .
specifically , you asked us to determine ( 1 ) the number , status , and reasons for park service visitor center projects ; whether these projects involved new construction or renovation of existing facilities ; and whether these projects were identified as priorities by the park service or by the congress ; ( 2 ) the costs of the visitor center projects and the functions included in those projects ; and ( 3 ) the sources of funding for the projects . most of the park service's 384 parks have a visitor center , but as existing visitor center buildings age and new parks are added to the system , new or renovated visitor centers are needed . the variation in the costs , size , and functions of projects that include visitor centers supports the park service's efforts . the national park service manages and maintains thousands of facilities to provide nearly 300 million visitors a year a safe and enjoyable visit to the nation's parks and monuments . one of the most important of these facilities is the visitor center , which serves as a focal point for visitors to learn about a park and offers a variety of services , including such basic services as orientation and information , exhibits and interpretation , publication sales , and restrooms . road construction funds from the federal highway administration's federal lands highway program provide an estimated $35 million , or 6 percent , of the total project funding . concerned that some of the new visitor center projects included new services , such as transportation facilities , and also appeared more costly than the projects that were built in the past , you asked us to provide detailed information , such as costs and functions , on park service visitor center projects that have been built or that are being planned to be built . conserving the nation's natural and cultural resources and ensuring visitor enjoyment of these resources has been the primary mission of the national park service since its inception in 1916 . of the 80 visitor center projects , 16 have been completed and 15 are still under construction . this expansion , combined with budget tightening of the 1980s and early 1990s , resulted in few visitor centers being built over the last 20 years . the park service has long provided facilities for visitor use , but over time , the way that the park service has provided services has changed . the park service has completed or started over one - third of the 80 visitor center projects , and the remaining two - thirds are being planned and construction is expected to be completed in the next 4 years . the remaining 49 visitor center projects , which were being planned as of april 2001 , are expected to be completed by fiscal year 2005 . our study included all national park service visitor center projects that had either been completed , were under construction , or were planned to be completed between fiscal year 1996 and fiscal year 2005 ( as identified by january 2001 ) . some of the existing visitor centers occupy buildings that were constructed in the early part of the century and were adapted to provide visitor services .
364 ) requires us to evaluate various aspects of the military services' logistics support capability , including the provision of spare parts . despite additional funding provided by the congress to address this issue , the army is still reporting concerns about spare parts shortages . shortages of spare parts are a key indicator of supply system problems that can result in the unavailability of weapon systems to meet mission requirements . since 1990 we have designated the department of defense's management of its inventory , including spare parts , as high risk because its inventory is vulnerable to fraud , waste , and abuse and its management systems and procedures were ineffective . the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2000 ( p.l . for this report , we determined ( 1 ) the impact spare parts shortages had on three selected army helicopters and ( 2 ) the reasons for the shortages . also , the chairman , house committee on appropriations , and the chairman , subcommittee on defense , house committee on appropriations , requested that we review issues related to the quality and availability of spare parts for aircraft , ships , vehicles , and weapon systems . having spare parts available when needed to perform required maintenance is critical to the department of defense's accomplishment of its missions . we will be discussing in separate reports our reviews on the availability of spare parts in the air force and the navy , the quality of spare parts , funding for spare parts , and war reserves requirements for spare parts . in response to the mandate and requests , we reviewed known spare parts shortages within the services . additionally , we identified the overall initiatives that the army and the defense logistics agency , which are responsible for managing and providing the spare parts , have in place or planned to address spare parts shortages . also , we reviewed data that measure the aircraft's highest operational readiness possible with available resources . to determine the impact spare parts shortages had on these helicopters , we reviewed data that measure the effectiveness of inventory operations in fulfilling units' requests for spare parts . despite years of efforts to resolve its inventory problems , the department still has spare parts shortages . to identify overall initiatives that address spare parts shortages , we obtained documentation and the army's and the defense logistics agency's views . to determine the reasons for the known shortages , we selected and reviewed 90 parts that were in short supply in fiscal year 2000 for these helicopters . 106-65 , sec . to address our reporting objectives , we selected the apache , blackhawk , and chinook helicopters . however , we did not review the initiatives . the purpose of this program is to ( 1 ) extend aircraft service life ; ( 2 ) reduce operating and support costs ; ( 3 ) improve reliability , maintainability , safety , and efficiency ; and ( 4 ) enhance capability . the program's focus will be to ( 1 ) provide inventory control point personnel with complete , timely , and accurate information on current and projected parts requirements ; ( 2 ) reduce customers' wait times for parts for which sources or production capability no longer exist ; and ( 3 ) create an efficient and effective program management structure and processes that will achieve the stated program goals .
as agreed , our objectives for this review were to ( 1 ) describe usda's current plans and ongoing efforts , including estimated costs , to modernize it for its service centers and ( 2 ) identify any significant risks in these plans and ongoing efforts . this report responds to your request for information on the department of agriculture's ( usda ) effort to modernize information technology ( it ) at its field service centers , which is being implemented as part of the department's service center implementation initiative . the purpose of this initiative is to provide “one - stop” service to customers of the farm service , natural resources , and rural development agencies by collocating field offices and modernizing the business processes and it used within these offices . these included usda's service center business process reengineering business case , service center business need and technical alternative evaluation study , service centers modernization strategy , business integration center project plan , service centers strategic plan , service center it procurement plan , and common computing environment implementation strategy . usda's effort to modernize business processes and it for its service centers is expected to be the biggest , most costly and complex it modernization effort in its history , with estimated costs ultimately exceeding $3 billion . to obtain information on usda's current plans and ongoing efforts to modernize it for its service centers , we analyzed relevant plans and studies for the department's service center it modernization , including usda's service center business process reengineering business case and supporting documentation on the business process reengineering and geospatial data projects ; the service center business need and technical alternative evaluation study ; the service centers strategic plan ; the service centers modernization strategy ; business integration center project plan ; the service center it procurement plan ; and the service center common computing environment implementation strategy . we interviewed senior office of the chief information officer officials to discuss the role that office has played in overseeing the service center it modernization and implementing the clinger - cohen mandates within the department , and met with office of management and budget ( omb ) officials to discuss their reviews of funding requests by usda for this effort . we did not validate the accuracy of agency - provided data on cost or benefit estimates , or actual costs . usda has failed in past efforts to plan and manage it modernization , and some of the same fundamental planning and management weaknesses that caused past failures threaten this effort . in conducting our review , we analyzed relevant service center it modernization plans and studies . develop an acquisition strategy that focuses on buying technology in manageable increments , where cost justification and performance measures are developed and documented for each increment . develop a comprehensive plan for the service center it modernization that documents and tracks all critical milestones , dependencies among major segments , and resources needed to complete them , taking into account the resources that will be needed to make the service center agencies' systems year 2000 compliant . rather , usda cites actions that it already has underway and believes these are sufficient to mitigate risks .
under the clean air act , the u.s. environmental protection agency ( epa ) is responsible for overseeing the states' air quality programs and for ensuring that the states appropriately implement the act's requirements . concerned about the air quality consequences of emissions that exceed allowable levels , you asked us to provide information on ( 1 ) the steps that epa and state regulators take to verify that large sources comply with their title v or state permit and the extent of compliance found ; ( 2 ) the steps that regulators take to verify the accuracy of emissions reports submitted by large industrial sources and the extent of errors found ; and ( 3 ) the steps that epa is taking , if any , to improve its oversight of these processes . in 1999 , 62 million americans lived in areas that did not meet federal air quality standards . title v of the clean air act amendments of 1990 requires nearly 20,000 major stationary sources ( such as factories that emit more than specified levels of pollutants ) to obtain and comply with the conditions of a permit that consolidates all applicable air pollution control requirements . to address these questions , we performed audit work at epa's headquarters , 2 of epa's 10 regional offices , and the air quality offices of four states ( two states within each of two of epa's regions ) . while these reports are not intended to demonstrate compliance with clean air act requirements , their accuracy is important for determining the amount of permit fees that major sources must pay and for developing state and national emission inventories , which are used to develop air pollution control strategies . generally , the permits contain provisions that limit emissions of pollutants as well as requirements for record keeping and monitoring . in addition , most major sources must report their aggregate annual emissions to their state air quality agency and pay fees based partly or entirely on their level of emissions . we selected these regions and states because of their large numbers of stationary sources and their levels of recent regulatory activity . for information on the extent of compliance and the extent of errors in emissions reports , we used data for fiscal years 1998 and 1999 , the most recent years for which data were available at the time of our review . within each region , we accompanied state air quality program officials on inspections of large facilities . the accuracy of these reports is important because they influence ( 1 ) the financing of states' regulatory programs through fees and ( 2 ) the development of emissions inventories , which , in turn , assist regulators in developing control strategies and establishing permit limits . finally , more thorough reviews could help epa and state compliance efforts . while taking steps to improve its overall compliance - monitoring strategy , epa does not plan to evaluate state processes for verifying emissions reports from large facilities . specifically , through its lengthy and resource - intensive investigations , epa identified widespread potential violations of new source review requirements in all four of the industries it reviewed . to help ensure the accuracy of large facilities' emissions reports , we recommend that the administrator of epa evaluate states' programs to determine whether they have adequate mechanisms in place for verifying the accuracy of emissions reports .
this report responds to your request and provides our ( 1 ) assessment of the department of defense's ( dod ) efforts to manage the fund's cash and ( 2 ) recommendations to dod which , if properly implemented , will provide additional management oversight of the fund's cash operations . one area of continuing concern has been dod's management of the fund's cash . in the committee's report on the fiscal year 1996 defense authorization , you raised concerns about the management of the defense business operations fund's cash and directed that we review the fund's cash management practices . since april 1991 , we have reported and testified on the challenges and problems confronting dod in the management of the fund . an enterprise that collects and disburses about $75 billion annually must have the mechanisms in place to ensure that it fulfills its responsibilities to dod management , the congress , and the american taxpayers . dod's fiscal year 1995 federal managers' financial integrity act ( fmfia ) report highlighted a number of serious weaknesses in dod's financial management operations and systems . dod has experienced continual difficulties in effectively implementing and operating the fund . successful implementation of the cfo act will be key to solving dod's long - standing financial management weaknesses . to the extent that ( 1 ) the fund is not paid for work performed in a timely manner or ( 2 ) dod cannot produce accurate and timely information on the fund's collections and disbursements , unanticipated fluctuations or , worse yet , cash shortages will occur . currently , dod's policy requires the fund to maintain cash levels to cover 7 to 10 days of operational costs ( $1.5 billion to $2.1 billion ) and 4 to 6 months of capital asset disbursements ( $.5 to $.9 billion ) . however , the poor state of cash - related information dod managers have to work with severely inhibits their ability to manage the fund's cash . unless a high priority is placed on correcting these problems , the status quo will be perpetuated , and the fund will continue to be limited in its ability to carry out its original objective of enhancing readiness capability through business operation efficiencies . the ability to generate cash consistent with dod policy is dependent on ( 1 ) accurately setting prices to recover the full costs of producing goods and services , ( 2 ) accurately projecting workload , such as the number of aircraft to be repaired during the year , and ( 3 ) collecting funds in a timely manner from customers for work performed . navy had the greatest share of the cash reduction ; its balance decreased from about $1.6 billion to $83 million . this is evident by the fact that dod relies on advance billing of customers for work not yet performed to ensure that the fund has sufficient funds available to meet its day - to - day operating expenses . dod's fiscal year 1995 fmfia report acknowledges inadequacies in the fund's accounting and reporting . gao's high - risk report series also pointed out that dod has serious , long - standing problems in providing reliable financial and cost information to those responsible for carrying out and overseeing dod's missions and programs .
since use of the in - lieu - fee mitigation option has increased over the last decade , you asked us to determine the extent to which ( 1 ) the in - lieu - fee option has been used to mitigate adverse impacts to wetlands , ( 2 ) the in - lieu - fee option has achieved its intended purpose of mitigating such impacts , and ( 3 ) in - lieu - fee organizations compete with mitigation banks for developers' mitigation business . of an estimated 220 million acres of marshes , bogs , swamps , and other wetlands in the contiguous united states during colonial times , over half have disappeared , and some of the remaining wetlands have been degraded . this decrease is due , primarily , to agricultural activities and development . agencies need adequate success criteria in order to measure whether progress is being made toward achieving the national goal of no net loss of the nation's remaining wetlands . developers whose projects adversely affect wetlands must , as prescribed in regulations and guidance issued by the army corps of engineers ( corps ) and environmental protection agency ( epa ) under the clean water act , first avoid and then minimize adverse impacts to wetlands to the extent practicable . to better ensure the ecological success of mitigation efforts under ad hoc arrangements , we recommend that the secretary of the army instruct the corps to establish procedures to clearly identify whether developers or recipients of funds are responsible for the ecological success of mitigation efforts and , using the same success criteria applicable to in - lieu - fee arrangements , to develop and implement procedures for assessing success . it is not clear , however , whether such arrangements have , in practice , been an adequate method for mitigating adverse impacts to wetlands . where states play a significant role in decisions on compensatory mitigation , the agencies could coordinate with them in developing the criteria . in addition , several districts have never taken steps to assess whether in - lieu - fee mitigation has adequately mitigated adverse impacts , and those that did make assessments used varying criteria . to ensure that in - lieu - fee organizations adequately compensate for adverse impacts to wetlands , we recommend that the administrator of epa , in conjunction with the secretaries of the army , commerce , and the interior , establish criteria to determine the ecological success of mitigation efforts and develop and implement procedures for assessing success . recognizing the value of wetlands , in 1989 , the administration set a national goal to protect against additional loss . the corps and epa , in coordination with the department of the interior's fish and wildlife service ( fws ) and the department of commerce's national oceanic and atmospheric administration ( noaa ) , work together to ensure that developers mitigate adverse impacts to wetlands and other waters of the united states . epa , in conjunction with the corps , fws , and noaa , issued guidance setting standards for mitigation banks effective december 1995 and for in - lieu - fee mitigation effective october 2000 . corps districts supplied us with contradictory information or were not able to provide us with data to support claims that acreage and / or functions and values of wetlands that had been restored , enhanced , created , or preserved equaled or exceeded those that had been lost through development .
with the illegal alien population in the united states estimated to be between 5 and a reported 11 million people , the issue of illegal immigration continues to attract the attention of policymakers , the media , and the public . in 1994 , the attorney general announced a five - part strategy to strengthen enforcement of the nation's immigration laws , including a strategy to deter illegal entry along the southwest border . to deter illegal entry between the nation's ports of entry , the strategy called for the immigration and naturalization service's ( ins ) border patrol to incrementally increase control of the border in four phases to make it so difficult and costly for aliens to attempt illegal entry that fewer individuals would try . specifically , this report addresses ( 1 ) ins' progress in implementing the strategy , ( 2 ) the strategy's effects to date , and ( 3 ) experience gained as the strategy has unfolded over the past 7 years . the illegal immigration reform and immigrant responsibility act of 1996 requires us to track , monitor , and evaluate the attorney general's strategy and to report annually for 6 years . seven years later , ins continues to make record numbers of arrests for illegal entry along the southwest border — over 1.6 million in fiscal year 2000 . the four - phased approach involved adding resources along the southwest border , starting with the areas that had the highest known levels of illegal alien activity . we have issued two previous reports on ins' southwest border strategy and two others dealing with other parts of the attorney general's strategy . as agreed with your committees , this report focuses on the component of the attorney general's strategy that deals with ins' efforts to deter illegal entry between the ports of entry along the southwest border . ins' current efforts to measure the effectiveness of its border control efforts could be enhanced by analyzing data in its ident system . to better gauge the effects of its border control efforts , we recommend that the ins commissioner develop specific performance indicators using the ident data and incorporate these indicators into ins' annual performance plan . these data offer ins an opportunity to develop additional performance indicators that could be incorporated into its annual performance plan review process and could help ins assess whether its border control efforts are associated with an overall reduction in the flow of illegal aliens across the border . the strategy's impact on local communities has been affected by the timing of ins' infusion of agent and other resources intended to protect the local community from a surge in illegal alien traffic ; what routes the illegal aliens have used in crossing the border ; and ins' involvement with the community . ins has taken some steps to design an overall evaluation of the strategy's effectiveness , and it has issued reports on the effects of operations gatekeeper and rio grande . whether ins' strategy has deterred illegal entry overall or whether it has merely shifted the traffic to different locations is unclear . as a way of gauging the effectiveness of its strategy in deterring illegal entry , the border patrol is attempting to measure its effectiveness in apprehending aliens .
the six programs and associated agencies were the ( 1 ) health care financing administration's ( hcfa ) medicare program ; ( 2 ) department of agriculture's food stamp program ; ( 3 ) social security administration's ( ssa ) old age , survivors , and disability insurance ( oasdi ) program ; ( 4 ) ssa's supplemental security income ( ssi ) program ; ( 5 ) u.s. customs service's compliance measurement program ( cmp ) ; and ( 6 ) immigration and naturalization service's ( ins ) inspections' traveler examinations ( intex ) pilot program . the internal revenue service ( irs ) reviews all tax returns after they are filed to ensure compliance with the tax laws governing this voluntary system . in order to understand the overall extent of noncompliance and the effectiveness of its compliance assurance programs , irs has periodically measured voluntary compliance . there are three types of voluntary compliance measures: filing compliance , which measures the percent of taxpayers who file returns in a timely manner ; payment compliance , which measures the percent of tax payments that are paid in a timely manner ; and reporting compliance , which measures the percent of actual tax liability that is reported accurately on returns . in spite of irs' efforts to enforce compliance , each year billions of dollars in taxes owed are not voluntarily reported and paid , which could result in reduced revenue to fund federal programs , higher tax rates , or both . the u.s. tax system is based on voluntary reporting — taxpayers self - report their liabilities on the returns they file . however , the commissioner of internal revenue has said that a current measure of voluntary compliance is needed to assess how well irs is accomplishing its mission . these reviews include the math error program , matching of information returns to tax returns and operational audits . in light of the controversy surrounding irs' last effort to measure voluntary reporting compliance by randomly auditing taxpayers , we initiated this review to determine the status of irs' current efforts . operational audits are targeted on returns where irs suspects noncompliance , often based on a computerized screening of returns that looks for indicators of noncompliance . to determine the status of irs' plans to measure voluntary reporting compliance , we reviewed available planning documents and discussed the plans with irs officials . irs does not have a current measure of voluntary reporting compliance . we initiated this assignment as part of our effort to monitor irs' activities related to its reorganization , implementation of its new strategic goals , and development of measures to assess its progress in meeting these goals . in addition , we looked at how selected programs in other federal agencies use random sampling to measure compliance with the rules and regulations governing their programs . unlike operational audits , done to help ensure compliance and targeted on suspected noncompliance , random audits are done to measure compliance and are conducted on a sample of returns selected without regard to suspected noncompliance . also , we wanted to explore how other agencies assessed compliance with their rules and regulations and measured progress against their strategic goals .
according to the department of the navy , the primary purpose of forward - deployed naval forces is to project power from the sea to influence events ashore . to be successful , our naval forces must be able to gain access to , and operate in the littoral regions of , potential adversaries . consequently , they must be able to detect and neutralize enemy sea mines and submarines , and to protect themselves against cruise missiles and other antiship weapons . specifically , we assessed the navy's existing mine countermeasures , antisubmarine warfare , ship self - defense , and surface fire support capabilities , and the progress of the acquisition programs the navy is pursuing to address shortfalls in these areas . we have reported on the extent of these capabilities in several individual reports over the last 6 years . finally , they must be able to launch and support offensive operations against enemy forces ashore . in this context , the navy has as one of its missions the support of the marine corps as it conducts amphibious operations . this report responds to your request that we update and consolidate the assessments contained in these reports and provide an overall assessment of the navy's capabilities to operate in the littoral . dod did not agree with our statement that the navy has not established funding priorities among its various antisubmarine and mine countermeasures programs . we accept dod's determination that current funding levels are adequate . the navy has not established funding priorities among its various antisubmarine programs . a congressionally mandated certification of the navy's mine warfare plan by the secretary of defense has enhanced the importance of mine countermeasures programs within the department of defense ( dod ) and the navy . since dod's budget represents the outcomes of many diverse constituencies competing for limited resources , funding tradeoffs and compromises are required to achieve agreement . as we have previously reported , dod employs overly optimistic planning assumptions in its budget formulation , which leads to far too many programs for the available dollars . further progress in developing improved capabilities may be limited by funding reductions in specific programs and competition among a large number of acquisition programs for the same resources . additional progress in overcoming shortfalls identified in the navy's 1997 anti - submarine warfare assessment may be limited by a lack of funding and the navy's failure to establish priorities among competing antisubmarine warfare acquisition programs . until such decisions are made , the navy will not be able to plan the full extent of its future funding needs for all mine countermeasures forces , from the standpoint of development , procurement , maintenance , and modernization . some countries are continuing to develop and proliferate mines that are increasingly more difficult to detect and neutralize . the navy has not made a decision on the size and composition of its future mine countermeasures force structure . on multiple occasions , the congress has unsuccessfully sought information from dod on the relative priorities of the programs being funded , the priorities among requirements , and the priorities of programs not funded . finally , we reported that while the congressionally mandated certification process increased the visibility of mine countermeasures requirements within dod and the navy , it did not address the adequacy of overall resources for this mission , nor contain any measures against which the navy's progress in enhancing its mine countermeasures capabilities could be evaluated .
with the passage of legislation such as the chief financial officers act , the government management reform act , and the government performance and results act , federal agency financial personnel are in the initial stages of establishing the systems and strengthening the accountability structures needed to prepare their first auditable financial statements and are increasingly expected to implement more businesslike accounting and management practices . well qualified financial management personnel are essential to the federal government's ability to manage its affairs effectively and provide accurate and useful information to the congress and executive branch managers . as the federal government strives to improve its financial management operations , it may be able to draw upon the expertise and experience of the private sector and state governments . this information can help provide a frame of reference for federal departments and agencies to consider as part of their efforts to strengthen the qualifications of federal financial management personnel . in contrast , financial management personnel with private corporations and state governments have considerable experience in operating the systems and practices necessary to produce audited consolidated financial statements to report on those activities for which their organizations are accountable to their stockholders and taxpayers , respectively . consequently , you asked us to survey the qualifications of key financial management personnel at fortune 100 companies and state governments . the final report in this series will compare the profile information on these personnel to that of their fortune 100 and state government counterparts . in this regard , we are issuing a series of reports describing the background and training of key financial management personnel in the department of defense . the cfo act spelled out an ambitious agenda for financial management reform , including expectations for the ( 1 ) deployment of modern systems to replace existing antiquated , often manual , processes , ( 2 ) development of better performance and cost measures , and ( 3 ) design of results - oriented reports on the government's financial condition and operating performance by integrating budget , accounting , and program information . the objectives for this report were to identify ( 1 ) the background and training profiles of key financial management personnel working at large private sector corporations and state governments and ( 2 ) the qualification requirements applicable to personnel in these positions . while these financial management improvement efforts may be new to many financial personnel in the federal government , similar requirements have been in place for personnel in the private sector and in state governments for many years . the financial personnel in these organizations have also had extensive experience in developing and implementing meaningful financial performance measures . the congress has taken various steps to help ensure that federal agencies improve their financial management . the disciplined process required to generate reliable , accurate financial data has been in place in the private sector for over 60 years following the 1929 stock market crash , and in state governments since the early 1980s . few financial management personnel were certified management accountants ( cma ) or certified internal auditors ( cia ) . requirements for other certifications ( cma and cia ) were rare . further , the requirements of the government performance and results act of 1993 call for federal managers to fundamentally shift their focus from a preoccupation with rigid adherence to prescribed processes to assessing the extent to which federal programs have achieved desired outcomes and results .
specifically , you asked that we ( 1 ) analyze the limited data available on actual results after dia opened for operations and ( 2 ) identify the risks associated with assessing dia's financial condition . you asked us to consult with you on the financial viability of the denver international airport ( dia ) , which opened for operations on february 28 , 1995 . finally , you asked us to comment on dia's ability to meet its financial obligations , including payments to its bondholders . you also asked us to review estimated cash flows and dia's cash reserves . opponents raised objections related to dia's construction and operating costs , levels of future passenger demand , and long - term financial viability . other risks include the possibility of ( 1 ) unknown construction defects resulting in major unexpected costs or ( 2 ) adverse actions arising from a current securities and exchange commission investigation and / or lawsuits filed by bondholders against dia . full funding requires that 2 months of operations and maintenance expenses be on deposit in the fund , a requirement of about $27 million . this fund can be used to cover operations and maintenance expenses if net cash from operations is inadequate . united airlines is thinly capitalized , with net equity of about $76 million and debt of about $12 billion , reported as of march 31 , 1995 . the airport , which opened for business on february 28 , 1995 , experienced numerous construction delays and cost overruns . also , because dia's revenues are primarily driven by passenger volume , increased ticket prices may be a concern if they result in significant passenger declines . most airlines have reported substantial net losses since 1990 , with total losses of about $13 billion from 1990 through 1994 . both dia and the federal aviation administration ( faa ) expect enplanement levels to increase over the next 5 years . financial results of the airline industry , a key risk factor , have been volatile since deregulation in 1978 . in addition , dia's future financial performance could be threatened by a number of factors specific to the airport's operations , most notably the overall volatility of the airline industry in general and any future deterioration in the financial health of its major tenant , united airlines . although investigations to date have not disclosed major deficiencies that would result in significant repair costs , if undisclosed defects are present that eventually cause expensive repairs , dia's cost structure could be materially affected . to review dia's revenues , we ( 1 ) sampled dia's daily revenue transactions for march through may 1995 and examined supporting documentation regarding collections of airline rents and landing fees , ( 2 ) tested supporting documentation for revenues from concessions such as parking , fees from rental car companies , food and beverage concessions , and retailers , ( 3 ) extracted data from reports on city of denver investment income and journal vouchers on receipts of passenger facility charges from airlines , ( 4 ) compared actual revenues for march through may 1995 to the monthly estimates of cash flows dia prepared for 1995 , ( 5 ) analyzed and studied for consistency dia's long - term estimates covering 1996 through 2000 for revenue and other financial information , and ( 6 ) reviewed the terms of lease agreements with airlines and cargo carriers , obtained and analyzed passenger data from airline landing reports for march through august 1995 , and became familiar with the rates and charges methodology dia used to set rental rates and landing fees for airlines .
this plan focuses on correcting many of the long - standing problems with indian trust operations , which include inadequate accounting and information management systems ; backlogs in asset appraisals , ownership determination , and record keeping ; and poor internal controls . this report responds to your request that we evaluate the department of interior's high - level implementation plan ( high level plan ) for improving its management of the indian trust funds and resources under its control . as discussed with your office , we agreed to assess whether interior has reasonable assurance that ( 1 ) the high level plan provides an effective solution for addressing these long - standing problems , and ( 2 ) its acquisition of a new asset and land records management service will cost effectively satisfy trust management needs . management of the indian trust funds and assets has long been characterized by inadequate accounting and information systems ; untrained and inexperienced staff ; backlogs in appraisals , ownership determinations , and recordkeeping ; the lack of a master lease file and an accounts receivable system ; inadequate written policies and procedures ; and poor internal controls . the objectives of our review were to assess whether interior has reasonable assurance that ( 1 ) the high level plan provides an effective solution for addressing long - standing problems with interior's indian trust responsibilities and ( 2 ) its acquisition of a new asset and land records management service will cost effectively satisfy trust management needs . about $60 million of this amount is to be spent on developing and improving information systems , $54 million on data cleanup , $17 million on records management , $8 million on training , and $8 million on all other activities . to determine whether interior has reasonable assurance that its acquisition of a new asset and land records management service will cost effectively satisfy trust management needs , we reviewed the clinger - cohen act of 1996 ; federal policy governing acquisition efforts including office of management and budget guidance and federal information processing standards ; and other current literature to determine the statutory and administrative requirements and best practices that should be used in acquiring software - intensive services such as the asset and land records service ; reviewed interior documents relating to this acquisition , including the request for information , vendor responses , and the request for proposals . the secretary of the interior is responsible for administering the government's trust responsibilities to tribes and indians , including managing about $3 billion in indian trust funds and administering about 54 million acres of indian land . to determine whether interior has reasonable assurance that the high level plan provides an effective solution for addressing interior's long - standing problems with its indian trust responsibilities , we reviewed the clinger - cohen act of 1996 and current technical literature as a basis for assessing the information technology aspects of the high - level plan ; reviewed the process that was used to develop the plan ; reviewed the strategic plan that was produced by interior's special trustee for american indians ; met with senior interior officials responsible for developing the plan , including interior's chief information officer , chief financial officer , deputy special trustee , and the interior contractor who assisted in the development of the plan ; and analyzed the high level plan for internal consistency and compliance with generally accepted best practices .
section 1051 of the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2001 ( public law 106-398 ) requires that we review the working capital fund activities of the department of defense ( dod ) to ( 1 ) identify any potential changes in current management processes or policies that , if made , would result in a more efficient operation and ( 2 ) evaluate various aspects of the dod policy that allow defense working capital fund activities to carry over a 3-month level of work from one fiscal year to the next . this report is the first in a series of reports that responds to this requirement and addresses the working capital fund fiscal year - end workload funding issue generally referred to as “carryover.” according to dod's fiscal year 2001 budget estimates , working capital fund industrial activities will have about $7 billion of funded work that will be carried over from fiscal year 2001 into fiscal year 2002 . specifically , our objectives were to review ( 1 ) the basis for dod's 3-month carryover policy , ( 2 ) the military services' implementation of this policy , ( 3 ) the military services' budgeted versus reported actual carryover amounts and whether there were any instances when the reported year - end carryover exceeded the 3-month policy , and ( 4 ) the potential financial and operational impact of reducing the amount of permitted carryover . to the extent that carryover is high , the congress may redirect the funds gained from such reductions to other priority initiatives . this report assesses the working capital fund policies and practices related to carryover . dod's budget estimates that these activity groups will have about $6.3 billion of carryover at the end of fiscal year 2001 — about 90 percent of the defense working capital fund's $7 billion total carryover . however , past congressional defense committee reports raised concerns that the level of carryover may be more than is needed for this purpose . excessive amounts of carryover financed with customer appropriations are subject to reductions by dod and the congressional defense committees during the budget review process . the congressional defense committees recognize that these industrial activities need some carryover to ensure a smooth flow of work during the transition from one fiscal year to the next . a working capital fund relies on sales revenue rather than direct appropriations to finance its continuing operations . a working capital fund is intended to ( 1 ) generate sufficient revenue to cover the full costs of its operations and ( 2 ) operate on a break - even basis over time — that is , not make a profit nor incur a loss . dod's carryover guidance does not address how certain items should be treated and / or calculated and , as a result , it is a contributing factor to the military services' inconsistent implementation of dod's formula for determining the number of months of carryover . until these weaknesses are resolved , concerns will continue to be raised about whether an activity group has too much or not enough carryover . the military services have not consistently implemented dod's guidance for determining whether an activity group has exceeded the 3-month carryover standard .
as agreed , using the selected key outcomes for usda as a framework , we ( 1 ) assessed the progress usda has made in accomplishing these outcomes and the strategies the agency has in place to achieve them ; and ( 2 ) compared usda's fiscal year 2000 performance report and fiscal year 2002 performance plan with the agency's previous year performance report and plan for these outcomes . as you requested , we reviewed the u. s. department of agriculture's ( usda ) fiscal year 2000 performance report and fiscal year 2002 performance plan required by the government performance and results act of 1993 ( gpra ) to assess the agency's progress in achieving selected key outcomes that you identified as important mission areas for the agency . to improve usda's performance reporting and planning , we recommend that the secretary of agriculture ( 1 ) set priorities for improving the timeliness of the data that usda is using for measuring its performance ; ( 2 ) improve usda's performance report by including more consistent discussions of data verification and validation ; ( 3 ) better match the department's goals and outcomes with its capabilities for expanding and maintaining global market opportunities ; ( 4 ) include performance goals and measures for strategic human capital management issues and information security issues in the departmental performance plan ; ( 5 ) make reducing food stamp trafficking an annual performance goal in usda's plan ; and ( 6 ) address and include the office of inspector general's major management challenges in future performance plans . these selected key outcomes are ensuring an adequate and reasonably priced food supply ; opening , expanding , and maintaining global market opportunities for reducing hunger and ensuring food for the hungry ; ensuring a safe and wholesome food supply ; and reducing food stamp fraud and error . usda presented one performance report with agency - by - agency coverage and 1 departmental and 24 agency and office performance plans . usda's performance report discussed the agency's progress in resolving many of its challenges , and its performance plan had ( 1 ) goals and measures that were directly related to seven of the challenges , ( 2 ) goals and measures that were indirectly applicable to two of the challenges , and ( 3 ) no goals and measures related to one of the challenges . the following table identifies the major management challenges confronting the u.s. department of agriculture ( usda ) , which includes the government - wide high - risk areas of strategic human capital management and information security . additionally , we agreed to analyze how usda addressed its major management challenges , including the governmentwide high - risk areas of strategic human capital management and information security , that we and usda's office of inspector general identified . we reviewed the same outcomes we addressed in our june 2000 review of the agency's fiscal year 1999 performance report and fiscal year 2001 performance plans to provide a baseline by which to measure the agency's performance from year - to - year . usda's fiscal year 2002 performance plans provided some goals and measures or strategies for all but five of its management challenges .
the kyrgyz republic gained its independence at the end of 1991 with the dissolution of the former soviet union . the interim leadership formed a commission on may 4 to draft a new constitution to establish a system of governance with greater balance between the legislative and executive branches . in the winter of 2009-2010 , the population faced growing electric power outages and large boosts in electricity and gas prices that many citizens blamed on corruption and mismanagement . in the face of growing protests by oppositionists on charges of government corruption and vote fraud surrounding a legislative election , he fled the country in march 2005 . after two days of large - scale unrest in the capital of bishkek and other cities that appeared to be linked to rising utility prices and government repression , opposition politicians ousted the bakiyev administration on april 8 , 2010 , and declared an interim government pending a new presidential election in six months . scientist and mid - level communist party official askar akayev had been elected president just before kyrgyzstan gained independence , and he was reelected in 1995 and 2000 in polls deemed problematic by monitors from the organization for security and cooperation in europe ( osce ) . according to the u.s. state department's country reports on human rights practices for 201 2 , the most important human rights problems included continued ethnic tensions in the south ; lack of judicial impartiality ; and law enforcement officials' use of arbitrary arrest , mistreatment , torture , and extortion against all demographic groups , but particularly against ethnic uzbeks . former opposition politician kurmanbek bakiyev was elected the new president in july 2005 in polling viewed as problematic by the osce . bakiyev initially fled to his native region in southern kyrgyzstan but was given refuge in belarus on april 19 . in july 2009 , president bakiyev was overwhelmingly reelected with 76% of the vote in a race deemed problematic by the osce . in 2007 , bakiyev reportedly orchestrated the holding of a referendum on a new constitution he had designed , and after the constitution was approved , similarly orchestrated a legislative election that yielded a majority for a new political party he had set up . freedom house reported that despite somewhat more democratic legislative and presidential elections in 2010-2011 , serious flaws remained in the treatment of ethnic minorities , due process , prevention of and accountability for torture , and judicial independence . freedom house , an ngo , continued to classify kyrgyzstan as "partly free" in 2012 in terms of political rights and civil liberties , similar to such countries as burundi , the central african republic , guinea , and venezuela . human rights organizations reported that authorities in the south continued to arrest and detain ethnic uzbeks for crimes committed during the 2010 interethnic violence , and that several disappearances and instances of abductions by law enforcement agencies took place in the south . roza otunbayeva , a former foreign minister and ambassador to the united states , was declared the acting prime minister . in july 2012 , legislation went into force to set up an independent and impartial national body empowered to monitor and prevent torture at detention facilities , and at the end of the year staffing was underway .
the congress passed section 8137 ( and its successor , section 8102 of public law 104-61 , department of defense appropriations act , 1996 ) to help ensure that dod prematch , or prevalidate , disbursements with recorded obligations , which is an important control for ensuring that agency funds are used as authorized by the congress and the department . in reducing these risks , the provisions of the act aim to strengthen accountability over dod's disbursement process , which has been plagued by long - standing problems . this report responds to your requests that we assess the department of defense's ( dod ) efforts to reduce problem disbursements and its implementation of section 8137 of public law 103-335 , department of defense appropriations act , 1995 , which required that each disbursement exceeding $5 million be matched to the appropriate obligations in dod's official accounting records before the disbursement is made . without such matching , there is a substantial risk that ( 1 ) fraudulent or erroneous payments may be made without being detected and ( 2 ) cumulative amounts of disbursements may exceed appropriated amounts and other legal limits . this review was conducted jointly with defense's office of inspector general ( ig ) , and the ig has issued a separate report on dod's implementation of the prevalidation program . these included correcting system weaknesses , providing additional training to accounting and disbursing personnel working in the prevalidation program , and developing useful performance indicators for monitoring the progress of the program . dod's problems with accounting for and reporting on disbursements will not be resolved until ( 1 ) weaknesses in control procedures that allow problem disbursements to occur are corrected and ( 2 ) improvements are made to dod's contract pay , disbursing , and accounting processes and systems . the ig recommended a number of specific actions to improve the prevalidation program . our objectives were to ( 1 ) assess dod's progress in reducing problem disbursements and ( 2 ) review dod's implementation of the requirements in section 8137 of public law 103-335 and section 8102 of public law 104-61 , for dod to match disbursements over $5 million with obligations in the official accounting records prior to making payments . we agree with the recommendations contained in the ig's report , and , likewise , the ig agrees with the recommendations contained in this report . we ( 1 ) analyzed various dod reports on problem disbursements to identify and document any changes in problem disbursement balances , ( 2 ) spoke with dfas officials to identify systemic problems hindering dod's ability to reduce problem disbursement balances , and ( 3 ) reviewed internal dod audit reports and the secretary of defense's fiscal year 1995 annual statement of assurance under the federal manager's financial integrity act . prevalidating all disbursements is important , especially in the short term , to protect the integrity of dod's disbursement process while long - term improvements are made to dod's contract pay , disbursing , and accounting processes and systems . it also required ( 1 ) dod to develop and submit an implementation plan to the congress and ( 2 ) the dod inspector general to review the plan and submit an independent assessment to the congressional defense committees .
our testimony is based on our prior work and a review that we have underway for this subcommittee and includes assessments of security concerns with ( 1 ) airport access controls , ( 2 ) passenger and carry - on baggage screening , and ( 3 ) alternatives to current screening practices , including practices in selected other countries . billions of dollars and a myriad of programs and policies have been devoted to achieving such a system . a safe and secure civil aviation system is a critical component of the nation's overall security , physical infrastructure , and economic foundation . faa's efforts to address these problems have been slow . although it is not fully known at this time what actually occurred or which of the weaknesses in the nation's aviation security apparatus contributed to the horrendous events of last week , it is clear that serious weaknesses exist in our aviation security system and that their impact can be far more devastating than previously imagined . faa is addressing these recommendations , but progress on one key effort — the certification of screening companies — is still not complete because the implementing regulation has not been issued . we recommended that faa develop an integrated plan to focus its efforts , set priorities , and measure progress in improving screening . we are here today to discuss the vulnerabilities that we have identified in the safeguards to protect passengers and prevent unauthorized access to or attacks on aircraft . it is now nearly 2 ½ years since faa originally planned to implement the regulation . weaknesses in the current system in which airlines are responsible for screening passengers and controlling access to secure areas have raised questions about whether alternative approaches should be considered . controls for limiting access to secure areas , including aircraft , have not always worked as intended . the department of transportation's inspector general has also documented numerous problems with airport access controls , and in one series of tests , the inspector general's staff successfully gained access to secure areas 68 percent of the time . a principal cause of screeners' performance problems is the rapid turnover among screeners . in work that we have under way for the subcommittee , we surveyed aviation stakeholders and aviation and terrorism experts and have identified four options for assigning screening responsibilities: continue with air carriers but with new requirements , assign responsibility to airports , or shift responsibility to the federal government , either through the creation of a new federal agency or the creation of a federal corporation . the future of aviation security hinges in large part on overcoming this cycle of limited action that has too often characterized the response to aviation security concerns . additionally , too little attention has been given to factors such as the sufficiency of the training given to screeners . as we reported in may 2000 , our special agents used counterfeit law enforcement badges and credentials to gain access to secure areas at two airports , bypassing security checkpoints and walking unescorted to aircraft departure gates . last week , faa and the air carriers implemented new controls that promise a greater sense of security . yet , to further minimize the vulnerabilities in our aviation security system , more needs to be done .
on july 9 , 1997 , we briefed you , other members of your staff , and officials from the defense information systems agency ( disa ) on the results of our review to date of the department of defense's ( dod ) efforts to improve the defense integration support tools database ( dist ) . during our review , we focused on determining the status of the office of the assistant secretary of defense for command , control , communications and intelligence ( asd / c3i ) and disa's efforts to address data integrity and other problems associated with dist and whether these efforts will be completed in time to beneficially affect departmentwide and component year 2000 efforts . dist serves as the dod inventory of automated information systems and is intended to be used as a tool to help dod components in correcting year 2000 date problems . the issues we discussed in our briefing were part of the work we performed concurrent with our overall review of dod's year 2000 computer systems efforts for the chairman , senate committee on governmental affairs ; the chairman and ranking minority member , subcommittee on government management , information and technology , house committee on government reform and oversight ; and the honorable thomas m. davis , iii , house of representatives . the impact of these failures could be widespread , costly , and debilitating to important military missions . if the year 2000 date problem is not addressed in time , dod computer systems could malfunction or produce incorrect information . disa was included in our review because of its unique role in dod's information processing and the year 2000 process . this letter summarizes the concerns we raised during the briefing , provides recommendations that — if implemented — should alleviate those concerns , and documents the actions your representatives and disa officials agreed to for improving dist . given the fact that defense has a major effort ongoing to improve its information systems , and that the year 2000 problem will likely call on the department to divert resources from other information technology - related initiatives , decisive action is needed to provide the resources and schedule priorities needed to accomplish dist improvements , and to ensure that the currency and accuracy of dist information is maintained in the future . after the new criteria for reporting information systems are applied by system managers , we recommend that your staff , and the director of disa , in conjunction with the services and components , act to ensure that the dist database is kept up - to - date and accurate , identify instances of noncompliance so that responsible command organizations can take corrective actions , and move forward with any other initiatives needed to make dist an effective management tool . in order to ensure that dist can be effectively used for year 2000 efforts , we recommend that you direct your staff assigned to oversee implementation of the dod year 2000 management plan and the director of the defense information systems agency to ensure that all duplicate , inactive , and incomplete entries be identified and expedite development and implementation of the purging methodology , expand year 2000 information included in dist for individual systems to include key program activity schedules that managers of interfacing systems need to ensure that their system interfaces are maintained during the renovation phase .
it has not been fully reviewed within gao . notice: this draft is restricted to official use . this draft testimony is being provided to obtain advance review and comment from those with responsibility for the subjects it discusses . collectively , the reports show that long - standing performance and management challenges hinder the federal government's efforts to achieve results . making these improvements will require the sustained efforts of the leadership and staff within agencies . at the same time , the report series also underscored the pivotal role that the federal government's central management agencies — in particular , omb — must play in guiding and overseeing agencies' efforts to address the shortcomings that we identified and to implement the changes necessary to improve performance . as you know , last month we issued a major new series of reports , entitled performance and accountability series: major management challenges and program risks , and an update of our high risk series . the report series also highlighted numerous improvements that agencies need to make in their performance , management , and accountability . mr. chairman and members of the subcommittee: we are pleased to be here today to discuss our observations on the office of management and budget's ( omb ) efforts to carry out its responsibilities to set policy and oversee the management of the executive branch . many management policies require budgetary resources for their effective implementation , whether it is financial management reform or information systems investment . first , we will provide an outline of omb's wide - ranging management responsibilities and note that the question of whether to integrate or separate management and budget functions has been long debated . like most organizations , federal agencies increasingly depend on information technology ( it ) to improve their performance and meet mission goals . framework contains as its core elements financial management improvement legislation , including the chief financial officers ( cfo ) act of 1990 , the government management reform act of 1994 , and the federal financial management improvement act of 1996 ; information technology reforms , including the paperwork reduction act ( pra ) of 1995 and the clinger - cohen act of 1996 ; and the government performance and results act of 1993 ( the results act ) . second , we will discuss the effectiveness of omb's management leadership , which , in our view , has been uneven . in our 1995 review of omb 2000 , we recommended that omb review the impact of its reorganization as part of its planned broader assessment of its role in formulating and implementing management policies for the government . considerable effort is now being exerted several agencies have made good progress towards achieving financial management reform goals . congress has , in effect , served as the institutional champion for many of these initiatives , providing a consistent focus for oversight and reinforcement of important policies . for example , congress' — and in particular this subcommittee's — attention to the year 2000 problem , information management , and financial management , has served to elevate these problems on the administration's management agenda . this year's plan follows a structure similar to that developed last year , including ( 1 ) a discussion of the administration's high impact agencies initiative , which focuses on defining service delivery commitments , developing customer and employee satisfaction measures , using interagency partnerships , and enhancing electronic access ; and ( 2 ) 24 specific priority management objectives ( pmo ) , many of which are also on gao's high risk list .
specifically , i will discuss ( 1 ) beneficiaries' potential financial liability under medicare's current benefit structure and cost - sharing requirements , ( 2 ) the cost of medigap policies and the extent to which they provide additional coverage , and ( 3 ) concerns that medigap's so - called “first dollar” coverage undermines the cost control incentives of medicare's cost - sharing requirements . medicare provides valuable and extensive coverage for beneficiaries' health care needs . most beneficiaries have additional supplemental coverage that helps to fill medicare's coverage gaps and pay some out - of - pocket expenses . nevertheless , recent discussions have underscored the significant gaps that leave some beneficiaries vulnerable to sizeable financial burdens from out - of - pocket costs . however , concerns exist that supplemental coverage can be expensive and may undermine the legitimate role of cost sharing in a health insurance plan — to encourage cost - effective use of services . i am pleased to be here today as you consider the need to modernize and strengthen the medicare program and review the role of supplemental “medigap” policies that many seniors buy to help improve their medicare coverage . the other sources — employer - sponsored policies , medicare+choice plans , and medicaid programs — are not as widely available to all beneficiaries . to assist the subcommittee as it considers proposals to improve coverage for beneficiaries and the financial health of the medicare program , my remarks today focus on the design of medicare's benefit package and the role of private supplemental coverage . privately purchased medigap is an important source of this supplemental coverage because it is widely available to beneficiaries . in summary , medicare's benefits package and cost - sharing requirements leave beneficiaries liable for high out - of - pocket costs . at the same time , medicare's cost - sharing requirements are poorly targeted and fail to promote prudent use of services . in addition , medigap first - dollar coverage eliminates the effect medicare's cost - sharing requirements could have to promote prudent use of services . medigap policies that many medicare beneficiaries purchase help to fill in some of medicare's gaps but are themselves problematic . as currently structured , medicare provides no limit on out - of - pocket spending and no coverage for most outpatient prescription drugs — a component of medical care that is of growing importance in treatment and rapidly increasing in cost . while these policies pay for some or all medicare cost - sharing requirements , they do not fully protect beneficiaries from potentially significant out - of - pocket costs . my comments are based on our prior and ongoing work on medicare and medigap as well as other published research . the danger is that some services may be overused — ultimately increasing costs for beneficiaries and the medicare program . in particular , some medigap policies offer prescription drug coverage , however , this coverage can be inadequate because beneficiaries still pay most of the cost and the maximum medigap benefit is capped . premiums paid for medigap policies averaged $1,300 in 1999 , with 20 percent going to administrative costs .
the 1990 amendments require the states to collect , analyze , and report information to the environmental protection agency ( epa ) . our objectives were to determine whether ( 1 ) epa's planned state emissions reporting requirements exceed the agency's program needs and ( 2 ) states use epa's aerometric information retrieval system ( airs ) to monitor emissions data . after the amendments were passed , the chairman of the former environment , energy , and natural resources subcommittee expressed concern that epa and the states could be overwhelmed by the collection and reporting requirements of the law and might not be able to make appropriate use of the information . this report conveys the results of our evaluation of selected data collection and reporting requirements of the clean air act amendments of 1990 . epa began work on the now suspended emissions regulation in order to consolidate and standardize several state emissions reporting requirements ( i.e. , emission statements , periodic emission inventories , and annual statewide point source reporting ) and to align these requirements with the mandates in the 1990 amendments . epa has suspended its promulgation of the regulation and has recently begun studying alternative reporting options . epa acknowledged these concerns and has suspended the regulation . the clean air act gives epa authority to set national standards to protect human health and the environment from emissions that pollute ambient ( outdoor ) air . epa's draft regulation on states' reporting of air pollution emissions exceeded what was needed by epa to meet minimum agency air pollution program needs . we believe the report adequately reflects epa's process and states' concern with the additional burden that would have been imposed on them if the draft regulation had been promulgated . to determine whether epa's planned state emissions reporting requirements exceeded the agency's actual program needs , we reviewed the clean air act , and we analyzed various information reporting requirements of the 1990 amendments and epa documents interpreting requirements of the amendments . budgeted subsystem costs were not available for fiscal year 1996 . the act assigns primary responsibility for ensuring adequate air quality to the states . neither of these estimates include states' personnel costs . in december 1994 , epa issued a study that stated that minimum program needs could be met with a fraction of the data that would have been required by the suspended regulation . when airs was originally designed , states were expected to be one of its primary users ; however , most heavy emission states now use their own systems because these systems are more efficient and easier to use than airs . expands several existing information collection , storage , and reporting requirements currently being met by the aerometric information retrieval system ( airs ) . the acting director also commented that the report did not adequately reflect epa's efforts to respond to the states' concerns . our analysis of the study revealed that , in one case , epa only needed to collect about 20 percent of the volatile organic compounds data requested in the suspended regulation to meet minimum program needs . budgeted operating and maintenance costs for fiscal year 1996 are projected to be $2.7 million .
over the last decade , the congress , the office of management and budget ( omb ) , and executive agencies have worked to implement a statutory framework to improve the performance and accountability of the executive branch and to enhance executive branch and congressional decisionmaking . as agreed with the subcommittee , i will highlight how gpra can be used as a tool to assist the congress in oversight and decisionmaking and to help address the challenges facing the federal government in the 21st century . my statement is based on our large body of work in recent years assessing gpra implementation and on strategic human capital management , as well as recent reports presenting the results of our survey of federal managers at 28 agencies and our analysis of human capital management discussions in agencies' fiscal year 2001 performance plans . the issuance of agencies' fiscal year 2000 performance reports , in addition to updated strategic plans , annual performance plans , and the governmentwide performance plans , completes two full cycles of annual performance planning and reporting under gpra . however , much work remains before this framework is effectively implemented across the government , including transforming agencies' organizational cultures to improve decisionmaking and strengthen performance and accountability . as a result of this framework , there has been substantial progress in the last few years in establishing the basic infrastructure needed to create high - performing federal organizations . i am pleased to be here today to discuss the government performance and results act of 1993 ( gpra ) . this framework includes as its core elements financial management and information technology reforms as well as results - oriented management legislation , especially gpra . moreover , we are now moving to a more difficult but more important phase of gpra implementation , that is , using results - oriented performance information as a routine part of agencies' day - to - day management , and congressional and executive branch decisionmaking . the cornerstone of federal efforts to successfully meet current and emerging public demands is to adopt a results orientation ; that is , to develop a clear sense of the results an agency wants to achieve as opposed to the products and services ( outputs ) an agency produces and the processes used to produce them . major management challenges and program risks confronting agencies continue to undermine the economy , efficiency , and effectiveness of federal programs . such goals should be included particularly for problems whose resolution is mission - critical , or which could potentially impede achievement of performance goals . the performance information produced by gpra's planning and reporting infrastructure can help build a government that is better equipped to deliver economical , efficient , and effective programs that can help address the challenges facing the federal government . omb has required that agencies' annual performance plans include performance goals for resolving their major management problems . virtually all of the results that the federal government strives to achieve require the concerted and coordinated efforts of two or more agencies . this transformation is not an easy one and requires investments of time and resources as well as sustained leadership commitment and attention . there are over 40 program areas across the government , related to a dozen federal mission areas , in which our work has shown that mission fragmentation and program overlap are widespread , and that crosscutting federal program efforts are not well coordinated .
97-291 - - nafta: related environmental issues and initiatives updated september 28 , 200 . environmental issues emerged early in nafta negotiations , and linkages between trade and environmental issues were reflected inthe outcome of these negotiations more so than in any previous trade talks . while not a new issue , the question ofwhether acountry's stricter environmental measures could be found to pose non - tariff trade barriers received an unprecedentedlevel of attentionduring the nafta debate . a related concern was that expected nafta - driven industrialization andpopulation growthin the u.s. - mexico border region would worsen the severe pollution problems already present . nafta's standards provisions do not affect a country's ability to determine its levelsof environmentalprotection for manufacturing and other process standards ( such as water pollution controls and resource harvestingpractices ) . at least20 cases have beenfiled , including 6 against the united states , one of which involves california's ban on methyl tertiary butyl ether ( mtbe ) in gasoline . ultimately , the nafta parties included language to conditionally protect a party's stricter environmental,health , and safetystandards for products and produce ( provided that , among other things , such measures are scientifically based ) . nafta set a precedent in addressing its relationship to multilateral environmental agreements ( meas ) . the u.s. - central america fta ( cafta ) , which the president has signed but which requiresimplementing legislation,includes similar provisions and also adapts the naaec provisions that allow citizens to file submissions concerninga party's failureto effectively enforce its environmental laws . interest in the 108th congress also has continued regarding the implications of nafta and the naaec for new trade agreements.the u.s. - chile and u.s. - singapore ftas both include an obligation for parties to enforce their environmental laws,and make thisobligation subject to dispute settlement procedures . additionally , the question was raised whether a country's weaker environmentalprotection measures ortheir ineffective enforcement would create a competitive advantage and provide an added incentive for businessesto relocateproduction to the least regulated country . u.s. - mexico and u.s. - canada bilateral waste - tradeagreements also areincluded , and the parties may agree to add others . in 1993 , the three nafta governments adopted the north american agreement on environmental cooperation ( naaec ) , whichincludes dispute settlement provisions to address a party's failure to enforce environmental laws . although tradeofficials argued thatenvironment was not a customary trade matter and that nafta talks were not the best forum for resolving theseissues , the level ofconcern over environmental issues in congress prompted nafta negotiators to respond to them . the u.s. - chile fta further calls for parties to negotiate a u.s. - chile environmentalcooperationagreement . other nafta provisionsencourageupward harmonization of standards and encourage parties to integrate environmental protection and sustainabledevelopment intoeconomic decision - making . the listed agreements include the montreal protocol on substances thatdeplete the ozonelayer ; the basel convention on the control of transboundary movements of hazardous wastes and their disposal ; and theconvention on international trade in endangered species . 6 , the energy bill ( section 146 ) would amend naftaimplementinglegislation to direct u.s. nadb board members to encourage the bank to finance infrastructure projects related toclean energy andenergy conservation .
several federal agencies are involved in analyzing the problem , including the u.s. geological survey ( usgs ) , the national oceanic and atmospheric administration ( noaa ) , and the u.s. environmental protection agency ( epa ) . hypoxia refers to a depressed concentration of dissolved oxygen in water . in addition , spawning areas and other essential habitat can be destroyed by the lack of oxygen . one model suggests that a 12% to 14% reduction in the use of fertilizer on croplands in the mississippi river basin would reduce the net anthropogenic nitrogen inputs by about 30% , without any loss in crop production . legislation was enacted by the 105 th congress to provide additional authority and funding for research and monitoring to address these concerns . although the extent of effects of hypoxic events on u.s. coastal ecosystems is still uncertain , the phenomenon is of increasing concern in coastal areas . mortality is especially likely for sedentary species . strategies selected focus on encouraging voluntary , practical , and cost - effective actions ; using existing programs , including existing state and federal regulatory mechanisms ; and following adaptive management . decreased concentrations of dissolved oxygen result in part from natural eutrophication when nutrients ( e.g. , nitrogen and phosphorus ) and sunlight stimulate algal growth ( e.g. , algae , seaweed , and phytoplankton ) , increasing the amount of organic matter in an aquatic ecosystem over decades and centuries . legislation has been introduced in the 110 th congress to reauthorize and amend the harmful algal bloom and hypoxia research and control act . noaa initiated the nutrient enhanced coastal ocean productivity ( necop ) program in 1989 to study the effects of nutrient discharges on u.s. coastal waters . while definitions vary somewhat by region , it is generally agreed that hypoxia in a marine environment occurs seasonally when dissolved oxygen levels fall below 2-3 milligrams per liter . hypoxia is more likely to occur in coastal waters where the water column is stratified ( i.e. , layered ) because of differences in temperature or salinity or both . as organisms die and sink to the bottom , they are consumed ( decomposed ) by oxygen - dependent bacteria , depleting the water of oxygen . when this eutrophication is extensive and persistent , bottom waters may become hypoxic , or even anoxic ( no dissolved oxygen ) , while surface waters can be completely normal and full of life . while some believe this problem may have no fast solutions and any management regime considered will need to recognize that progress or improvement may not be apparent for years or even decades , others suggest that improved agricultural practices in efficient application of chemical fertilizers and prevention of soil erosion could yield immediate and measurable benefits . about 21% to 43% of the area of the united states' estuaries have experienced a hypoxic event ; more than half of the affected area is in the mississippi / atchafalaya river plume . in the last few years , the u.s. department of agriculture's cooperative state research , education , and extension service has provided a special research grant of around $220,000 annually to iowa state university's leopold center for sustainable agriculture for a project to define and implement new methods and practices in farming that reduce impacts on water quality and the hypoxia problem in the gulf of mexico .
two provide access to federal meetings: the federal advisory committee act ( 1972 ) ; and the government in the sunshine act ( 1976 ) . two provide access to federal records: the freedom of information act ( 1966 ) and the privacy act ( 1974 ) . throughout the first 150 years of the federal government , access to government information does not appear to have been a major issue for the federal branches or the public . there were a few instances during this period when the president , arguing the need to maintain the constitutional independence and equality of his branch , vigorously resisted attempts by congress and the courts to obtain executive records . section 3 ( b ) of the administrative procedure act of 1946 ( 5 u.s.c . some congressional panels began examining information access issues and seeking responsive legislative solutions . §301 ) , which authorized the heads of departments to prescribe regulations regarding the custody , use , and preservation of their agencies' records , papers , and property . during this same era , an active federal public printing program was established and effectively developed , making government documents more accessible . the public availability of records held by the executive branch was limited by narrow interpretation of the "housekeeping" statute of 1789 ( now codified at 5 u.s.c . this report offers an overview of each of these statutes , including the boundaries of their authority . among these legislative responses were the enactments of four statutes . §551 ) indicated that matters of official record should be available to the public , but added that an agency could restrict access to its documents "for good cause found" or "in the public interest. . prevailing law tolerated this state of affairs , offering citizens no clear avenue of access to agency information . these discretionary authorities were relied upon to restrict the accessibility of unpublished agency records and documents . following world war ii , some information was available from certain federal departments and agencies . this report then provides citations to additional resources on each of the laws . the department of justice ( doj ) is responsible for overseeing and coordinating administration of the freedom of information act . congress could use its "power of the purse" and the senate could use its advice and consent power to leverage its information access demands . both congress and the judiciary have subpoena powers that can compel the production of materials by another branch . federal courts rely upon a spirit of justice and fair play to sustain their orders for the production of information by another branch . the department of homeland security ( dhs ) received 291,242 requests in fy2014 , more than any other agency . u.s. congress . a federal district court , in committee on oversight and government reform v. lynch , rejected the claim of privilege over the items sought , and ordered the attorney general to produce the responsive documents . the u.s. house of representatives committee on government reform has published several editions of its report , a citizen's guide on using the freedom of information act and the privacy act of 1974 to request government records — most recently in september 2012 .
the focus of the latest national debate over high levels of immigration is largely on its economic effects , that is , whether immigration provides net economic benefits to society . immigration has been a contentious issue since the nation's inception . the current debate has been concerned with the impact of immigration on the public budget and the private economy . during periods of substantial immigration , it has not been unusual for the native - born population to raise objections on many grounds — cultural , religious , ethnic , and economic . the debate over immigration policy has been devoted more to the well - being of u.s. workers than to consumer welfare . the report opens with a discussion of how to analyze the impact of immigrants on the pay and job opportunities of native - born workers . in terms of budgetary effects , the question is whether immigrants receive more in public services than they pay in taxes . immigrants also affect the private economy in their capacity as workers: if the admission of foreign - born workers lowers wages , which , in turn , results in more goods being produced at lower prices , then u.s. consumers would benefit ; however , if immigration results in lower wages , u.s. workers would be harmed . some policymakers have proposed further strengthening the u.s. border with mexico to curtail the entrance of unauthorized aliens and improving enforcement of more stringent sanctions against employers who hire these predominantly low - skilled workers , based in part upon the belief that immigration does , in fact , have substantial adverse consequences for low - skilled native - born workers . before the entrance of foreign - born workers to the u.s. labor market , the amount of labor that workers are willing to supply to employers is represented by the curve labeled s 1 in figure 1 . the empirical issue is how best to measure the existence and magnitude of the potential wage and employment effects of immigration that the model describes . yet , changing the composition of immigration may not be the most effective way to improve the plight of low - skilled native - born workers . it then uses this framework to examine and interpret the empirical literature on the subject . it also has been suggested that congress address the distributional issue some empirical studies have raised by changing the composition of legal immigration . but , theory also suggests that immigration would make consumers ( including the above - mentioned native - born workers ) better off because it holds down wages and thereby holds down prices of goods and services . if other factors ( e.g. , skill - biased technological change ) have played a greater role than the inflow of low - skilled foreign - born workers , then curtailing the immigration of this group may not much affect the wage and employment outcomes of low - skilled u.s. workers . the model suggests that some native - born workers may be made worse off through lower wages or diminished job prospects because immigration increases the supply of labor available to the nation's employers . the increase in the supply of labor due to the addition of foreign - born workers is represented by s 2 .
the former program , aid to families with dependent children ( afdc ) , was replaced with the temporary assistance for needy families ( tanf ) block grant , which provides states with $16.5 billion each year through 2002 to serve this population . while prwora expanded the flexibility of states to design and administer their tanf programs , it also limited the ability of the department of health and human services ( hhs ) to regulate states' tanf programs . we determined ( 1 ) the extent and nature of state and local government contracting with for - profit and nonprofit organizations , using federal and state tanf funds to provide services to eligible recipients ; ( 2 ) what approaches are used by the federal government to oversee tanf contracting with nongovernmental entities and what problems have been identified in this area nationally ; ( 3 ) what approaches are used by state and local governments to ensure compliance with bid solicitation and contract award requirements and what violations of these requirements have been identified involving the awarding of contracts funded by tanf in selected jurisdictions ; and ( 4 ) what approaches are used by state and local governments to ensure that organizations contracted to provide services funded by tanf comply with the terms of their contracts and what major instances of noncompliance with such requirements have been identified in selected jurisdictions . the personal responsibility and work opportunity reconciliation act ( prwora ) of 1996 dramatically changed the nation's cash assistance program for needy families with children . as specified in prwora , tanf's goals include ending the dependence of needy families on government benefits by promoting job preparation , work , and marriage ; preventing and reducing the incidence of nonmarital pregnancies ; and encouraging two - parent families . prwora also established new accountability measures , such as minimum mandated work participation rates for states and a 5- year lifetime limit on assistance for tanf recipients . contracting out social services can potentially result in several benefits , such as more efficient and effective delivery of services . these measures heighten the importance of holding tanf contractors accountable for performance . while state and local governments have contracted out welfare services for quite some time , prwora expanded the scope of services that could potentially be contracted out , such as determining eligibility for tanf , which had traditionally been done by government employees . moreover , with the large drop in tanf caseloads nationally , a greater share of federal tanf block grant funds and state funds , known as state “maintenance - of - effort” funds , is now devoted to various support services that are typically contracted out . effective oversight is critical to help ensure contractor accountability for the use of public funds , and our review identified problems in some cases with state and local oversight of tanf contractors . while states have a great deal of flexibility in using tanf funds , hhs continues to have a fiduciary responsibility to ensure that states properly account for their use of federal funds and maintain adequate internal controls over the use of funds by their subrecipients . greater use of single audits as a program management tool by hhs would provide greater assurance that tanf contractors are being held accountable for the use of public funds .
the department of education has a history of financial management problems , including serious internal control weaknesses , which have affected education's ability to provide reliable financial information to decisionmakers both inside and outside the agency and to maintain the financial integrity of its operations . specifically , you asked us to assess the adequacy of internal controls over ( 1 ) grant and loan disbursements , ( 2 ) third party drafts , and ( 3 ) government purchase cards , and to determine if any fraudulent or otherwise improper payments were made in these areas . because of this , we have designated education's student financial assistance programs as a high - risk area for waste , fraud , abuse , and mismanagement . however , because the department has not effectively implemented its new policies , vulnerabilities remain . given the billions of dollars in payments made by education each year to recipients nationwide and abroad , these known deficiencies raise the risk that fraudulent or erroneous payments could make their way undetected through education's processes . while education has taken steps to develop new policies and procedures to address these problems , in many cases they are not being effectively implemented . as the department has recognized , it must continually review its processes to ensure that the improved controls are sustained and , therefore , will help to reduce the department's vulnerability to fraudulent and improper payments and lost assets and improve its financial management overall . you requested that we cover the period may 1998 through september 2000 during which time education disbursed $181.5 billion through these processes — $181.4 billion in grants and loans , $55 million in third party drafts , and $22 million in purchase card transactions . in january 2002 , three employees pleaded guilty to a scheme in which they defrauded the department of more than $1 million during the 1990s , and , in 2000 , the department reported that $1.9 million meant for two school districts in south dakota was fraudulently wired to improper bank accounts . the objectives of our review were to assess internal controls in place from may 1998 through september 2000 and to identify any fraudulent or otherwise improper payments that may have resulted from control weaknesses in education's processes for ( 1 ) disbursing grants and loans , ( 2 ) paying for purchases with third party drafts , and ( 3 ) use of government purchase cards . control activities are the policies , procedures , techniques , and mechanisms that enforce management's directives and help ensure that actions are taken to address risks . gao examines the use of public funds ; evaluates federal programs and policies ; and provides analyses , recommendations , and other assistance to help congress make informed oversight , policy , and funding decisions . control activities are an integral part of an entity's planning , implementing , reviewing , and accountability for stewardship of government resources and achieving effective results . internal control , which is synonymous with management control , helps government program managers achieve desired results through effective stewardship of public resources . the department of education's mission is to ensure equal access to education and to promote educational excellence throughout the nation .
aliens apply to the immigration and naturalization service ( ins ) for such benefits as naturalization , work authorization , and adjustment of status .  ( 3 ) how does ins address its dual responsibility of timely application processing and the detection and deterrence of fraudulent applications ? . and ( 4 ) what performance measures does ins have in place to gauge the results of its benefit fraud enforcement activities ? .  ( 2 ) how do ins's policies , procedures , and information systems support its immigration benefit fraud investigations ? . immigration benefit fraud involves attempts by aliens to obtain such benefits through illegal means ( e.g. , using fraudulent documents ) . immigration benefit fraud is a significant problem that threatens the integrity of the legal immigration system . specifically , this report addresses the following questions: ( 1 ) what does ins know about the nature and extent of immigration benefit fraud ? . at your request , we reviewed available information on the nature and extent of immigration benefit fraud and assessed ins's efforts to address it . in its fiscal year 2000 threat assessment , ins predicted that immigration benefit fraud would intensify as smugglers and criminal enterprises searched for other methods to bring illegal aliens into the united states . to identify data that indicate the nature and extent of immigration benefit fraud , we reviewed immigration and naturalization service ( ins ) reports and studies , interviewed ins officials , and used information developed in our prior reports . ins officials believe that the problem is pervasive and serious ; they also believe that some aliens are using the benefit application process to enable them to carry out illegal activities , such as crimes of violence , narcotics trafficking , and terrorism . the priorities are to ( 1 ) identify and remove criminal aliens ; ( 2 ) deter , dismantle , and diminish smuggling of aliens ; ( 3 ) respond to community reports and complaints about illegal aliens ; ( 4 ) minimize immigration benefit fraud and document abuse ; and ( 5 ) block and remove employers' access to unauthorized workers . ins's management of its benefit fraud enforcement activities has been fragmented and unfocused owing to several problems . regardless of how ins is restructured , addressing the issues discussed in this report would require that enforcement and service delivery priorities be recognized . to determine how ins's policies , procedures , and information systems support its immigration benefit fraud enforcement activities , we reviewed relevant laws and regulations ; ins threat assessments , interior enforcement strategy , policy guidance , and information system data ; and testimonies and other reports and documents . specifically , any restructuring plan should address the need to coordinate the efforts of the investigation units in the district offices and service centers ; balance the responsibility for timely adjudication of immigration benefit applications and the need to detect and investigate fraudulent applications ; establish guidance for deciding which immigration fraud investigations to pursue ; track immigration benefit fraud investigations ; determine the optimum means of providing adjudicators with access to ins's databases ; and establish outcome - based performance measures . recently , proposals have been offered that would separate ins functions into enforcement and service components .
in recent years , particularly since the enactment of the internal revenue service restructuring and reform act of 1998 ( restructuring act ) , the demand for offers has increased significantly . a growing backlog of cases and longer processing times have prompted concern on the part of taxpayers , congress , and other stakeholders about the management of the internal revenue service's ( irs ) offer in compromise ( oic ) program . specifically , you asked us to ( 1 ) determine why the inventory of cases and case processing times have continued to grow ; ( 2 ) assess whether irs's current initiatives for managing the oic program will reduce inventory and processing times ; and ( 3 ) determine whether irs is fulfilling the requirements of the restructuring act in terms of independently reviewing all proposed rejections of offers , considering the facts and circumstances of each case , and not rejecting offers from low - income taxpayers solely on the basis of the amount offered . an offer in compromise is an agreement between a taxpayer and the irs to settle or “compromise” the taxpayer's tax liability for less than the full amount owed . irs now takes about 10 months , on average , to make an offer determination . generally , irs considers offers in cases in which taxpayers cannot afford to pay the full tax liability . because of your concern about the growing inventory and processing times , you asked us to review irs's administration of the program . because of concern that this decision would leave some taxpayers unable to qualify for either an installment agreement or an offer , you asked us to determine the extent to which irs has information on how the counsel decision affects taxpayers and to evaluate irs's legislative proposal for a new partial payment installment agreement program . to address these objectives , we reviewed and analyzed program data from irs statistical reports and program documents and reviewed offer policies and procedures and studies by an outside contractor and the treasury inspector general for tax administration ( tigta ) . even though irs added staff to the program , the inventory of unresolved offers and the processing times have grown . in 1998 , irs counsel determined that irs did not have the authority to enter into an installment agreement that would not fully pay the tax liability within the time allowed by law . you also asked us to review a recent change to irs's installment agreement program . an installment agreement allows taxpayers to pay their tax liability over time . we focused on fiscal years 1997 through 2001 because this was a period of enormous change in the oic program . we also interviewed irs officials , including officials responsible for the oic and installment agreement programs . as irs makes changes to its oic program , we recommend that the commissioner of internal revenue develop evaluation plans for the various offer initiatives that include details on data to be collected , data collection methods , basis for comparing outcomes , quality of decisions , and an analysis plan and move no new initiatives into implementation without a finalized evaluation plan ; determine which oic program performance and cost data should be collected to monitor program performance , given resource constraints , and ensure that such data are collected in a timely and reliable manner ; and set goals for offer processing time that are based on taxpayer needs , other benefits , and costs .
the three largest federal disability programs providing cash assistance , which are administered by the social security administration ( ssa ) and the department of veterans affairs ( va ) , in 2001 collectively provided $89.7 billion in cash benefits to approximately 10.2 million adults with a physical or mental condition that reduced their earning capacity . in this report , we review the extent to which di , ssi , and va's disability criteria have been updated based on ( 1 ) scientific advances , including medical and technological innovations ; and ( 2 ) labor market changes , including the growth in service - and knowledge - based industries over manufacturing - based industries . ssa administers both the disability insurance ( di ) program and the supplemental security income ( ssi ) program . with such an extensive cash outlay and such a large beneficiary population , it is important to use updated scientific , workforce , and economic information to evaluate claims for disability benefits . over time , progress in the fields of medicine and technology has provided a better understanding of how disease and injury affect the ability to work . study and report to congress the effect that a comprehensive consideration of medical treatment and assistive technologies would have on the va disability programs' eligibility criteria and benefit package . together , scientific advances and labor market changes redefine the extent that physical or mental conditions affect the ability of people with disabilities to work . if federal disability programs do not update scientific and labor market information used in assessing program eligibility , they risk overestimating the limiting nature of some disabilities while underestimating others . but nevertheless , without a comprehensive analysis about alternatives and their impacts , it is likely that little progress will be made . although the three largest federal disability programs differ in their underlying purpose , they face a similar underlying challenge . the analysis should estimate the effects on the size , cost , and management of the program and other relevant va programs and identify the legislative action , if any , necessary to initiate and fund such change . study and report to congress the effect that a comprehensive consideration of medical treatment and assistive technologies would have on the di and ssi programs' eligibility criteria and benefit package . we also discuss implications of incorporating these advances and changes into the programs . all three programs have experienced growth in recent years . moreover , not keeping abreast of this information puts federal programs at risk of undermining their efforts to help some persons with disabilities achieve economic independence or work to their full potential . likewise , changes in the labor market have affected the skills needed to perform work and the settings in which work occurs . updating disability criteria within existing program structures is prudent , not only as a means to best ensure program integrity , but also for agencies to meet their fiduciary responsibilities for public funds . in the past , we and others have reported the di , ssi , and va programs as being out - of - step with medical and technological advances and changes in the workforce and the economy .
since the terrorist attacks of september 11 , 2001 , and the subsequent anthrax incidents , there has been concern about the ability of the federal government to prepare for and coordinate an effective public health response to such events , given the broad distribution of responsibility for that task at the federal level . in order to assist the committee in its consideration of this extensive reorganization of our government , this statement focuses on titles iii and v of the president's proposal and the implications of ( 1 ) the proposed transfer of specific public health preparedness and response programs currently housed in hhs into the new department , ( 2 ) the proposed transfer of control over certain other public health preparedness assistance programs from hhs to the new department , and ( 3 ) the proposed transfer of responsibility for research and development on chemical , biological , radiological , and nuclear threats to the new department . the aspects of the proposal concerned with public health preparedness and response would involve two primary changes to the current system , which are found in title v of the proposed legislation . the president's proposed homeland security act of 2002 would bring many of these federal entities with homeland security responsibilities — including public health preparedness and response — into one department , in an effort to mobilize and focus assets and resources at all levels of government . our earlier work found , for example , that more than 20 federal departments and agencies carry some responsibility for bioterrorism preparedness and response and that these efforts are fragmented . second , it would transfer the control over , but not the operation of , other public health preparedness assistance programs , such as providing emergency preparedness planning assistance to state and local governments , from the department of health and human services ( hhs ) to the new department . however , we have concerns about the proposed transfer of control of public health assistance programs that have both basic public health and homeland security functions from hhs to the new department . title iii of the proposed legislation would also transfer responsibility for certain chemical , biological , radiological , and nuclear research and development programs and activities to the new department . i appreciate the opportunity to submit this statement for the record on the proposed creation of the department of homeland security . the proposed department of homeland security would also be tasked with developing national policy for and coordination of the federal government's civilian research and development efforts to counter chemical , biological , radiological , and nuclear threats . the statement is based largely on our previous and ongoing work on homeland security , as well as a review of the proposed legislation . first , the proposal would transfer certain emergency preparedness and response programs from multiple agencies to the new department . emergency response is further complicated by the need to coordinate actions with agencies at the state and local level , where much of the response activity would occur . we expect that , in addition to improving overall coordination , the transfer of programs from multiple agencies to the new department could reduce overlap among programs and facilitate response in times of disaster .
the department of labor's unemployment insurance ( ui ) program paid about $30 billion in benefits in calendar year 2001 to workers who lost their jobs . in recent years , reports from labor's office of inspector general ( oig ) and others have identified numerous aspects of the ui program that may be vulnerable to overpayments and fraud . in light of the dramatic increase in the number of unemployed workers filing for ui benefits in the past year and the program's potential exposure to fraud and overpayments , you asked us to determine ( 1 ) the extent and type of overpayments in the ui program , including those that may be attributable to fraud or abuse ; and ( 2 ) the factors that contribute to overpayments in the ui program , as well as actions taken by labor to ensure program integrity . the ui program is a federal - state partnership designed to partially replace the lost earnings of individuals who become unemployed through no fault of their own and to stabilize the economy in times of economic recession . overpayments include payments that should not have been made or were made for incorrect amounts . the health of each state's trust fund depends , in part , on the amount of taxes collected from employers ; current economic conditions , such as the level of unemployment ; and the ability of the state to control its benefit payments by accurately determining individuals' eligibility for ui benefits in a timely manner . use the annual administrative funding process or other funding mechanisms to develop incentives and sanctions that will encourage state compliance with payment accuracy performance measures . key to this is sustaining its efforts to expand state access to ssa's online database for verifying the accuracy of ssns and developing more efficient automated means to help states verify claimants' employment status and any income they may be receiving in other states . also , labor already possesses systems such as wris that , with some modification , could potentially help states verify claimants' eligibility information in other states more efficiently . in particular , the report acknowledges the fact that some types of overpayments are more difficult for states to detect and prevent than others , and therefore present additional challenges for states in ensuring payment accuracy . inaccurate or untimely eligibility information may contribute to overpayments and fraud and place unnecessary burdens on a state's trust fund . labor questioned our assessment that it has not fully utilized its quality assurance data to improve state operations . we also reviewed overpayment data from labor's benefit accuracy measurement ( bam ) and benefit payment control ( bpc ) systems . states are also unlikely to voluntarily increase their overpayment recovery efforts . while implementing changes to existing systems would likely entail some additional administrative costs for labor and the states , the results of this review and our prior work in other programs suggests that the savings that result from enhanced payment accuracy procedures ( such as online access to important data sources ) and increased attention to preventing and detecting overpayments could outweigh these costs . finally , labor has given limited attention to overpayment collections .
because of a concern about the extent of erroneous eic claims , the congress included provisions in the taxpayer relief act of 1997 ( tra97 ) that led to the internal revenue service's ( irs ) establishment of a compliance effort known as the eic recertification program . the earned income credit ( eic ) is a refundable tax credit available to low - income , working taxpayers . our objectives were to determine whether ( 1 ) irs's communications with taxpayers about recertification meet the needs of irs and taxpayers , ( 2 ) information taxpayers are told to provide to prove their entitlement to the eic is reasonably easy to obtain and consistent with what irs examiners accept in making recertification decisions , and ( 3 ) examiners are consistent in how they assess supporting documentation provided by taxpayers . from january through december 2001 , according to irs , about $31 billion was paid to about 19.0 million eic claimants . while it is important to ensure that all persons eligible for the eic receive it , equally important is the need to identify and deny erroneous claims , whether due to fraud , negligence , or confusion . because of the need to strike an appropriate balance between compliance and taxpayer burden , you asked us to assess the eic recertification program . under the program , taxpayers who have been disallowed the eic through an irs audit are to substantiate their qualification for the eic before irs recertifies them to receive the credit again . our assessment of the recertification program included analyses of irs forms , correspondence , and guidance related to recertification ; interviews of irs examiners who worked on recertification cases ; and interviews of representatives from organizations who provide assistance to low - income taxpayers in controversies with irs . most relevant to this report , ( 1 ) the definitions of qualifying child and eligible foster child for eic purposes have changed and ( 2 ) starting with tax returns filed in 2001 , irs , as authorized by tra97 , began imposing a 2-year ban on credits to taxpayers who it determines negligently claimed the eic through reckless or intentional disregard of the regulations . although our assessment was directed at the eic recertification program , many of our findings would also apply to other irs enforcement efforts involving eic claims . these procedures generally involve examiners ( 1 ) asking taxpayers to provide support , ( 2 ) reviewing any support provided , and ( 3 ) advising taxpayers of the audit results . many of these changes were in response to recommendations resulting from prior reviews by us and the treasury inspector general for tax administration ( tigta ) . there have also been some significant program developments since 1998 . ii for information on prior recommendations by us and tigta and irs's corrective actions. ) . since july 1999 , we and the treasury inspector general for tax administration ( tigta ) have reported several concerns about the eic recertification program and have made several recommendations . irs examiners are to select the return for audit unless the taxpayer is no longer claiming the eic child ( ren ) previously disallowed and is not claiming a new eic child .
our objectives were to answer the following questions: ( 1 ) how well does the department of housing and urban development ( hud ) ensure that lenders participating in the multifamily accelerated processing ( map ) program meet hud's qualification requirements ? .  ( 2 ) how well is hud implementing its processes for reviewing and monitoring map lenders' underwriting of loans ? . strengthen the lender qualifications and monitoring division's monitoring of lenders and hud field offices , by ( 1 ) establishing a time frame for finalizing and issuing written operating procedures that include criteria for selecting loans and lenders for review that pose a high insurance risk to the department ; ( 2 ) issuing written reports on all quality assurance reviews conducted in fiscal year 2001 to the cognizant map lenders and hud field offices ; and ( 3 ) developing a process for aggregating and analyzing the results of quality assurance reviews to identify patterns of underwriting deficiencies and program violations by map lenders . each year , the department of housing and urban development's ( hud ) federal housing administration ( fha ) insures billions of dollars in multifamily housing mortgage loans to facilitate the construction , substantial rehabilitation , purchase , and refinancing of apartments and health care facilities .  ( 2 ) how well is hud implementing processes for reviewing and monitoring map lenders' underwriting of loans ? . fha mortgage insurance protects lenders against financial losses stemming from a borrower's default . hud could improve its implementation of processes for reviewing and monitoring map lenders' underwriting of loans . to improve hud's oversight of map lenders and to reduce the financial risks assumed by fha , we recommend that the secretary of hud direct the assistant secretary for housing - federal housing commissioner to do the following: strengthen the process for approving map lenders by ( 1 ) issuing guidance that clarifies hud's experience requirements for map underwriters and requires hud staff to evaluate prospective map underwriters against these standards ; and ( 2 ) issuing guidelines that establish standards for quality control plans and require map lenders to develop and maintain these plans as a condition of continued participation in the map program .  ( 3 ) has hud held any map lenders accountable for noncompliance with program requirements ? . however , hud has not fully implemented its quality assurance process . specifically , although the lender qualifications and monitoring division is tasked with implementing this process , it has not ( 1 ) achieved its intended staffing level , ( 2 ) developed and implemented formal operating procedures , or ( 3 ) effectively used the results of its reviews to improve lenders' underwriting of loans .  ( 3 ) has hud held any map lenders accountable for noncompliance with program requirements ? . improve field offices' implementation of procedures for reviewing mortgage insurance applications submitted by map lenders , by ( 1 ) holding map team leaders accountable for preparing required review memos , and for ensuring that hud field office staff consistently use review checklists in accordance with map guidance ; ( 2 ) utilizing data in hud's financial assessment subsystem to corroborate expense data for hud - insured or - assisted properties used as comparable properties in appraisal reports ; and ( 3 ) clarifying and enforcing hud's requirement for updating the operating expense estimate for a subject property to the date of the appraisal .
in response to your interest , we are reporting on ( 1 ) the status of the network growth strategy , ( 2 ) amtrak's estimates of expected mail and express revenue , and ( 3 ) amtrak's success in obtaining freight railroads' agreement to allow it to expand service over their tracks . in recent years , facing the continuing deterioration of its financial condition and its attempt to eliminate its need for federal operating assistance by december 2002 , amtrak undertook a number of actions intended to improve its financial condition . the national railroad passenger corporation ( amtrak ) is the nation's intercity passenger rail operator . in december 1999 , amtrak's board of directors shifted its route and service strategy toward planning to implement new routes and expand services ( called the network growth strategy ) on the freight railroad tracks over which amtrak operates . it estimated that this expansion , involving 15 routes , would yield about $66 million in net financial benefits through fiscal year 2002 , primarily from expanding its mail and express business , and help amtrak move toward operational self - sufficiency . among these actions were changes in its routes and services . starting in 1995 , amtrak began reducing service and eliminating routes to reduce costs , although this strategy was ultimately unsuccessful . in february 2002 , after we completed our work , amtrak estimated that it would need more than twice the amount of federal appropriations ( $1.2 billion for fiscal year 2003 ) than it had received on average over the past 3 years to retain its route network . we discussed the proposed network growth strategy actions with officials from amtrak , the department of transportation , and several freight railroads over which amtrak operates . we also reviewed amtrak's financial information used to generate route and service actions . these potential risks include the expected ability to obtain capital funding and reach agreement with freight railroads to operate over their tracks . amtrak's network growth strategy has been unsuccessful because it overestimated ( 1 ) revenues expected from new mail and express service and ( 2 ) its ability to reach agreement with freight railroads over capital funding and other implementation issues . to carry out our work , we reviewed documents describing the network growth strategy , among other things . amtrak has been unsuccessful in implementing its network growth strategy . we recommend that , for any future major route and service proposals , the president of amtrak disclose to amtrak's board of directors any significant risks that could impair the successful implementation of the planned actions and its plans to ameliorate those risks . however , we believe that amtrak's not examining more closely the capital improvements needed to implement their route proposals and whether freight railroads would likely agree to them were significant flaws in amtrak's strategy . we did not assess the reasonableness of this estimate . by so doing amtrak would have proposed considerably fewer new services and would have been more successful in implementing its proposals . about 2 years after announcing the network growth strategy , amtrak has cancelled 9 of the 15 planned route actions without implementing them .
specifically , this report assesses ( 1 ) irs's overall approach to ensure that innocent spouse cases were being processed in a timely , accurate , and consistent manner ; ( 2 ) the adequacy of irs's procedures to transfer tax liabilities between taxpayers when relief was granted to one of the taxpayers ; and ( 3 ) irs's efforts to evaluate the usefulness of its innocent spouse program web site to taxpayers . since passage of the irs restructuring and reform act ( restructuring act ) of 1998 , irs has received thousands of requests from taxpayers for innocent spouse relief . irs's inability to provide timely responses to such requests has generated concerns among taxpayers , congress , and other stakeholders . under the internal revenue service's ( irs ) innocent spouse program , irs can relieve taxpayers of tax debts on the basis of equity considerations , such as not knowing that their spouse failed to pay taxes due . because of your concerns about irs's growing inventory of unresolved innocent spouse cases and the timeliness of irs's case processing , you asked us to review irs's administration of the program . this is true even though only one taxpayer may have earned the wages or income shown on the tax return . by law , married persons who file joint tax returns are each fully responsible for the accuracy of the tax return and for the full tax liability . it took irs about a year , on average , to completely process an innocent spouse case in fiscal year 2001 . to address these objectives , we reviewed and analyzed innocent spouse program data from irs's innocent spouse tracking system ( ists ) and management reports , and we reviewed related policies , procedures , and guidance . we interviewed irs officials responsible for managing the innocent spouse program as well as officials in irs's national taxpayer advocate service office and electronic tax administration office and in the u.s. department of the treasury's ( treasury ) office of chief counsel . we focused on program operations that cover the period march 1999 through december 2001 , because this period best reflected the program's results after the restructuring act's changes and because it covers the period for which performance data were most recently available . we reviewed reports by the treasury inspector general for tax administration ( tigta ) and the taxpayer advocate that addressed innocent spouse issues . appendix ii provides similar information on cases that were scheduled to be tried in the federal courts but were settled by treasury's office of chief counsel and irs's office of appeals . you also asked us to provide information on the number and disposition of innocent spouse cases that federal courts recently litigated ; appendix i provides this information . our scope and methodology are discussed in more detail in a separate section of this report . the data were the most currently available when we performed our review . however , the decline in cases received does not fully account for irs's progress in reducing its inventory of undecided cases . to further assess the management of the program , we relied on our past reports on managing organizational performance , irs's guidance regarding performance management , and other management literature , including the government performance and results act .
our specific objectives were to identify ( 1 ) critical success factors in building information - sharing relationships and ( 2 ) related challenges and how to address them . accordingly , the federal government's strategy for protecting the nation's critical computer - dependent infrastructure sectors includes efforts to establish information sharing and analysis centers ( isacs ) within both the federal government and individual industry sectors . these factors included ( 1 ) fostering trust and respect ; ( 2 ) establishing effective , timely , and appropriately secure communication ; ( 3 ) obtaining top management support ; ( 4 ) ensuring organization leadership continuity ; and ( 5 ) generating clearly identifiable membership benefits . information sharing and coordination are key elements in developing comprehensive and practical approaches to defending against computer - based , or cyber , attacks , which could threaten the national welfare . the importance of sharing information and coordinating the response to cyber threats among various stakeholders has increased as our government and our nation have become ever more reliant on interconnected computer systems to support critical operations and infrastructures , such as telecommunications , power distribution , financial services , national defense , and critical government operations . implementation of such provisions , as well as other monitoring actions , could facilitate information sharing and , thus , federal and private efforts to protect critical infrastructures . to identify practices that could be adopted by federal agencies and others to ( 1 ) promote successful sharing of information on computer - based vulnerabilities and incidents and ( 2 ) overcome related challenges , we studied 11 organizations experienced in developing pertinent information - sharing relationships and procedures . prior to 2000 , the congress held important hearings on year 2000 readiness , and , in 1998 , passed legislation intended to address concerns from private - sector entities about exposure to legal liability and antitrust law violations that might arise due to sharing information on year 2000 readiness . the congress is currently considering measures intended to address several of the practices and challenges we identified . computer - based incidents , such as the iloveyou virus in may 2000 and the recent code red , sircam , and nimda attacks , have caused significant disruptions and damage . such attacks could severely disrupt computer - supported operations , compromise the confidentiality of sensitive information , and diminish the integrity of critical data . information on threats and incidents experienced by others can help stakeholders identify trends , better understand the risks they face , and determine what preventative measures should be implemented . for example , the congress can actively monitor progress in meeting critical infrastructure protection goals , including improved information sharing , and promote trust by assisting in clarifying the way federal agencies may use sensitive information provided for critical infrastructure protection purposes . such analysis centers can use comprehensive , timely information on incidents to determine the nature of an attack , provide warnings , and advise on how to mitigate an imminent attack . as the government's critical infrastructure protection strategy evolves , both public and private - sector entities can adopt the practices described to establish trusted relationships with a wide variety of federal and nonfederal entities that may be in a position to provide potentially useful information and advice on vulnerabilities and incidents ; develop standards and agreements on how shared information will be establish effective and appropriately secure communication take steps to ensure that sensitive information is not inappropriately disseminated , which may require statutory changes ; ensure that benefits are realized by developing and maintaining staff with the skills to support analytical capabilities and facilitate communication among information - sharing partners ; obtain the support of senior officials in both federal and nonfederal obtain adequate funding .
in the aftermath of the september 11th attacks , for instance , about one - quarter of the $40 billion emergency response fund was dedicated to homeland security , including funds to enhance state and local government preparedness . the choice and design of policy tools , such as grants , regulations , and partnerships , can enhance the government's capacity to ( 1 ) target areas of highest risk to better ensure that scarce federal resources address the most pressing needs , ( 2 ) promote shared responsibilities by all parties , and ( 3 ) track and assess progress toward achieving national goals . the congress has long recognized the need to objectively assess the results of federal programs . the establishment of goals and performance measures to guide the nation's preparedness efforts . over 40 federal entities have roles in combating terrorism , and past federal efforts have resulted in a lack of accountability , a lack of a cohesive effort , and duplication of programs . for its part , the federal government historically has principally provided leadership , training , and funding assistance . my comments today are based on a body of gao's work on terrorism and emergency preparedness and policy options for the design of federal assistance , as well as on our review of many other studies . i appreciate the opportunity to be here in los angeles to discuss issues critical to successful federal leadership of , assistance to , and partnerships with state and local governments in the area of preparedness for terrorist events . because the national security threat is diffuse and the challenge is highly intergovernmental , national policymakers must formulate strategies with a firm understanding of the interests , capacity , and challenges facing those governments in addressing these issues . given the recent and proposed increases in preparedness funding as well as the need for real and meaningful improvements in preparedness , establishing clear goals and performance measures is critical to ensuring both a successful and a fiscally responsible effort . we recognize that the president , in his proposed 2003 budget , has announced that the office of homeland security will propose such a plan later this year . our previous work has found fragmentation and overlap among federal assistance programs . as state and local officials have noted , this situation has led to confusion , making it difficult to identify available federal preparedness resources and effectively partner with the federal government . in addition , we draw on ongoing work for this subcommittee ; pursuant to your request we have begun a review to examine the preparedness issues confronting state and local governments in a series of case studies . but the initial responsibility falls upon local governments and their organizations — such as police , fire departments , emergency medical personnel , and public health agencies — which will almost invariably be the first responders to such an occurrence . for the nation's preparedness programs , however , outcomes of where the nation should be in terms of domestic preparedness have yet to be defined . we will examine the state and local perspective on these issues and thereby help the congress and the executive branch to better design and target programs and strategies .
the department of veterans affairs ( va ) provides health care services to veterans who have been diagnosed with psychosis — primarily schizophrenia , a disorder that can substantially limit their ability to care for themselves , secure employment , and maintain relationships . for many of them , effective treatment , especially antipsychotic drug therapy , has reduced the severity of their illnesses and increased their ability to function in society . these veterans also have a high risk of premature death , including suicide . since 1989 , new antipsychotic drugs have been approved in the united states . in fiscal year 2001 , the amount for antipsychotic drugs jumped 29 percent to $158 million — or 7 percent of va's total drug costs . to address these concerns , you asked us to determine ( 1 ) if va's clinical guideline for prescribing atypical antipsychotic drugs is consistent with medical community practices for managing serious mental illnesses and ( 2 ) whether implementation of the guideline is consistent with its intent to ensure that prescribing decisions are ultimately based on physicians' clinical judgment . gao examines the use of public funds ; evaluates federal programs and policies ; and provides analyses , recommendations , and other assistance to help congress make informed oversight , policy , and funding decisions . doing so might not detect individual facility policies that could restrict access to the more costly atypical antipsychotic drugs . atypical antipsychotic drugs are essential to providing quality mental health care ; however , they vary significantly in cost . to ensure that veterans with mental disorders receive the most appropriate yet cost - effective drug , va issued a guideline in july 2001 for prescribing atypical antipsychotic drugs for newly diagnosed patients or for patients not responding favorably to their current medication . in fiscal year 2000 , va spent $1.1 billion to provide psychiatric care for almost 200,000 veterans with psychosis . however , atypical antipsychotic drugs are expensive , and the cost differences among them can vary significantly . all atypical antipsychotic drugs are on va's national formulary , except the newest , which is available through nonformulary approval processes . overall , atypical antipsychotic drugs are more costly than traditional antipsychotic drugs . of this amount , $123 million was spent on antipsychotic drugs . however , procedures at a few facilities have limited or could restrict access to certain atypical antipsychotic drugs on va's national formulary because of cost considerations . in fiscal year 1999 , 62 percent of all antipsychotic drug prescriptions were for atypical drugs ; by fiscal year 2001 , more than 80 percent were for atypical drugs . over the last few years , the number of prescriptions for atypical antipsychotic drugs has increased dramatically in va . you asked us to review whether this guideline may result in restricted access to the more costly atypical antipsychotic drugs and , in turn , adversely affect the quality of care for veterans . such procedures are contrary to va's prescribing guideline for atypical antipsychotic drugs . antipsychotic drugs — both traditional and atypical — are va's third most expensive class of drugs . each has been proven effective in clinical trials , but effectiveness appears to depend on the particular patient .
thank you for the opportunity to discuss financial management at the department of defense ( dod ) . to date , none of the military services or major dod components has passed the test of an independent financial audit because of weaknesses in financial management systems , operations , and controls . in this regard , on september 10 , 2001 , secretary of defense rumsfeld announced a broad initiative intended to “transform the way the department works and what it works on” which he estimated could save 5 percent of dod's budget — or about $15 billion to $18 billion annually . today , dod faces financial and related management problems that are pervasive , complex , long - standing , and deeply rooted in virtually all business operations throughout the department . today , we will provide our perspectives on the ( 1 ) department's long - standing inability to effectively reform its financial management and other business systems and processes and ( 2 ) keys to successfully carrying out the secretary's business process transformation . of the 22 areas on gao's governmentwide “high - risk” list , 6 are dod program areas , and dod shares responsibility for 2 other high - risk areas that are government wide in scope . overhauling dod's financial management represents a major challenge that goes far beyond financial accounting to the very fiber of the department's range of business operations and management culture . previous administrations have tried to address these problems in various ways but have been unsuccessful . the president has made financial management and the use of technology integral to his fiscal year 2002 management agenda for making the federal government more focused on citizens and results . dod's financial management deficiencies , taken together , represent the single largest obstacle to achieving an unqualified opinion on the u.s. government's consolidated financial statements . even before the events of september 11 , increased globalization , changing security threats , and rapid technological advances were prompting fundamental changes in the environment in which dod operates . the president's management agenda notes , “without accurate and timely information , it is not possible to accomplish the president's agenda to secure the best performance and highest measure of accountability for the american people.” with the events of september 11 , and the federal government's short - and long - term budget challenges , it is more important than ever that dod effectively transform its business operations to ensure that it gets the most from every dollar spent . secretary rumsfeld recognized that transformation would be difficult and expected the needed changes would take 8 or more years to complete . the department must be able to effectively carry out its stewardship responsibilities for the funding it receives and for the vast amount of equipment and inventories used in support of military operations . our experience with other federal agency business transformation efforts supports the secretary's position . transforming dod's business operations would free up resources that could be used to enhance readiness , improve the quality of life for our troops and their families , and reduce the gap between “wants” and available funding in connection with major weapon systems .
to put this in perspective , in fiscal year 2003 , state was appropriated about $6 billion for the administration of foreign affairs and usaid received approximately $12 billion in total program funding . i will focus on our observations regarding state's management in the following five areas: ( 1 ) unneeded real estate ; ( 2 ) embassy construction ; ( 3 ) overseas presence and staffing , including rightsizing ; ( 4 ) information technology ; and ( 5 ) strategic planning . in carrying out its mission of forming , representing , and implementing u.s. foreign policy , state faces complex challenges , some of which have intensified since the terrorist attacks of september 11 , 2001 , including the provision of secure facilities overseas . i will also discuss key areas where usaid has faced challenges , including ( 1 ) human capital management and workforce planning , ( 2 ) program evaluation and performance measurement , ( 3 ) information technology , and ( 4 ) financial management . over the last several years , funding for state's operations has increased , particularly for security upgrades at embassies and consulates around the world and for a major hiring program to meet u.s. foreign policy needs . i am pleased to be here today to discuss the department of state's and the u.s. agency for international development's ( usaid ) stewardship of their resources and areas within their budgets where applying strong management practices has the potential to produce efficiencies that could result in cost savings . usaid has also received significant funding increases for foreign assistance programs , in afghanistan and iraq in particular , as well as for hiv / aids relief programs . in addition , gao and others have identified management challenges and operational deficiencies at usaid that affect the agency's ability to implement its programs . over the years , gao , state's office of the inspector general ( oig ) , and various commissions and studies have identified numerous management weaknesses at state . ongoing attention to resource management issues at both state and usaid will be needed to ensure that the department and the agency take advantage of opportunities for more efficient operations and achieve budget savings wherever possible . to obtain its goal , however , usaid needs to continue efforts to resolve its internal control weaknesses and ensure that planned upgrades to its financial systems are in compliance with federal financial system requirements . however , resources are not unlimited , and sound management practices can affect the utilization of large sums of money . usaid has made progress in correcting some of its systems and internal control deficiencies and is in the process of revising its plan to remedy financial management weaknesses as required by the federal financial management improvement act of 1996 . my statement today is based on our work at state and usaid over the last several years . poor coordination among the key u.s. agencies has been a long - standing management problem , and cooperation with other foreign donors has been limited . although the agency has made a serious effort to develop improved performance measures , it continues to report numerical outputs that do not gauge the impact of its programs .
mr. chairman and members of the committee: i appreciate the opportunity to testify on the internal revenue service's ( irs ) efforts to identify and deal with abusive tax schemes that primarily are used by individual taxpayers . my statement today , based on work we have done at the committee's request , focuses on what is known about the extent of abusive tax schemes involving individual taxpayers , the status of irs's efforts to combat such schemes , and challenges irs faces in moving forward . during hearings before this committee last april , several witnesses testified about the increased promotion and use of various types of abusive tax schemes and scams , including constitutional trusts , offshore trusts , and tax credits for slave descendants . irs caught about $5 billion in improper tax avoidance or tax credit and refund claims , but estimated that another $20 billion to $40 billion had not been identified and addressed . not all of these schemes were new , but in part due to the ease of marketing schemes cheaply through the internet , schemes were flourishing . thus , irs's efforts to pursue abusive tax schemes are key to ensuring that such schemes do not undermine the federal tax system . use of such schemes can pose a threat to the integrity and fairness of our tax system by adversely affecting voluntary compliance if honest taxpayers believe that significant numbers of individuals are not paying their fair share of the tax burden . irs has recognized these challenges and is beginning to work on solutions and options . to date , however , irs has not developed a means to track the resources , in particular staffing , devoted to combating abusive schemes or developed goals and measures that congress and irs can use to assess its progress . the sheer number of possible abusive tax schemes that likely will require face - to - face audits could outstrip irs's available resources . furthermore , identifying and handling these cases will require a better - coordinated effort on irs's part . in part because no one individual or office could provide an agencywide perspective on irs's strategy , goals , objectives , performance measures , or program results , it is difficult to provide a clear picture of all that is underway and being accomplished in irs's efforts to address abusive tax schemes . limited data also suggest that irs's enhanced focus has led to some increased success in convicting those promoting and taking advantage of abusive schemes , in publicizing these results , and in uncovering previously hidden major offshore compliance problems . available information suggests , however , that irs has created new offices , reemphasized and reorganized certain prior efforts , and planned to assign or already assigned at least 200 additional staff to its efforts . as of february 2002 , irs estimated that in tax year 2000 about 740,000 taxpayers had used abusive schemes . nevertheless , irs officials believe that the number and dollar consequence of schemes has grown in recent years . recent developments suggest that the number of individuals involved in one type of abusive tax scheme involving offshore accounts may be greater than what irs estimated just 2 months ago , and thus , potential lost revenues may be higher .
in addition we will provide an update of the department's progress since march in addressing specific weaknesses in its overall information technology program , including the status of its actions to develop an enterprise architecture , improve information security , implement the veterans benefits administration's ( vba ) veterans service network ( vetsnet ) replacement compensation and pension payment system and maintain the existing benefits delivery network , and implement jointly with the department of defense and indian health service the government computer - based patient record initiative . information technology continues to play an integral and substantial role in helping va effectively serve our nation's veterans , with the department spending more than a billion dollars annually in support of its information technology operations . our testimony last march noted important strides by the secretary of veterans affairs to improve the department's it leadership and management , including the hiring of a chief information officer ( cio ) to lead the program and a commitment to reform how the department uses information technology . as you are well aware , however , the department has been challenged in its efforts to effectively manage its information technology to produce results and achieve optimal agency performance . since that time , the secretary has taken additional steps toward achieving improvements in key areas of it performance , including recently announcing a realignment of the way in which the department is organized to carry out its information technology mission . thank you for inviting us to take part in your discussion of the department of veterans affairs' ( va ) information technology ( it ) program . in conducting this work we analyzed relevant documentation and interviewed key agency officials to identify and assess va's decisions and actions since march to improve its information technology management . at your request , we will discuss today this new organizational structure and resulting changes in the role of va's cio . we reviewed available documentation discussing the department's plans and strategies for realigning its information technology structure . further , we conducted site visits at the veterans benefits administration's regional office in salt lake city to assess the current use of vetsnet in processing compensation and pension benefits claims ; and at the va medical center in washington , d.c. , to observe data retrieval capabilities of the federal health information exchange ( formerly the government computer - based patient record initiative ) . we also examined its enterprise architecture strategy as well as steps being taken to strengthen computer security management departmentwide . this could have a significant effect on va's accountability for how components are spending money , as we have previously noted the department's inability to adequately capture all of its it costs . this initiative has been termed healthepeople ( federal ) . va's new organizational structure holds promise for building a more solid foundation for investing in and improving the department's accountability over information technology resources . the department's critical remaining actions include routinely monitoring and evaluating the effectiveness of security policies and controls and acting to address identified weaknesses . successful implementation of va's information technology program requires strong leadership and management to help define and guide the department's plans and actions .
because of the susceptibility of the program to fraud and abuse , the congress enacted the health care fraud and abuse control ( hcfac ) program as part of the health insurance portability and accountability act of 1996 ( hipaa ) , public law 104-91 . hcfac , which is administered by the department of health and human services' ( hhs ) office of inspector general ( oig ) and the department of justice ( doj ) , established a national framework to coordinate federal , state , and local law enforcement efforts to detect , prevent , and prosecute health care fraud and abuse in the public and private sectors . the medicare program is the nation's largest health insurer with almost 40 million beneficiaries and outlays of over $219 billion annually . hipaa requires hhs and doj to issue a joint annual report no later than january 1 of each year to the congress for the preceding fiscal year on ( 1 ) amounts deposited to the federal hospital insurance trust fund pursuant to hipaa and the source of the amounts and ( 2 ) amounts appropriated from the trust fund for the hcfac program and the justification for the expenditure of such amounts . accordingly , the objectives of our review were to identify and assess the propriety of amounts reported as ( 1 ) deposits to the trust fund , ( 2 ) appropriations from the trust fund for hcfac activities , ( 3 ) expenditures at doj for hcfac activities , ( 4 ) expenditures at hhs for hcfac activities , ( 5 ) expenditures for non - medicare anti – fraud and abuse activities , and ( 6 ) savings to the trust fund , as well as other savings , resulting from expenditures from the trust fund for the hcfac program . hhs and doj have issued five joint reports , which individually covered hcfac - related activities for fiscal years 1997 through 2001 . to facilitate providing the congress and other decision makers with relevant information on program performance and results , we recommend that the attorney general and the secretary of hhs assess the feasibility of tracking cost savings and expenditures attributable to hcfac activities by the various federal programs affected . therefore , it was impossible for us to meet our reporting deadline of january 1 , 2002 , and in all likelihood , we will also not be able to meet our 2004 commitment . hipaa , as amended by the balanced budget act of 1997 , public law 105-33 , also requires that we submit reports no later than january 1 , 2002 , and 2004 , that identify certain collections , appropriations , expenditures , and savings related to hcfac and other aspects of the program as we consider appropriate . the hhs and doj joint hcfac report for fiscal year 2001 , which was required to be issued in january 2002 but was not issued until april 2002 , contained information needed to perform this review . to accomplish the first objective , identifying and assessing the propriety of amounts reported for deposits in fiscal years 2000 and 2001 as ( 1 ) penalties and multiple damages , ( 2 ) criminal fines , ( 3 ) civil monetary penalties , and ( 4 ) gifts and bequests , we did the following: reviewed the joint hhs and doj hcfac reports for fiscal years 2000 and 2001 to identify amounts deposited to the trust fund .
 ( 4 ) what efforts are being made at the national level to address the illegal diversion of prescription drugs ? .  ( 3 ) what challenges do states face in implementing and using pdmps ? . fifteen states currently operate prescription drug monitoring programs ( pdmps ) as a means to control the illegal diversion of prescription drugs . the increasing diversion of prescription drugs for illegal use is a disturbing trend in the nation's battle against drug abuse .  ( 2 ) what benefits have state pdmps produced ? . the most frequently diverted prescription drugs are those that are prone to abuse , addiction , and dependence , such as hydrocodone ( the active ingredient in lortab and many other drugs ) , diazepam ( valium ) , methylphenidate ( ritalin ) , and oxycodone ( the active ingredient in oxycontin and many other drugs ) . according to the drug enforcement administration ( dea ) , increases in the extent of prescription drug abuse and in emergency room admissions related to prescription drug abuse , as well as an increase in the theft and illegal resale of prescription drugs , indicate that drug diversion is a growing problem nationwide . prescription drug diversion is the channeling of licit pharmaceuticals for illegal purposes or abuse . because of your interest in the issues of prescription drug diversion and control , you asked us to address the following questions: ( 1 ) how do the 15 pdmps compare across states in terms of objectives , design , and operation ? . they provide data and analysis to state law enforcement and regulatory agencies to assist in identifying and investigating activities potentially related to the illegal prescribing , dispensing , and procuring of prescription drugs . the abuse of illegally diverted prescription drugs is associated with serious consequences , including addiction , overdose , and death . moreover , the $2 million in grants available from the bureau of justice assistance , and to be administered jointly with dea , provides states with a potential source of funding to start a pdmp . prescription drug monitoring programs offer states a more efficient means of detecting and deterring illegal diversion . cooperative efforts at the state and national levels are seeking to overcome these challenges and increase the number of states with programs . in 2000 , the most recent year for which data are available , about 9 million americans aged 12 and older reported using prescription drugs , including pain relievers , tranquilizers , stimulants , or sedatives , for nonmedical purposes . to address the questions concerning the state pdmps , we reviewed information from dea and the national alliance for model state drug laws on the features of the existing programs . in addition , a number of other states have enacted or are considering legislation to establish a program . the alliance also facilitates communication between states that are considering a pdmp and states that have programs in place , and provides technical assistance to states on implementing its recommendations . pdmps collect , review , and analyze prescription data from pharmacies . it can involve activities such as “doctor shopping” by individuals who visit numerous physicians to obtain multiple prescriptions , illegal sales of prescription drugs by physicians or pharmacists , and prescription forgery .
the tennessee valley authority ( tva ) operates the nation's largest public power system , supplying electricity to about 8 million customers across a 7-state region . concerned about tva's dual challenge of reducing emissions while managing increased demand on its power system , you asked us to: ( 1 ) determine how tva plans to meet future demands for electricity through 2005 while minimizing its emissions of so2 and nox ; ( 2 ) describe the scope and impact of tva's demand - side management efforts ; and ( 3 ) compare the scope and impact of tva's demand - side management efforts to those of selected other utilities' efforts . accordingly , we are recommending that the tva chairman ( 1 ) evaluate the structure and effectiveness of its current programs ; ( 2 ) review the longer - term potential applicability of other programs to its power system ; and ( 3 ) , as appropriate , implement demand - side management practices . tva relied on its 11 coal - burning plants to supply about 60 percent of its electric power in fiscal year 2001 . these plants account for almost all of tva's emissions of two key air pollutants — sulfur dioxide ( so2 ) , which has been linked to reduced visibility , and nitrogen oxides ( nox ) , which contribute to the formation of harmful ozone . tva directly serves 62 large federal and industrial customers and serves other commercial , industrial , and residential customers through a network of 158 power distributors . in part to lessen the need for new capacity , tva and other electricity suppliers promote the efficient use of electricity through “demand - side management” programs , which are designed to reduce the amount of energy consumed or to change the time of day when it is consumed . when current customers use less electricity , the utility has to generate less power and thus may produce fewer emissions of air pollutants . demand for tva's electricity will increase about 1.7 percent annually through 2010 , according to tva projections . building new generating capacity can result in additional emissions , which raises environmental concerns . to meet this demand , tva estimates that it will need to expand its current generating capacity of 30,365 megawatts by 500 megawatts annually — nearly the equivalent of building an average - size power plant , or contracting for the power from one , every year . for example , some utilities offer their customers incentives to purchase appliances and lighting that use less electricity . to meet its customers' demand for electricity , tva generates electricity not only at its 11 coal - fired plants ( consisting of 59 generating units ) , but also three nuclear power plants ( five units ) , 29 hydroelectric dams ( 109 units ) , one pumped storage site ( four units ) , and five sites with combustion turbines ( 64 units ) . tva estimates that demand for its electricity will increase about 1.7 percent annually through 2010 . as that area has grown , in both population and economic activity , tva customers' use of electricity has grown and is expected to keep growing .
on september 28 , 2001 , we released a report that describes ( 1 ) the research and preparedness activities being undertaken by federal departments and agencies to manage the consequences of a bioterrorist attack , ( 2 ) the coordination of these activities , and ( 3 ) the findings of reports on the preparedness of state and local jurisdictions to respond to a bioterrorist attack . preparing to respond to the public health and medical consequences of a bioterrorist attack poses some challenges that are different from those in other types of terrorist attacks , such as bombings . i appreciate the opportunity to be here today to discuss our work on the activities of federal agencies to prepare the nation to respond to the public health and medical consequences of a bioterrorist attack . these agencies are participating in a variety of activities , from improving the detection of biological agents to developing a national stockpile of pharmaceuticals to treat victims of disasters . in summary , we identified more than 20 federal departments and agencies as having a role in preparing for or responding to the public health and medical consequences of a bioterrorist attack . in addition , we found emerging concerns about the preparedness of state and local jurisdictions , including insufficient state and local planning for response to terrorist events , a lack of hospital participation in training on terrorism and emergency response planning , the timely availability of medical teams and resources in an emergency , and inadequacies in the public health infrastructure . the last includes weaknesses in the training of health care providers , communication among responsible parties , and capacity of laboratories and hospitals , including the ability to treat mass casualties . federal departments and agencies have engaged in a number of efforts to coordinate these activities on a formal and informal basis , such as interagency work groups . despite these efforts , we found evidence that coordination between departments and agencies is fragmented . my testimony will summarize the detailed findings included in our report , highlighting weaknesses in the public health infrastructure that we have identified in our ongoing work and which we believe warrant special attention . we did , however , find recent actions to improve coordination across federal departments and agencies . its funding has increased from approximately $121 million at that time to approximately $194 million in fiscal year 2001 . federal spending on domestic preparedness for terrorist attacks involving wmds has risen 310 percent since fiscal year 1998 , to approximately $1.7 billion in fiscal year 2001 , and may increase significantly after the events of september 11 , 2001 . for example , several different agencies are responsible for various coordination functions , which limits accountability and hinders unity of effort ; several key agencies have not been included in bioterrorism - related policy and response planning ; and the programs that agencies have developed to provide assistance to state and local governments are similar and potentially duplicative . over 40 federal departments and agencies have some role in combating terrorism , and coordinating their activities is a significant challenge . overall coordination of federal programs to combat terrorism is fragmented . several agencies received little or no funding in fiscal year 1998 .
to help address long - standing problems related to ocr's untimely processing of complaints , we recommend that the secretary of agriculture establish time requirements for all stages of the complaint process and monitor ocr's progress in meeting these requirements ; and develop an action plan to address ongoing problems with obtaining and retaining staff with needed skills , establish performance measures to ensure accountability , and monitor ocr's progress in implementing the plan . the u.s. department of agriculture's ( usda ) farm service agency ( fsa ) administers a direct loan program that , among other things , provides loans to farmers who are unable to obtain private commercial credit to buy and operate farms . in light of these concerns , you asked us to ( 1 ) compare the processing times and approval rates for direct loans for hispanic farmers with those for non - hispanic farmers , ( 2 ) describe usda's policies for staying foreclosures and how these policies have been implemented , and ( 3 ) assess usda's progress in addressing previously identified problems associated with untimely processing of discrimination complaints and human capital issues within usda's office of civil rights . additional progress has been hindered because ocr has yet to address underlying , severe human capital problems . to help address problems related to fsa foreclosures , we recommend that the secretary of agriculture develop and promulgate a policy statement that lays out the factors usda considers in issuing stays of foreclosure in class action lawsuits ; maintain historic information , by race , on foreclosures completed by direct fsa and ocr to improve communications to ensure that foreclosure actions are not taken against borrowers with pending complaints . to help guard against such charges , fsa needs to improve its monitoring and accountability mechanisms and make its systems and decision processes more consistent and transparent . furthermore , usda has faced charges that its office of civil rights ( ocr ) has not conducted proper and timely investigations of complaints of discrimination . to help resolve issues surrounding charges of discrimination in fsa's direct loan program , we recommend that the secretary of agriculture establish criteria for determining when discrepancies between minority and non - minority loan processing times and approval rates warrant further inquiry ; and require state offices to implement recommendations made as a result of fsa field reviews or explain in writing their rationale for not doing so . in each of fiscal years 2000 and 2001 , fsa processed about 20,000 loan applications and approved over 16,000 direct loans to farmers . despite implementing many improvements recommended by usda's inspector general and task forces , ocr has only made modest progress in its timely processing of complaints . furthermore , if usda does not improve its process of reconciling its lists of complainants , it runs the risk of violating its policy of not taking foreclosure actions against farmers with pending discrimination complaints . some members of this group have since raised concerns that , contrary to past class actions where usda stayed ( or suspended ) foreclosure actions , usda is foreclosing against hispanic farmers while this lawsuit is still pending . ocr has made only modest progress in improving its timely processing of complaints because it has yet to address severe , underlying human capital problems .
the decennial census is the nation's most comprehensive and expensive data - gathering program . our objectives were to ( 1 ) update full - cycle costs to reflect the most current information and ( 2 ) analyze bureau data to determine the causes of the significant increase in cost per housing unit for the 2000 census when compared to the cost for the 1990 census . as agreed with your offices , this report responds to your joint request for us to ( 1 ) update full - cycle costs to reflect the most current information and ( 2 ) analyze bureau data to determine the causes of the significant increase in cost per housing unit for the 2000 census when compared to the cost of the 1990 census to assist the bureau in planning for the 2010 census . however , due to current , ongoing studies and evaluations of the 2000 census , it is too early to determine the full extent of improvements compared to the 1990 census . from providing the basis for apportioning the u.s. house of representatives to providing data used by communities , businesses , and americans everywhere , the decennial census provides a great deal of knowledge about our nation . for the 2000 census , costs for these four frameworks increased about 23-percent to about $920 million or about $8 of the total $56 per housing unit cost . in a previous report , we estimated that when compared to the 1970 census , the projected full - cycle cost per housing unit of the 2000 census would quadruple and the total cost would nearly double the costs of the 1990 census . the $1 cost increase for the 2000 census was due to increased bureau efforts to compile a complete and accurate address list and to plan , evaluate , and test aspects of the census design , including dress rehearsals . further , the bureau is still assessing the quality of the 2000 census in its postenumeration review through fiscal year 2003 . the objectives of this report were to ( 1 ) update full - cycle costs and ( 2 ) analyze bureau data to determine the causes of the significant increase in cost per housing unit for the 2000 census when compared to the cost for the 1990 census . the remaining frameworks 1 , 4 , 6 , and 7 contributed the remaining $1 of the $24 per housing unit cost increase for the 2000 census when compared to the 1990 census . the $24 cost per housing unit increase was primarily the result of increased costs in four of the eight frameworks: ( 1 ) $16 for expanded field data collection methods , ( 2 ) $3 for the extensive use of technology and contractor support , referred to as automated data processing and telecommunications support , ( 3 ) $2 for more enhanced methods for data content and products , and ( 4 ) $2 for increases in marketing , communication , and partnership programs . according to census officials , the significant cost increase can be attributed primarily to the bureau's attempt to achieve a better quality census than in 1990 .
over the past decade , the national association of insurance commissioners ( naic ) , through its accreditation program , has made considerable progress in achieving greater uniformity among state insurance regulators in carrying out their financial solvency oversight responsibilities . we are pleased to discuss our observations to date of ongoing efforts to develop and implement more uniform regulatory processes within the insurance industry . more recently , competitive pressures stemming from further consolidation of industries in the financial services sector and enactment of the gramm - leach - bliley act ( glba ) has kept attention focused on regulatory reforms in the insurance industry . of particular interest are those processes related to licensing individual producers ( agents and brokers ) who sell insurance , approving new insurance products that insurers wish to market , and licensing companies to sell insurance . we have long held the view that state insurance regulation can be enhanced through greater uniformity . in the past , we have encouraged insurance regulators to implement more uniform regulatory standards , usually in the context of financial oversight . state regulators are also trying to streamline regulatory processes to help bring new insurance products to market more quickly . many insurance industry participants advocate more uniform standards as a way to help streamline regulatory processes in an effort to make conducting business on a multistate or nationwide basis easier . naic has undertaken several initiatives designed to streamline these regulatory processes . chief among these has been the development and implementation of the system for electronic rate and form filing ( serff ) . as requested , this statement focuses on three initiatives , highlighting their status to date , the issues encountered , and their prospects for success . naic's speed to market initiative has focused both on developing a more centralized filing and approval process for some types of life and health insurance products and on improving existing state - based approval processes for other types of products . other speed to market improvement efforts are directed toward existing state - based systems . these initiatives are commonly referred to as: producer licensing reciprocity and uniformity , speed to market , and national treatment of companies . naic and state regulators largely abandoned initial efforts to create a more centralized insurer licensing and oversight process in favor of improvements to existing state - based licensing processes . naic's producer licensing reciprocity and uniformity initiative aims to streamline the licensing process for producers that desire to sell insurance in one or more states in addition to their state of residence . the primary accomplishment of these improvement efforts to date has been the implementation of a common insurer license application form , the uniform certificate of authority application ( ucaa ) . glba calls for a majority of states to either adopt uniform producer licensing laws or reciprocate with other states in the licensing process by november 2002 . naic is now attempting to overcome this problem by developing an interstate compact , a legal mechanism under which states would cede product review and approval authority for certain types of insurance products to a regulatory commission , allowing it to eliminate deviations the individual states are unwilling to remove on their own .
there are concerns that the projected increases in freight tonnage for all transportation modes will place pressures on the marine , aviation , and highway transportation systems . my testimony today , which is based on our report that is being issued today , addresses three topics: ( 1 ) the federal funding approaches used for the marine transportation system as compared with the aviation and highway systems , ( 2 ) the amount of customs duties on imported goods shipped through the marine , aviation , and highway systems , and ( 3 ) a framework to assist the congress as it considers future federal investment decisions . an intermodal perspective appears especially important as the nation reacts to the increased security needs for transportation networks and as it plans for better , more efficient transportation for the future . we are pleased to be here today to discuss challenges in defining the federal role with respect to freight transportation issues . as a result , there is growing awareness of the need to view various transportation modes , and freight movement in particular , from an integrated standpoint , particularly for the purposes of developing and implementing a federal investment strategy and considering alternative funding approaches . diverse industry stakeholders believe that substantial new investments in the maritime infrastructure may be required from public and private sources because of an aging infrastructure , changes in the shipping industry , and increased concerns about security . to develop a framework to assist the congress in making decisions about the federal role in financing the marine transportation system , we built on prior gao work on federal investment approaches and managerial best practices and interviewed u.s. army corps of engineers and department of transportation officials . the federal approach for funding the marine transportation system relies heavily on general revenues , while the approach for funding the aviation and highway systems relies almost exclusively on collections from users of the systems . our recently completed work on marine transportation is based on our analysis of data collected from 15 federal agencies that expended revenue on the various transportation systems and / or collected funds from users of the systems during fiscal years 1999 through 2001 . the first component — establishing national goals for the system — requires an in - depth understanding of the needs of the system and the relationship of the system to other transportation modes . for example , in the $2.4 billion alameda corridor program , state and local stakeholders had both a financial incentive to relieve congestion and the commitment and ability to bring financial resources to bear . a third component — determining the funding tools and other approaches that will maximize the impact of any federal investment — is important to help expand the capacity to leverage funding resources and to promote shared responsibilities . a systematic framework would be helpful to decision makers as they consider the federal government's purpose and role in providing funding for the system and as they develop a sound investment approach to guide federal participation . during the same period , nearly all of the $10 billion in federal funds expended each year for the aviation system and the $25 billion in federal funds expended each year for the highway system came from revenues generated by users of those two systems .
this sweeping piece of legislation was enacted just 10 months ago , but it has already produced major changes in the nation's approach to maritime security . i am pleased to be here today to discuss the implementation of the maritime transportation security act ( mtsa ) of 2002 . at your request , we have begun reviewing the implementation of security provisions of title i of mtsa . our information is based on interviews with agency officials charged with implementing mtsa's provisions , as well as with officials and stakeholders from several ports . we will be continuing our efforts to more fully evaluate a number of the issues i will address today , and we plan to issue a report when this work is complete . i am here today to tell you about our preliminary findings and what agencies within the department of homeland security ( dhs ) and other federal departments are doing to fulfill their many responsibilities under the act . mtsa called for actions in 46 key areas we identified , such as creating a maritime intelligence security system , assessing security conditions in port areas , creating and implementing a vessel tracking system , and creating identification systems for port workers and seafarers . also , the transportation security administration ( tsa ) is testing new identification cards for controlling access to secure transportation facilities , including vessels and port facilities . i also want to advise you about specific matters that agency officials or others have brought to our attention thus far and other issues that may require further oversight . further work will be needed to determine the extent to which early progress will be sustained over the course of implementation efforts and whether the spirit of cooperation translates into efforts at the port level . the bureau of customs and border protection ( bcbp ) and the maritime administration ( marad ) , the two other agencies with the largest set of responsibilities under mtsa , also are making progress on major projects . our preliminary findings are as follows: progress has been made in implementing mtsa . all six coast guard maritime safety and security teams included in the fiscal year 2003 budget are expected to be operational by the end of september 2003 ; these teams are designed to provide increased protection against terrorism in and around the nation's harbors . while the coast guard is implementing this system , more than half of the 25 busiest u.s. ports will not have it for the foreseeable future , because it requires extensive shore - based equipment and infrastructure that many ports do not have . the two remaining areas relate primarily to operational or efficiency matters , such as duplication of effort in collecting intelligence information . for example , the coast guard , which had lead responsibility for most of the assignments , has six interim rules in place covering major areas of responsibility , such as security in and around the ports , aboard individual vessels , and at individual facilities . the coast guard developed a system that would allow port officials and personnel on other vessels to determine the identity and position of vessels entering or operating within the port . three of these areas , as shown in table 1 , primarily have security implications .
to follow up on our november 2001 report on the executive branch's efforts in this area , you asked us to determine what rightsizing actions may be feasible to reduce costs and security vulnerabilities while retaining effectiveness in meeting foreign policy objectives . we reviewed reports , including those of the accountability review boards , the overseas presence advisory panel ( opap ) , and a state department - led interagency rightsizing committee,and we discussed overseas staffing issues with officials from the state department , other u.s. agencies operating overseas , and the office of management and budget ( omb ) , which is currently implementing the president's management initiative to rightsize u.s. embassies . for our purposes , we define rightsizing as aligning the number and location of staff assigned to u.s. embassies with foreign policy priorities and security and other constraints . we selected this embassy as a case study because it is a large embassy that has been the subject of substantial rightsizing discussions , including recommendations by the former ambassador to france to reduce the number of staff in france by about one - half . we identified three critical elements that should be evaluated together as part of this framework: ( 1 ) physical security and real estate , ( 2 ) mission priorities and requirements , and ( 3 ) operational costs . in addition , i will briefly discuss some of the steps needed to implement the framework and the importance of developing a mechanism to move the rightsizing process forward while ensuring greater transparency and accountability in overseas staffing decisions . we will report on this work in more detail later this year . i am pleased to be here today to discuss our ongoing work on rightsizing the u.s. overseas presence . today i will discuss our preliminary observations on a framework for assessing the feasibility of rightsizing the u.s. overseas presence . my testimony will also highlight staffing issues we identified at the u.s. embassy in paris . we also performed fieldwork at the u.s. embassy in paris . developing comprehensive cost data and linking budgets and staffing decisions are also imperative . in response to opap's recommendations , in february 2000 , president clinton directed the secretary of state to lead an interagency effort to ( 1 ) develop a methodology for assessing embassy staffing , and ( 2 ) recommend adjustments , if necessary , to staffing levels at six pilot study embassies . state's current mission performance plan process does not differentiate among the relative importance of u.s. strategic goals . in addition , the president's fiscal year 2003 international affairs budget highlighted the importance of making staffing decisions based on mission priorities and costs and directed omb to analyze agencies' overseas staffing and operating costs . however , a number of policy issues and challenges need to be addressed for this process to move forward with any real success . although state has a multibillion - dollar plan under way to address security deficiencies around the world , security enhancements cannot bring most existing facilities in line with the desired setback and related blast protection requirements . for instance , the executive branch needs to prioritize foreign policy goals and objectives and insist on a link between those goals and staffing levels .
the social security administration ( ssa ) administers the ssi program , which is the nation's largest cash assistance program for the poor . in 2001 , outstanding ssi debt and newly detected overpayments totaled $4.7 billion . last year , ssi provided $33 billion in benefits to 6.8 million aged , blind , and disabled persons . my testimony today focuses on our current review of actions taken by ssa over the last several years to improve its overpayment deterrence and detection capabilities as well as its ability to recover overpayments once they occur . for example , to better deter and detect overpayments , the agency obtained legislative authority to use additional tools to verify recipients' financial eligibility for benefits ; enhanced its processes for monitoring and holding staff accountable for completing assigned ssi workloads ; and improved its use of automation to strengthen its overpayment detection capabilities . we designated ssi a high - risk program in 1997 after several years of reporting on specific instances of abuse and mismanagement , including poor overpayment detection and recovery practices . these factors also make the ssi program vulnerable to overpayments . benefit eligibility and payment amounts for the ssi population are determined by complex and often difficult to verify financial factors such as an individual's income , resource levels , and living arrangements . i am pleased to be here today to discuss the supplemental security income ( ssi ) program . individual financial circumstances also often change , requiring staff to frequently reassess recipients' continuing eligibility for benefits . to examine these issues , we reviewed ssi performance data and various internal and external reports on ssi management and operations . in addition to improving its overpayment deterrence and detection capabilities , ssa has also made recovery of overpaid benefits a higher priority . the following year we issued a report with recommendations for improving ssi operations . for example , ssa now seizes the tax refunds of individuals with unresolved ssi debt and recently began more aggressive actions to recover overpayments from former ssi recipients by reducing their social security retirement or disability benefits . thus , the ssi program tends to be difficult and labor intensive to administer . we also conducted more than 175 interviews with ssa managers and staff at its headquarters in baltimore and in its philadelphia , san francisco , and atlanta regions and with managers and staff from state disability determination services . in summary , ssa has taken many actions over the last several years to strengthen ssi program integrity . further , at a time when ssa has enhanced its debt recovery capability , its current overpayment waiver policies and practices may be causing ssa to unnecessarily forego the collection of millions of dollars in overpaid benefits annually . further , there are vulnerabilities that ssa has yet to address , such as excessively complex program rules for determining recipient living arrangements and underused penalty authorities for persons who fail to report information affecting their benefits . however , because a number of initiatives are still in the planning or early implementation stages , it is too soon to assess their ultimate impact on ssi payment accuracy . during our meetings with management and staff , we documented their views on the priority ssa places on improving ssi program integrity , and verified policy and procedural changes that have been made in operations .
preventive health care services can extend lives and promote well - being among our nation's seniors . such preventive services are a growing part of medicare , the federal government's health insurance program for some 34 million americans age 65 and older , as well as 6 million younger disabled persons . medicare , administered by the centers for medicare and medicaid services ( cms ) , now covers 10 preventive services — 3 types of immunizations and 7 types of screening . what action has cms taken to increase use of preventive services among the medicare population ? . screening for some types of cancer may extend and improve the quality of life through early detection and treatment . a report evaluating the cost effectiveness of the demonstration projects , the quality of preventive services provided , and beneficiary and health care provider satisfaction is due to the congress in 2004 . cms provided details on its publication and educational campaigns to inform medicare beneficiaries about preventive service benefits and to encourage their use . for example , immunizations against the flu can prevent thousands of hospitalizations and deaths each year among those age 65 and older . while beneficiary education activities are worthwhile , cms studies have shown that other interventions , such as those that are directed at changing the way a health delivery system operates so that patients are more likely to receive services , are more effective . you asked us to examine two questions regarding preventive services for older americans: to what extent are medicare beneficiaries using covered preventive services ? . to answer these questions , we estimated medicare beneficiaries' use of services from a nationwide , state - based survey conducted by the centers for disease control and prevention ( cdc ) . use of preventive services offered under medicare has increased over time . to help ensure that preventive services are being delivered to those beneficiaries who need them , cms sponsors efforts — called “interventions” — aimed at increasing preventive service usage rates . these beneficiaries may , for example , face barriers in obtaining the services or simply choose not to use them . while the current efforts include 3 of the 10 preventive services covered by medicare , cms is also developing indicators and performance measures necessary for interventions to increase use of screening services for osteoporosis and colorectal and prostate cancer . cms has sponsored reviews of studies looking at the effectiveness of interventions to increase use of preventive services among people age 65 and older . cms also has efforts under way aimed at increasing the use of preventive services among minority and low - income seniors . we acknowledge that our report does not describe all of cms's health promotion / education activities underway that relate to increasing the use of preventive services among the medicare population . although medicare provides coverage for these preventive services , some beneficiaries do not receive them . cms also takes action to implement interventions in each state through its peer review organization ( pro ) program . one of these reviews evaluated the effectiveness of interventions targeting people over age 65 for five services covered by medicare — immunizations for flu and pneumonia and screenings for breast , cervical , and colon cancer .
we appreciate this opportunity to testify on the office of pipeline safety's ( ops ) oversight of the safety of our nation's pipeline infrastructure . these challenges include ( 1 ) developing performance measures for the integrity management approach , ( 2 ) ensuring sufficient resources and expertise to oversee operators' integrity management programs , ( 3 ) providing consistent and effective enforcement of integrity management program requirements , and ( 4 ) issuing requirements for integrity management programs for operators of gas transmission pipelines . as a result , ops has the lowest implementation rate of any transportation agency for recommendations from the national transportation safety board ( the safety board ) . we are here today to discuss ( 1 ) ops' progress in implementing integrity management and other initiatives , ( 2 ) ops' progress in responding to recommendations from the safety board and statutory requirements , and ( 3 ) issues that are critical to the future success of ops' initiatives to improve the safety and oversight of the pipeline industry . historically , ops has been slow to take action to improve its oversight of the pipeline industry and implement critical pipeline safety improvements . in recent years , ops has initiated several actions to improve its oversight of the pipeline industry , including requiring “integrity management” programs for individual operators to assess their pipelines for risks , take action to mitigate the risks , and develop program performance measures . ops oversees the safety of 2.2 million miles of pipelines that transport potentially dangerous materials , such as oil and natural gas . this lack of responsiveness has prompted congress to repeatedly mandate basic elements of a pipeline safety program , such as requirements to periodically inspect pipelines . our statement is based on reports we issued in may 2000 and september 2001 , as well as ongoing work for mr. dingell of this subcommittee . ops has moved forward with its new risk - based regulatory approach — integrity management — that requires operators to develop programs that focus on the greatest risks to their pipelines . ops has also made progress on other initiatives that are intended to improve the agency's oversight of the pipeline industry . ops has since improved its responsiveness to the safety board's recommendations and taken action on eight statutory requirements . according to ops officials , the agency plans to collect data that will allow it to link its compliance actions with improvements in safety . ops faces major challenges in implementing its initiatives and in fulfilling the safety board's recommendations and statutory requirements . ops hopes to implement most of its initiatives to improve data in 2002 . ops subsequently changed its enforcement policy to make better use of its full range of enforcement tools , including increasing the number and severity of fines . ops has made progress in responding to recommendations from the safety board and statutory requirements , but still has not implemented some significant recommendations and requirements . allowing more states to oversee a broader range of interstate pipeline safety activities . these initiatives include: revising forms and procedures to collect more complete and accurate data , which will enable ops to better assess the causes of incidents and focus on the greatest risks to pipelines .
since 1988 , the medicaid program has offered transitional medicaid assistance , which provides certain families who are losing medicaid as a result of employment or increased income up to 1 year of additional medicaid health insurance coverage . transitional medicaid assistance was originally enacted for a 10-year period , and has twice been extended to help provide continued health insurance coverage to families moving into employment . the enactment of federal welfare reform in august 1996 significantly changed federal welfare policy for low - income families with children in several ways , including establishing a 5-year lifetime limit on cash assistance . states have implemented a variety of initiatives intended to help families move from cash assistance to the workforce , including some enhancements to transitional medicaid . the welfare reform law also extended transitional medicaid assistance through 2001 , thus continuing an important link to health insurance coverage for individuals as their economic circumstances changed . because the transitional medicaid provision is due to expire in september 2002 and you are considering its extension , you asked us to provide information on the role this program plays in supporting transitions from welfare to work . accordingly , my remarks today will focus on how transitional medicaid assistance provides low - income working families an option to maintain health insurance coverage and states have used transitional medicaid to provide health insurance coverage to families . employment in low - wage or part - time positions — which is common for these newly working individuals — frequently does not provide adequate access to affordable health insurance , whether through employer - sponsored or individually purchased health insurance , thus making transitional medicaid coverage an important option . these initiatives have likely contributed to a drop in cash assistance caseloads of more than 50 percent from 1996 through mid - 2001 . for example , some states reported increasing training for state eligibility determination workers to better inform beneficiaries of this entitlement and how to access it . our earlier work showed that , for the 21 states we reviewed , the implementation of transitional medicaid assistance varied across the states and that certain state practices had enhanced beneficiaries' ability to retain medicaid coverage . amending the medicaid statute to provide states with additional flexibility to ease income - reporting requirements for the coverage period of transitional medicaid assistance , as has been done for other aspects of the medicaid program , could further facilitate uninterrupted health insurance coverage for families moving from cash assistance to the workforce . i am pleased to be here today as you consider the role of medicaid in helping families' transition from welfare to the workforce . in summary , transitional medicaid assistance is a key protection offered to families at a critical juncture in their efforts to move from welfare to work . my comments are based largely on our previously issued reports and testimony on medicaid and welfare reform . we also found , however , that many families did not receive their full transitional medicaid assistance benefits because they failed to report their income three times , as required , throughout the 12-month period of coverage . while such approaches helped make transitional medicaid more available , beneficiaries' failure to report income as required often resulted in their losing eligibility after the first 6 months .
this report addresses the following questions: ( 1 ) to what extent is dod participating in public - private partnerships for depot maintenance ; ( 2 ) what are the characteristics that need to be present to achieve effective partnerships , and where is dod in its ability to measure success ; and ( 3 ) what factors could affect dod's planned expansion of public - private partnerships ? . your subcommittee has supported the use of public - private depot maintenance partnerships with its support of enabling legislation and interest in dod's use of such partnerships . for the past several years , the department of defense ( dod ) and the congress have encouraged the defense logistics support community to pursue partnerships with the private sector . in january 2002 , dod issued policy encouraging the use of such public - private partnerships in order to combine the best commercial processes and practices with dod's extensive depot maintenance capabilities with the objective of improving the efficiency and viability of dod's depots . these public - private partnerships are arrangements through which the combined resources , risks , and rewards of a public agency and a private company are intended to provide greater efficiency , better access to capital , and improved compliance with a range of government regulations . to encourage the department of defense to more clearly identify its long - term goals for its depot facilities and the role of public - private partnerships in meeting those goals , the congress should consider requiring dod to develop measurable goals for improving future operations of its depot facilities to include ( 1 ) facilities recapitalization , ( 2 ) retention of specific depot capabilities , and ( 3 ) human capital plans for preserving a viable workforce . dod and contractor officials have identified 14 characteristics that they believe over time will contribute to a partnership's success in achieving dod's objective of improved depot efficiency and viability , but dod has not developed sufficient data and goals for assessing its partnering initiative . dod also expects these improvements to depot operations to ultimately improve support for war fighters . however , dod's ability to measure the partnerships' overall success is limited because it has not yet developed baseline data and measurable goals for assessing the outcomes of its partnering efforts and the metrics that it has developed sometimes will not provide the clear data needed to fully assess the partnerships . dod is limited in its ability to measure the overall success of its partnering efforts because it has not yet developed baseline data and measurable goals for the expected outcomes of the effort . we also visited 14 of dod's 20 major maintenance depots where these partnerships are ongoing . however , the department's reluctance to establish overall goals for partnerships makes it unclear as to the overall role that dod envisions for partnerships in its depots — even though dod's focus on partnering was intended as one means of fostering improvements in government owned and operated depot facilities . dod does plan to greatly expand the use of public - private partnerships to help achieve the partnership initiative's objective of improving the efficiency and viability of its military depots .
volatile prices , energy shortages , financial difficulties such as the bankruptcy of the enron corporation ( the nation's largest energy trading company before its financial problems ) , and accusations of price manipulation have raised questions about the transition to competitive markets and the federal government's ability to regulate and oversee these new markets to protect market participants and consumers . the federal energy regulatory commission ( ferc ) — the federal agency primarily responsible for regulating and overseeing these industries — will play an important role in developing competitive wholesale markets and in protecting consumers against market abuses . the u.s. electricity and natural gas industries' transition to competitive markets has not been smooth . to strengthen ferc's human capital plan , we recommend that the chairman of ferc revise the agency's plan to ( 1 ) identify specific activities , resources , and time frames to implement the human capital initiatives and ( 2 ) provide results - oriented measures to track the agency's progress in implementing the initiatives and evaluate their effectiveness . in june 2002 , we reported that ferc had not yet adequately revised its regulatory and oversight approach to respond to the transition to competitive energy markets . to determine ferc's progress in establishing an oversight and enforcement capability for competitive energy markets , we focused our review on the formation and operation of omoi . we also pointed out that ferc faced significant human capital and organizational structure challenges as it transformed its workforce to effectively regulate and oversee these evolving markets . moreover , without results oriented measures , ferc will be unable to determine whether its initiatives are leading to better outcomes and achieving the desired effects , such as whether its workforce is better able to meet the challenges posed by competitive energy markets . although ferc developed new performance measures for its market oversight goals and objectives for fiscal years 2003 and 2004 , the new measures are generally not outcome - oriented and do not lend themselves to assessing omoi's effectiveness . it also does not contain results oriented performance measures that can help ferc measure progress toward achieving these objectives . the plan also does not provide results - oriented performance measures to help ferc gauge its progress in achieving the plan's goals and objectives . to help ensure that ferc's oversight of competitive energy markets is comprehensive and resources are effectively directed , we recommend that the chairman of ferc more clearly define omoi's role in overseeing the nation's energy markets by taking the following actions: explicitly describe omoi's activities relative to carrying out the agency's statutory requirements to ensure just and reasonable prices and to preventing market manipulation . in light of ferc's stated commitment to and your interest in market oversight , you asked us to assess ferc's progress in ( 1 ) establishing an oversight and enforcement capability for competitive energy markets and ( 2 ) improving agencywide human capital management . for example , we noted that the agency did not have enough staff with knowledge of competitive energy markets , and that its market oversight function was too dispersed across the agency . however , work remains to be done to ensure ferc's plan is successful .
the department of defense ( dod ) , in particular , accounts for a large percentage of the federal government's purchase card use . for fiscal year 2002 , dod reported that an average of about 207,000 cardholders used purchase cards to make about 11 million transactions at a cost of nearly $7 billion . to meet the objectives of this assignment , we requested that dod and the military services provide us with the ( 1 ) status of dod and the military services' efforts in implementing the provisions of the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2003 and the dod appropriations act , 2003 , ( 2 ) status of actions taken to implement the recommendations included in the four gao reports , and ( 3 ) administrative or disciplinary actions taken against individuals we identified as having made potentially fraudulent , improper , and abusive or questionable transactions . in prior years , the dod purchase card program at dod has not been well managed . in response to these concerns , the bob stump national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2003 ( national defense authorization act ) , section 1007 , required dod to improve the management of the purchase card program . in addition , dod and the military services have taken actions on nearly all of 109 recommendations that gao made in its four reports on the purchase card program , and dod has plans to have most of the recommendations implemented by june 2004 . we identified ( 1 ) a proliferation of cardholders , ( 2 ) lack of documented evidence of training of cardholders and approving officials , ( 3 ) inadequate program monitoring , and ( 4 ) lack of disciplinary actions against cardholders who abused the purchase cards . in the past few years , the use of purchase cards has dramatically increased as federal agencies have sought to eliminate the lengthy process and paperwork long associated with making small purchases . to address the issues identified , we made over 100 recommendations targeted at improving the design and implementation of controls over card use and establishing guidelines for disciplining those who misused their government purchase cards . the report also provides the status of dod efforts to implement the recommendations we made in the reports issued during fiscal years 2002 and 2003 aimed at improving the military service's management of the purchase card program . dod has initiated actions to implement all of the requirements that were mandated in the fiscal year 2003 national defense authorization and dod appropriations acts . while dod and the military services provided evidence documenting actions taken to improve the purchase card program and to prevent individuals and companies from further obtaining fraudulent , improper , and abusive or questionable items with a dod purchase card , we did not make any field visits to independently validate whether dod had effectively implemented the reported changes . dod and the military services have taken strong actions to improve the controls over the purchase card program . as we stated in various testimonies and reports issued between july 2001 and december 2002 , significant breakdowns in internal controls over the army , navy , and air force management of the purchase card program left the services vulnerable to fraud , waste , and abuse .
credible projections of the effects of policy proposals on federal spending and future retirees' income are necessary . future demographic trends include a doubling of the nation's retiree population and only modest labor force growth , leading to concerns about retirement income adequacy for future generations . experts consulted by gao cited priorities for improving retirement data that fit into two broad categories: ( 1 ) obtaining better data from employers on employee benefits and ( 2 ) obtaining better data by linking more individual and household surveys with administrative data ( such as employer records , and social security earnings history records ) . because adequate data is critical to the analysis of retirement income and wealth , gao was asked to identify data improvements that experts say are a priority for the study of retirement income and wealth , as well as factors limiting efforts to obtain the needed information . to increase their understanding about issues related to retirement , policymakers need credible projections of the effects of their proposals on federal spending and on future retirees' income . in addition , federal agencies need to consider both the federal cost of these efforts and the financial and nonfinancial costs imposed on respondents in comparison with the benefits expected from improvements in data . the plan should include cost - effective strategies to make better use of existing statistics by linking survey and administrative data , improve access to linked data consistent with privacy and confidentiality legislation , and improve data collected from employers related to retirement income and wealth . to facilitate plan participants' , beneficiaries' , and analysts' timely access to information about employer - provided pension plans , the congress should consider directing the secretary of labor to obtain from plan administrators electronic filings of all spds and summaries of material modifications required by erisa and make them publicly available in electronic form . information from employers , such as documents describing the features of their pension plans , would enable analysts to forecast future retirement income of pension holders , based on the specific features of their pension plans and the likely distribution of pension income and wealth for different segments of the population . the recommendations of these experts focused primarily on improved use of existing data to support policy analysis , and not on additional data collection . while taking into account these cost considerations , respondent concerns about increased reporting burden , and agency concerns about maintaining confidentiality , the congress , and the departments of labor and the treasury could take the next steps to help fill some of the data needs . in response to your request , as agreed , we identified ( 1 ) data improvements that experts say are a priority for the study of retirement income and wealth and ( 2 ) factors limiting efforts to obtain the needed information . this should assist analysts of retirement income in obtaining information about the features of employer - sponsored benefit plans that are not electronically available . in light of these demographic trends , policymakers have been moved to consider how the future economy can support the large retiree population , and whether retirement income levels will be adequate in the future .
accordingly , we assessed ( 1 ) the department's progress in assessing its core functions as a basis for sourcing decisions , ( 2 ) the plans and progress dod has made in identifying and implementing alternatives to a - 76 , and ( 3 ) the current status of dod's a - 76 program . specifically , the objectives of this report were to assess ( 1 ) the department's progress in assessing its core functions as a basis for sourcing decisions , ( 2 ) the plans and progress dod has made in identifying and implementing alternatives to a - 76 , and ( 3 ) the current status of dod's a - 76 program . the department of defense ( dod ) is currently examining a core competency - based approach for making sourcing decisions — that is , the decision to use a public or private sector source to perform a necessary agency function or activity based on whether the function or activity is core to the agency's mission . recently , dod's study goals have increased because of omb's competitive sourcing goals . at your request , we examined dod's plans for sourcing non - core functions and the effect this may have on its a - 76 program . in determining how to best perform non - core functions , dod's position is that its components should look beyond just the use of office of management and budget ( omb ) circular a - 76 , with its focus on public - private competitions , in making sourcing decisions . dod has been a leader among federal agencies in using a - 76 in recent years . also , a - 76 competitive sourcing is a major initiative under the president's management agenda and omb has set ambitious goals for those competitions . such conversions may be a more cost - effective alternative than simply increasing military end - strength where shortages exist in military positions . this is one of the business transformation initiatives that have been endorsed by one of dod's high - level management committees , the senior executive council . as requested by the ranking minority member of the house committee on armed services , subcommittee on readiness , we reviewed dod's plans for sourcing non - core functions and the effect this may have on its a - 76 program . nonetheless , despite its experience in implementing competitive sourcing , the department faces a number of challenges related to its a - 76 program . integrating operations ( maximizing combat capability ) . omb has established ambitious a - 76 competitive sourcing program goals for the department to meet in both the short term and the long term , even while dod is focusing on its core competency approach . however , decisions to replace military personnel with civilians or contractors without identifying sources for increases in operations and maintenance funds to support those decisions could stress the ability of the operations and maintenance account to meet other pressing needs . dod's fiscal year 2002 fair act inventory exempted 171,698 positions from competition because of statutory , national security , or operational concerns . we also recommend that the secretary of defense require dod components to ensure that decisions to convert functions performed by military personnel to performance by civilians or contractors are predicated on having clearly identified sources of funding to support those decisions .
recognizing this potential , the u.s. agency for international development ( usaid ) has included microenterprise development in the agency's strategy for economic development and poverty reduction . to assist your committee in overseeing the agency's management of its microenterprise development program , you asked that we ( 1 ) determine the extent to which usaid's microfinance activities are meeting the program's key objectives , ( 2 ) assess the reliability of the agency's reporting on its overall microenterprise activities , and ( 3 ) examine the agency's role in identifying and disseminating microenterprise best practices . to determine whether the u.s. agency for international development's ( usaid ) microenterprise development program is meeting its key objectives , we first identified those objectives by reviewing the agency's policy guidance and the pertinent legislation . the key objectives of usaid's microenterprise development program are to reduce poverty among microenterprise owners , workers , and families ; target the poor and the very poor ; encourage participation by women ; and develop sustainable microfinance institutions ( mfi ) . the microenterprise for self - reliance and international anti - corruption act of 2000 , enacted on october 17 , 2000 , expressed strong congressional support for microenterprise projects , stated policy preferences for implementing such projects , and authorized increased funding . microenterprises — small businesses owned and operated by poor entrepreneurs — have potential to help the least advantaged populations in the developing world . to identify key program objectives , we reviewed usaid's policy guidance and the microenterprise for self - reliance and international anti - corruption act of 2000 . despite the general reliability of its data , certain methodological weaknesses in usaid's mrr system may prevent the agency from reporting with precision its program expenditures , the percentage of its funds going to the very poor , the percentage of mfis that are sustainable , and the extent of usaid's contributions to the institutions it supports . efforts to reach the very poor that do not recognize and address these key concerns may not be fully effective . in 2001 , the agency reported that it was conducting microenterprise projects in 52 countries and had obligated almost $2 billion since 1988 to support its program . since 1996 , usaid has annually surveyed missions and implementing institutions regarding their microenterprise activities and issued a report to congress . in its comments , usaid also agreed to ( 1 ) provide more explicit instructions on what activities to include in the mrr ; ( 2 ) revise the formula for estimating the extent of funding that benefits the very poor and include in its annual report additional language concerning the formula ; ( 3 ) improve the accuracy of data on obligations and poverty lending ; and ( 4 ) adopt a new standardized definition of sustainability if one is adopted by the field . the majority of usaid's microenterprise funding supports microfinance services , particularly micro loans . to determine whether usaid is meeting these objectives , we interviewed officials from usaid , usaid's implementing partners , and experts ; conducted fieldwork in peru , egypt , and bulgaria , three countries with established usaid microenterprise programs ; and reviewed academic and applied studies of microenterprise projects and outcomes .
this report addresses ( 1 ) the federal programs that provide transportation services for transportation - disadvantaged populations and the types of services they provide ; ( 2 ) federal , state , and local government spending for transportation services through these federal programs ; ( 3 ) the extent of coordination among state , local , and federal agencies in delivering transportation services for the transportation - disadvantaged , including actions taken by the coordinating council ; and ( 4 ) any obstacles that may impede effective coordination and potential options for overcoming such obstacles . however , certain populations in the united states lack the ability to provide their own transportation or have difficulty accessing whatever conventional public transportation may be available . our overall approach was to ( 1 ) review federal laws and regulations governing the use of federal funds for services for transportation - disadvantaged populations ; ( 2 ) analyze spending data where available ; ( 3 ) review federal and other governmental activities and the research literature related to the coordination of transportation services ; and ( 4 ) obtain the views of more than 100 officials from federal , state , and local government agencies , industry and client advocacy groups , and other experts involved with or affected by the coordination process on the obstacles and options for improving coordination . many federal programs authorize use of funds to provide transportation for transportation - disadvantaged people so they can access government programs . ensure that strategic and annual performance plans discuss their departments' transportation coordination efforts and incorporate long - term goals and performance measures that address the need for coordination among programs for the transportation - disadvantaged . many within these populations face significant problems in accessing transportation . programs that provide incidental transportation include health and medical programs , job - training programs , or programs for the aging . the ability to access personal or public transportation is fundamental for people to connect with employment opportunities , health and medical services , educational services , and the community at large . complete spending information is not available because many federal funding recipients are not required to distinguish transportation from other spending when reporting spending information to federal agencies . efforts to improve services and achieve cost savings through coordination of transportation activities among agencies at all levels of government vary . our scope of work included federal programs that provide transportation services to the transportation - disadvantaged . we have also issued other reports raising concerns about service coordination . these “transportation - disadvantaged” persons may have an age - related condition , a disability , or income constraints . we clustered the wide range of identified obstacles into three categories related to ( 1 ) sharing vehicles and the low priority given to funding coordination activities ; ( 2 ) programmatic differences ; and ( 3 ) limited federal , state , and local leadership and commitment to undertake and sustain coordination efforts . in some areas within the five states we visited , coordination among providers has resulted in significant benefits , such as improved customer service and lower unit costs . while some states are not currently experiencing reductions in their transportation programs , many states are anticipating that budget deficits will continue into 2004 .
we were asked to provide information on ( 1 ) how key provisions of the trade adjustment assistance ( taa ) reform act have affected program services , ( 2 ) what have been the challenges in implementing the taa reform act's new provisions , ( 3 ) whether demand for taa training has changed , and how states are meeting this demand , and ( 4 ) what is known about what the taa program is achieving . in light of recent changes to the program , you asked us to examine ( 1 ) how key provisions of the taa reform act have affected program services , ( 2 ) what have been the challenges in implementing the taa reform act's new provisions , ( 3 ) whether demand for taa training has changed , and how states are meeting this demand , and ( 4 ) what is known about what the taa program is achieving . in particular , labor should track over time the following: the ability of workers to meet the new training enrollment deadline and of states and local areas to provide appropriate assessments to all trade - affected workers within the deadline , especially when responding to very large layoffs , and whether the eligibility criteria for the new wage insurance program are resulting in the denial of services to some older workers who could benefit from the program . partly in response to these concerns , congress passed the trade adjustment assistance ( taa ) reform act of 2002 . economists generally agree that international trade has benefited americans in a number of ways , for example , through making a broader range of goods and services available . the primary program for workers dislocated from manufacturing because of international trade is the trade adjustment assistance ( taa ) program , established in 1962 and currently funded at about $1.3 billion annually . among the changes , the act shortened from 60 days to 40 days the time labor is given to process petitions filed on behalf of groups of workers to determine their potential eligibility for services ; established a deadline for workers to enroll in training , after they have been laid off or their petition has been approved , in order to maintain eligibility for extended income support payments ; created a health coverage tax credit ( hctc ) to help trade - affected workers who are enrolled in or have completed training , or have a waiver from this requirement , pay for health insurance ; created a wage insurance benefit for workers age 50 and older , subsidizing the difference between the prior and new wages of some trade - affected workers who find reemployment quickly ; and expanded the eligibility criteria for secondary workers — defined as those who are indirectly affected by international trade , because they supply component parts to or perform finishing work for directly affected firms . the act consolidated two former programs that served trade - affected workers — the taa and the north american free trade agreement transitional adjustment assistance ( nafta - taa ) programs — and made a number of key changes designed to expand benefits and decrease the time it takes to get workers into services .
two broad groups of u.s. - flag carriers compete for these food aid shipments: 1. those that participate in the maritime security fleet ( msf ) ( generally liners that carry containers on scheduled routes ) and receive a $2.1 million annual subsidy from the federal government and 2. those that do not ( generally carriers of bulk and bagged cargo that operate on a charter basis ) . to answer these questions , we gathered and analyzed food aid shipment data for fiscal years 1999 to 2003 from the u.s. agency for international development ( usaid ) , the department of agriculture ( usda ) , and the maritime administration ( marad ) , as well as msf and cargo preference vessel data from marad and military contingency participation data from marad and the department of defense ( dod ) . since no analysis had been conducted on the effects of such a change , the maritime security program was authorized without this provision , and we were directed to study the impact of placing a limitation on msf transportation of bagged food aid preference cargo . food aid shipments must generally be transported on u.s. - flag ships under the requirements set by the cargo preference program . how are the cargo preference and maritime security programs designed to meet their objectives and who participates in them ? . how would establishing a bagged cargo preference tonnage limitation on msf vessels be expected to affect msf , other u.s. - flag ships , the cargo preference food aid program , and the ports servicing these ships ? . what are the nature and extent of msf and non - msf carrier participation and competition in the food aid program ? . as discussed with representatives of the house and senate committees on armed services and the senate committee on commerce , science , and transportation , we have focused on answering the following questions: 1 . in a legislative mandate in section 3535 of the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2004 ( p.l . however , food aid agencies could face higher costs if the limits resulted in fewer and more expensive options for some shipments , and these agencies have emphasized their concerns that additional constraints on food aid shipments could impede their ability to provide food aid to meet critical humanitarian needs . dod strongly supports both the cargo preference and maritime security programs . during the debate on renewing the maritime security program and msf , the non - msf carriers complained that the msf subsidy put them at a competitive disadvantage , particularly for bagged food aid cargo . as discussed with committee representatives , we have focused on answering the following questions: ( 1 ) how the cargo preference and maritime security programs are designed to meet their objectives and who participates in them ; ( 2 ) what the nature and extent are of msf and non - msf carrier participation in the food aid program ; ( 3 ) how establishing a bagged cargo preference tonnage limitation on msf vessels would be expected to affect the msf , other u.s. - flag ships , the cargo preference food aid program , and the ports servicing these ships .
in 2001 , hhs — through its administration for children and families' ( acf ) children's bureau — began implementing a new federal review system , known as the child and family services reviews ( cfsr ) , to hold states accountable for improving child welfare outcomes . in addition , the federal department of health and human services ( hhs ) monitors states' compliance with key federal goals , specified in part by the adoption and safe families act ( asfa ) of 1997 , to keep children safe and ensure their placement in stable and permanent homes . the objectives of our study were to report on ( 1 ) acf's and the states' experiences preparing for and conducting the statewide assessments and on - site reviews ; ( 2 ) acf's and the states' experiences developing , funding , and implementing items in the pip ; and ( 3 ) additional efforts that acf has taken beyond the cfsr to ensure that all states meet federal goals of safety , permanency , and well - being . to help states investigate reports of child abuse and neglect , provide placements to children outside their homes , and deliver services to help keep families together , the federal government provides approximately $7 billion dollars to states annually . without clear guidance on how to systematically prepare and monitor pip - related documents , and how regional officials can integrate their many oversight responsibilities , acf has left state officials unsure of how their progress over time will be judged and potentially complicated its own monitoring efforts . unlike prior federal reviews — which determined states' adherence to certain process measures — acf designed the cfsrs as an outcome - oriented approach to assess children's safety ; their timely placement in permanent homes ; and their mental , physical , and educational well - being . to better understand the cfsr process , you asked us to examine ( 1 ) acf's and the states' experiences preparing for and conducting the statewide assessments and on - site reviews ; ( 2 ) acf's and the states' experiences developing , funding , and implementing items in their pips ; and ( 3 ) additional efforts , if any , that acf has taken beyond the cfsr to help ensure that all states meet federal goals of safety , permanency , and well - being for children . further , states are required to develop and implement program improvement plans ( pip ) to improve their child welfare practice and capacity when they are found to be deficient . to ensure that acf uses the best available data in measuring state performance , we recommend that the secretary of hhs expand the use of additional data states may provide in their statewide assessments and consider alternative data sources when available , such as longitudinal data that track children's placements over time , before making final cfsr determinations . acf also developed a number of factors to assess states' performance in systemic areas , such as staff training and foster parent licensing . in addition , to ensure that acf regional offices and states fully understand the pip development , approval , and monitoring processes , and that regional offices fully understand acf's prioritization of the cfsr as the primary mechanism for child welfare oversight , we recommend that the secretary of hhs take the following two actions: issue clarifying guidance on the pip process and evaluate states' and regional offices' adherence to this instruction , and provide guidance to regional offices explaining how to better integrate the many training and technical assistance activities for which they are responsible , such as participation in state planning meetings and the provision of counsel to states on various topics , with their new cfsr responsibilities .
epa has taken steps to address several uncertainties surrounding the program's future viability . given the program's limited funding , epa could use performance indicators to help evaluate , prioritize , and serve as the basis for making funding decisions . the group's findings , including how epa should measure program performance , are as yet uncertain . while the superfund program has implemented indicators to gauge the impacts of its efforts on human health and the environment , epa has acknowledged the limitations of its current means of measuring program performance and agrees that this shortcoming prevents the agency from communicating the outcomes of its work at hazardous waste sites to the public , congress , states , and the regulated community . because superfund lacks indicators to fully measure the outcomes of the program's cleanup efforts , epa has asked the advisory council to develop criteria by which to measure the program's progress . if successfully implemented for the superfund program , establishing these measures would also help epa and the congress make the difficult funding , policy , and program decisions that the current budget environment demands . however , it is unclear whether the advisory council will reach consensus on its recommendations ; and its findings are not expected until december 2003 , at the earliest . in considering changes to the program to address future challenges associated with the superfund program's fiscal uncertainty , we recommend that the administrator , epa , develop indicators that can be used to measure program performance . epa underscored the limitations of its current means of measuring program performance when it asked the national advisory council for environmental policy and technology subcommittee to address measures of the superfund program's progress . to assess the npl listing process , we evaluated epa's minimum eligibility criteria , policies , guidance , and recent practices ; we also assessed the extent of epa's coordination with states . as agreed with your office , we examined ( 1 ) the current status of the superfund program , ( 2 ) the factors guiding epa's selection of sites to be placed on the npl , and ( 3 ) the program's future outlook . however , epa acknowledges that there are still few cross - program metrics to capture comprehensive program outcomes . gao examines the use of public funds ; evaluates federal programs and policies ; and provides analyses , recommendations , and other assistance to help congress make informed oversight , policy , and funding decisions . in our review of cleanup actions , we focused on remedial actions , which are generally costly and can take a long time to complete . officials in 6 of the 10 epa regions agreed that states in their region faced fiscal problems and anticipated that shortfalls could cause problems with states' future cleanup capabilities . the objectives of this review were to examine ( 1 ) the current status of the superfund program , ( 2 ) the factors guiding the environmental protection agency's ( epa ) selection of sites to be placed on the national priorities list ( npl ) , and ( 3 ) the program's future outlook . however , epa's superfund program expenditures steadily decreased by $255 million from fiscal years 1999 through 2002 .
because the veterans corporation's programs are still in their early stages , we agreed with the staffs of the house and senate committees on small business and veterans' affairs to describe ( 1 ) the veterans corporation's efforts in providing small business assistance to veterans , including service - disabled veterans ; ( 2 ) the use of and controls over federal funds to provide these services ; and ( 3 ) the efforts of the veterans corporation to become financially self - sufficient . the veterans entrepreneurship and small business development act of 1999 ( act ) , as amended , created the veterans corporation and , among other things , requires it to ( 1 ) improve access to technical assistance that promotes entrepreneurship , and ( 2 ) use public and private resources to assist veterans , including service - disabled veterans , with the formation and expansion of small businesses . recognizing the need to assist the nation's veterans who choose to start or expand small businesses in their transition from military to civilian life , congress created the national veterans business development corporation ( the veterans corporation ) — a chartered corporation — to provide small business and entrepreneurship assistance . a congressional report released in january 1999 , identified gaps in the federal government's delivery of entrepreneurial services to veterans . the act also required gao to evaluate the effectiveness of the veterans corporation in providing services to veterans . to carry out these activities , the act authorized the appropriation of $12 million in federal funds to the veterans corporation over a 4-year period . it also required that the veterans corporation implement a plan to raise private funds and become a self - sustaining corporation . to meet our objective to describe the veterans corporation's use of federal funds , we interviewed officials at the veterans corporation . to complete our work , we obtained and analyzed program information and corporate documents provided by the veterans corporation . we also obtained technical comments from the small business administration ( sba ) and the department of veterans' affairs ( va ) that have been incorporated where appropriate . we also obtained and analyzed the veterans corporation's fiscal years 2001 and 2002 financial statements , obtained and reviewed minutes of board of directors meetings , and interviewed the veterans corporation's external auditors . we also interviewed officials from the staff and board of the veterans corporation , as well as officials from federal agencies , partnering organizations , and veteran service organizations . officials additionally have identified some initial challenges that have slowed the progress of these efforts , including ( 1 ) the inability to collect data on the veteran population , ( 2 ) limited government participation in the veterans corporation activities , ( 3 ) delays in appointing management , and ( 4 ) unclear corporate legal status of the veterans corporation . gao examines the use of public funds ; evaluates federal programs and policies ; and provides analyses , recommendations , and other assistance to help congress make informed oversight , policy , and funding decisions . the board established three committees , including the ( 1 ) barriers identification committee , which is tasked with reviewing studies and research to identify barriers that affect transitioning military personnel ; ( 2 ) information clearinghouse committee , which is responsible for obtaining and disseminating certification , licensure , and small business development information ; and ( 3 ) research and legislative action committee , which will analyze barriers and develop recommendations .
our specific objectives were to ( 1 ) develop a profile of general and flag officer careers and ( 2 ) assess dod's justification for its general and flag officer legislative proposals . the mandate directed us to evaluate dod's recommendations . for fiscal year 2005 , the department of defense ( dod ) has proposed eliminating or amending a number of general and flag officer provisions to provide greater flexibility in managing its senior uniformed leaders . since 1996 , congress annually has authorized the military services a total of nearly 900 active duty general and flag officers . we initiated this review in response to a mandate in the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2003 . the secretary of defense has expressed interest in retaining experienced leaders beyond the current statutory retirement limits . such provisions reflect congressional interest in maintaining oversight and accountability of general and flag officers . finally , dod has not determined the long - term cost implications of its proposals pertaining to retirement compensation . as subsequently agreed with your offices , we developed information and analysis to assist congress as it considers dod's fiscal year 2005 legislative proposals . among dod's stated goals of the proposals are to extend the careers of general and flag officers and to increase the length of individual assignments . the mandate required dod to review the existing statutory framework for the management of general and flag officers and submit any recommendations for revising the framework . this is the second report we have issued in response to the fiscal year 2003 mandate . this evaluation should include an assessment of ( 1 ) factors that contribute to the retirement of senior general and flag officers prior to the statutory retirement limits , ( 2 ) the need for changes in dod policy or procedure to make greater use of existing authority to extend general and flag officers careers on a case - by - case basis beyond the statutory retirement limits , and ( 3 ) the long - term cost implications of proposals to change retirement compensation . dod , however , has not analyzed the long - term cost implications of its retirement compensation proposals . a legislative framework that has evolved over time shapes the careers of general and flag officers and the management of these officers . for example , congress has enacted legislative provisions limiting the tenure of general and flag officers , the terms they can serve in specified senior leadership positions , and the distribution of general and flag officers across pay grades . our first report reviewed dod's 2003 study of general and flag officer requirements and authorizations and recommended actions that dod could take to clarify its general and flag officer requirements . in march 2004 , dod resubmitted many of the same proposals to congress for consideration as part of the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2005 . for example , we recommended that dod clarify the magnitude and impact between dod's validated requirements for general and flag officers and congressional authorizations , to include an analysis of the impact caused by the workarounds dod uses to fill the gap between requirements and authorizations . if dod makes full use of its existing legislative authority but finds that it is inadequate to achieve its goal of retaining experienced leaders , then it may be in a better position to argue for changes to this authority .
we were asked to determine ( 1 ) to what extent people aged 55 and over are enrolled in federal employment and training programs and what services they receive , ( 2 ) how employment and training services are provided to older workers , and ( 3 ) how performance measures may have affected services for older workers . to determine what employment and training services are provided to people aged 55 years and older ( older workers ) and how these services are provided , we surveyed responsible officials in each of the 50 states and washington , d.c. , and puerto rico , on states' services for older workers through several of the major federal employment and training efforts: ( 1 ) the workforce investment act ( 49 states responded ) , ( 2 ) the senior community service employment program ( 50 states responded ) , and ( 3 ) the trade adjustment assistance programs ( 48 states responded ) . if the potential labor shortage is not addressed , the nation's productivity , growth , and international competitiveness could be threatened . concerned that existing federal employment and training programs may not be oriented towards the needs of older workers , you asked us to determine ( 1 ) the extent to which people aged 55 and older are enrolled in federal employment and training programs and what services they receive , ( 2 ) how employment and training services are provided to older workers , and ( 3 ) how performance measures may have affected services for older workers . with the potential labor shortage and an aging population , increasing demands will be made on the workforce development system to help ensure that older workers are provided adequate opportunities to help address the anticipated labor shortage and meet employer needs for labor . some economists predict that by 2030 , the nation could experience a labor shortage of 35 million workers . these programs included the senior community service employment program , which primarily provides low - income older workers with subsidized employment in public agencies and nonprofit organizations ; the workforce investment act programs , which provide job search assistance and training to adults and individuals who have lost their jobs because of layoffs or plant closings ( dislocated workers ) ; and the trade adjustment assistance programs , which provide employment and training assistance for those individuals who have lost their jobs due to the adverse effects of international trade . as the shortage approaches and labor markets begin to tighten , one option available to increase the labor supply is to encourage people to stay in the labor force beyond traditional retirement ages , especially because people who are age 55 or older will constitute nearly a third of the total population — an increase of 46 percent over three decades . in light of concerns that older workers have unique employment characteristics that could adversely affect certain program outcomes and that older workers who need in - depth job search assistance and job training to remain in , or re - enter , the workforce may not receive such services , we recommend that the secretary of labor assess wia performance measures and make adjustments as necessary to eliminate the disincentive to enrolling older workers in wia .
the reliability of contract disbursing data is critical to the department of defense ( dod ) for ( 1 ) properly accounting for and accurately making contract payments , ( 2 ) effectively accounting for and controlling billions of dollars in budget authority , and ( 3 ) preparing reliable financial information on the results of operations to support management and congressional decision making on programs , operations , and budget requests . for example , defense finance and accounting service ( dfas ) columbus fiscal year 1999 data showed that almost $1 of every $3 in contract payment transactions in the mechanization of contract administration services ( mocas ) system was for adjustments to previously recorded payments — $51 billion of adjustments out of $157 billion in transactions . we have previously reported on dod's inability to accurately account for and report on disbursements , which is a long - term problem that is pervasive and complex in nature . however , dod has not yet completed its work to ( 1 ) provide information to the procuring activities on the correct methods for presenting payment instructions on contracts , ( 2 ) develop and implement standardized payment instructions to be used dod - wide , and ( 3 ) fully automate the payment process using these instructions . you asked that we determine ( 1 ) the magnitude of adjustments that affected previously recorded payments and dfas columbus's reported cost to make these adjustments during fiscal year 2002 , ( 2 ) why contracts , including payment instructions , were so complex , ( 3 ) the key factors that caused dfas columbus to make payment adjustments for the two contracts that we reviewed in detail , and ( 4 ) what steps dod has taken or planned to address the adjustment problem . until dod successfully modernizes its business operations , these interim steps will help avoid the inaccurate contract payment data that have hindered dod's ability to accurately account for and report on contract disbursements . resolving dod's long - standing contract payment problems will require major improvements to its processes and systems . one key element of dod's efforts to improve its business operations is its effort to develop an enterprise architecture to guide and constrain its ongoing and planned investments in business systems . to determine the magnitude of adjustments that affected previously recorded payments and defense finance and accounting service ( dfas ) columbus's reported cost to make these adjustments in fiscal year 2002 , we obtained and analyzed a mechanization of contract administration services ( mocas ) database of contract payment transactions , including disbursements , collections , and adjustments , made for fiscal year 2002 . thus , the two contracts — a $565 million army missile contract and a $49 million air force communications contract — are not representative of all dod contracts but , based on our experience , have characteristics similar to other complex contracts . in its comments , dod concurred with two of the four recommendations and partially concurred with the remaining two recommendations . the failure of dpps to become dod's standard procurement payment system is indicative of dod's long - standing inability to efficiently and effectively modernize its financial management and business systems .
by enacting a number of major management reforms , the congress has created a statutory framework , with the government performance and results act ( gpra ) as its centerpiece . a central piece of that initiative is the office of management and budget's ( omb ) new diagnostic tool , the program performance assessment rating tool ( part ) . during the past decade , the congress and the executive branch have sought to improve federal management and instill a greater focus on results . a series of three reports described agencies' progress over a 4-year period in aligning performance plans ; budgets ; and , in the most recent report , financial statements . improving the integration of budget and performance is a high priority initiative in the president's management agenda . finally , we observed that describing the planned and actual use of resources in terms of measurable results was an essential long - term effort that would take time and adaptation on the part of all agencies . omb expects to use part assessments in considering department and agency budget submissions for the fiscal year 2004 president's budget request to the congress . part is designed to provide a consistent approach to reviewing program design , planning , and goals development as well as program management and results . the objectives of this report on the nuclear regulatory commission ( nrc ) , and its two companion studies on the administration for children and families within the department of health and human services and the veterans health administration within the department of veterans affairs , are ( 1 ) to document what managers in these three agencies considered successful efforts at creating links between planning and performance information to influence resource choices and ( 2 ) the challenges they face in doing so . one of gpra's major purposes is to encourage a closer and clearer link between planning , performance — that is , results , and the budget process . we found that from fiscal years 1999 through 2002 , agencies made significant progress in showing a direct link between expected performance and requested program activity funding levels — either through structural changes or crosswalks — as the first step in defining the performance consequences of budgetary decisions . in a number of different reports to the congress , we have examined different aspects of the resources - to - results link . furthermore , we found that progress likely would be uneven and the pace of development affected by mission complexity and differences in operating environments across the government . we also studied ways to guide agencies to better integrate performance information into the budget process . each administration takes a slightly different approach to implementing results management . however , we concluded that additional effort was needed to describe the relationship between performance expectations , requested funding , consumed resources , and performance results . both our assessments of performance and budget account alignments and the framework of budget practices have led to the next phase of work and the subject of this report . in this work , we developed a framework of budget practices that we believe can contribute to an agency's capacity to manage for results .
in january 2003 , we designated the implementation and transformation of the department of homeland security ( dhs ) as high - risk due to the size and complexity of the effort , the existing challenges faced by the components being merged into the department , and the potentially serious consequences should dhs fail to effectively carry out its mission . dhs , which is expected to have some of the most extensive acquisition requirements in government , is currently in the process of integrating the mission functions and acquisition practices of 23 incoming entities . the immigration and naturalization service ( ins ) is one of the largest agencies coming under the new department , with a budget of $6.1 billion and contracts for goods and services valued at $1.7 billion in fiscal year 2002 . specifically , we assessed whether ins has an adequate infrastructure — including oversight , information , and workforce — to manage its acquisitions . ins's procurement organization will continue to acquire goods and services under dhs . given the heightened importance of ins's mission due to threats to the security of our nation , you asked us to review ins's contracting processes . in addition , you asked us to determine whether ins is following sound contracting policies and procedures in awarding and managing individual contracts . dhs officials are currently assessing the incoming agencies' ( 1 ) major procurements to determine whether duplication exists and to identify ways of maximizing the dhs's purchasing power by consolidating like procurements where feasible ; ( 2 ) procurement and financial systems to determine whether any of the existing systems are adequate to meet the department's future needs ; and ( 3 ) acquisition workforce to identify gaps and the need for dhs - specific training requirements . its acquisition workforce is struggling to effectively manage the large and mission - critical procurements for which it is responsible . in addition , while headquarters and administrative centers established performance goals and measures to help evaluate the effectiveness of the procurement function , these efforts have not been effective . further , ins's acquisition workforce is not adequate to manage the agency's increased mission requirements . ins has made limited use of internal controls , such as internal reviews and performance goals and measures , that could help monitor procurement activity across the agency . ins's mission and overall workforce have expanded greatly in the past decade , and spending on contracts has also increased significantly . the plan should also identify key strategies to attract and retain this workforce , including use of available recruiting and retention flexibilities or other targeted approaches . a consulting firm helped the ins headquarters procurement office set goals , such as obligating funds in a timely manner ; providing clear , consistent customer guidance ; maximizing private and public sector resources ; and complying with statutory requirements . we recommend that the secretary of dhs direct the under secretary for management to take the following actions as part of ongoing efforts to implement dhs procurement policies . dhs is expected to spend billions annually to acquire a broad range of products , technologies and services , and these contractor - provided goods and services will be critical to the department's ability to achieve its mission of protecting the nation from terrorism .
to identify changes in the department of defense's ( dod ) on - hand and on - order inventories for fiscal years 1996 through 2001 , we used data developed in prior reviews and inventory stratification reports . the department of defense maintains a supply of spare and repair parts in order to keep its equipment operational for war - and peace - time missions . the management of this inventory is especially critical as the department and the services are called upon for new missions relating to combating terrorism worldwide and protecting the homeland . in response to your request , this report ( 1 ) provides information on changes in and make up of the department's inventory and ( 2 ) analyzes changes in inventory requirements , with a focus on causes of requirements changes derived from a sample of navy inventory items . nevertheless , the department has attributed readiness problems to parts shortages . such changes in missions can lead to changes in inventory requirements , which , in turn , determine the size of the inventory . while some improvements have been made , in january 2003 we reported that these conditions still existed and that over half of the department's inventory is not needed to satisfy current operating requirements . since 1990 , we have identified the department's management of secondary inventory as a high - risk area because levels of inventory were too high and management systems and procedures were ineffective . while the services are implementing management changes that will reduce the size of dod's inventory , long - standing and systemic inventory management problems continue to exist . to improve the accuracy of the navy's secondary inventory requirements , we recommend that the secretary of defense direct the secretary of the navy to require the commander , naval supply systems command , require its inventory managers to use the most current data available for computing administrative lead time requirements . this report , in response to your interest in the department of defense's inventory management , is one in a series on the department's management of secondary inventory — that is , spare and repair parts , clothing , medical , and other items that support the military's operating forces . the services are implementing management changes that will reduce the size of dod's reported inventory and the amount of inventory that satisfies requirements . a navy inventory reporting change and increased dod inventory requirements contributed significantly to the growth in dod's inventory . about 37,000 items accounted for $4.3 billion in inventory requirements increases , and another 37,000 items accounted for a $1.2 billion decrease in inventory requirements decreases . since 1995 we have reported on imbalances in dod's inventory , and our current work shows that these imbalances continue to exist . dod's overall inventory requirements increased by $10.6 billion , or 26 percent , between the end of fiscal years 1999 and 2001 , with some of the navy's requirements being overstated . overall , the amount of dod's inventory that exceeds current operating requirements has decreased since 1996 . the navy has not formally updated the data it uses to project administrative lead time requirements for aviation parts since 1999 , and thus these requirements are overstated .
we included the following six civilian agencies in our review: the general services administration ( gsa ) , the national aeronautics and space administration ( nasa ) , the department of energy ( doe ) , the department of veterans affairs ( va ) , the department of treasury , and the department of health and human services ( hhs ) . you requested that we ( 1 ) determine the efforts civilian federal agencies are making to address their future acquisition workforce needs and identify the challenges , if any , they have encountered and ( 2 ) identify any “lessons learned” from the department of defense's ( dod ) efforts to develop strategic plans for its acquisition workforce . as a result , rigid procurement rules have given way to rules that allow the use of more judgment and initiative on the part of the individuals who make up the acquisition workforce . it is also striving to maximize the value of the $200 billion it spends annually by taking advantage of the opportunities offered by the commercial marketplace . the federal government is dramatically changing the manner in which it purchases goods and services . leading public organizations here in the united states and abroad have found that strategic human capital management must be the centerpiece of any serious change management initiative and efforts to transform the cultures of government agencies . at the same time , some agencies are contending with the fact that the acquisition workforce has decreased by 22 percent in the last decade . we did not assess the effectiveness of the agencies' efforts . workforce planning provides managers with a strategic basis for making human resource decisions and allows organizations to address systematically the issues that are driving workforce change . industry and government experts alike recognize that a key to making a successful transformation toward a more sophisticated acquisition environment is having the right people with the right skills . in order to leverage the experiences of federal agencies' efforts , including those of dod , to address future acquisition workforce needs , we recommend that the ofpp administrator work with procurement executives to ensure that the lessons learned from these efforts are shared with all federal agencies as they continue with their initiatives to improve the acquisition workforce . four organizations — the office of personnel management ( opm ) , the office of federal procurement policy ( ofpp ) , the procurement executives council ( pec ) , and the federal acquisition institute ( fai ) — have roles to play in dealing with workforce and acquisition workforce issues . these six agencies accounted for about 72 percent of the federal dollars contracted by civilian ( non - dod ) agencies in fiscal year 2001 . dod has been working for several years to strengthen its civilian acquisition workforce . hhs concurred with our findings , but provided technical comments , including clarifying that it views acquisition as critical to mission success , although acquisition is not a primary function of the agency . three agencies are developing specific acquisition workforce plans . finally , doe believed that the lack of management support did not pose a challenge to its efforts to improve the acquisition workforce , but that a lack of resources to implement developmental programs has been a challenge .
the federal home loan bank system's ( fhlbank system ) traditional cooperative approach to providing housing and community finance through 12 regionally based federal home loan banks ( fhlbank ) faces continual challenges due to consolidation in the financial services industry and the emergence of mortgage lenders with nationwide operations . specifically , you asked that we 1. describe the laws and regulations pertaining to the terms that fhlbanks can offer on advances ; 2. provide information on whether key differences exist in current advance pricing and other terms across the fhlbanks ; 3. determine whether holding companies face any legal or regulatory barriers in transferring assets among subsidiaries who are members of different fhlbank districts ; and 4. describe fhfb's safety and soundness oversight of the fhlbanks' advance pricing practices and review selected data that fhfb collects to monitor safety and soundness practices within the fhlbank system . thus , these bank and thrift holding companies may , in effect , have access ( through their subsidiaries ) to advances from multiple fhlbanks . recently , these concerns have been heightened as the federal housing finance board ( fhfb ) , the fhlbank system's financial regulator , has analyzed the benefits and costs associated with potential changes to the system's membership requirements that would allow financial organizations to join more than one fhlbank district ( these potential changes to the system's membership rules are commonly referred to as multidistrict membership ) . traditionally , each fhlbank made loans , known as advances , that were secured by eligible collateral ( e.g. , single family mortgage loans ) to member institutions — particularly thrifts — located in its district to support housing finance . as discussed with your staff , our report objectives are to ( 1 ) describe the laws and regulations pertaining to the terms that fhlbanks can offer on advances ; ( 2 ) provide information on whether key differences exist in current advance pricing and other terms across the fhlbanks ; ( 3 ) determine whether holding companies face any legal or regulatory barriers in transferring assets among subsidiaries who are members of different fhlbank districts ; and ( 4 ) describe fhfb's safety and soundness oversight of the fhlbanks' advance pricing practices and review selected data that fhfb collects to monitor the safety and soundness of the fhlbank system . as discussed with your staff , this report provides an overview of advance term pricing requirements and practices within the fhlbank system that could be useful in assessing the extent of current competition among the fhlbanks and the potential competitive impacts of multidistrict membership . to address these objectives , we obtained and reviewed applicable federal laws and regulations pertaining to the terms that the fhlbanks can offer on advances . supporters of multidistrict membership believe that it is necessary to modernize the fhlbank system's structure , while critics believe that multidistrict membership would increase the potential for dangerous competition between the fhlbanks . we also interviewed the 12 fhlbank presidents , credit and collateral staff from 7 of the 12 fhlbanks , and fhfb officials . we sent a set of structured questions to each of the 12 banks and reviewed their credit and collateral policies .
since the mid - 1990s , gao has highlighted the need for the department of state and other agencies to establish a systematic process for determining their overseas staffing levels . in august 2001 , the president's management agenda directed all agencies to “rightsize” their overseas presence to the minimum necessary to meet u.s. foreign policy goals . shortly after the 1998 bombings of two u.s. embassies in east africa , two high level independent groups called for the reassessment of staffing levels at u.s. embassies and consulates . to support the long - standing need for a successful rightsizing initiative , in 2002 we developed a framework that identifies critical elements of embassy operations — physical security , mission priorities and requirements , and cost — and also includes rightsizing options for consideration . our july 2002 report recommended that the office of management and budget ( omb ) use our framework to support the administration's rightsizing initiatives , starting with its assessments of staffing levels and rightsizing options at posts in europe and eurasia . the questions provide a basis for decision makers to systematically link the elements of security , mission , and cost to embassy staffing levels and requirements . the framework also includes questions on rightsizing options , including relocating staff to the united states or to regional centers , and competitively sourcing certain functions . after responding to the questions , decision makers should then be in a position to determine whether rightsizing actions are needed to add , reduce , or change the staff mix at an embassy , and to consider rightsizing options . this report presents the results of our work at three u.s. embassies we visited in west africa — the medium - sized post in dakar , senegal ; and two small embassies in banjul , the gambia ; and nouakchott , mauritania . in response to omb's concerns , you requested that we determine whether the questions could be applied at u.s. embassies in developing countries . to accomplish this objective , we applied the questions to each post in west africa by reviewing embassy planning and requirements documents and by interviewing embassy managers and officials in the department of state's bureau of african affairs regarding each embassy's security , mission , cost , and rightsizing options . we also discussed security issues at those posts with officials in state's bureau of diplomatic security .  ( see app . the objective of our work at these embassies was to determine whether our rightsizing framework is applicable at u.s. embassies in developing countries . however , because the questions were developed primarily based on our work at the u.s. embassy in paris , omb was not confident that the questions could be uniformly applied at all posts worldwide . each element contains a set of corresponding questions for rightsizing the overseas workforce . ii for the rightsizing framework and corresponding questions. ) . however , the mission planning process neither specifically addresses embassy rightsizing as a policy or critical management issue nor calls for assessments of related security and cost issues affecting all agencies operating at overseas posts . in addition , we met with officials in state's bureau of east asian and pacific affairs and the bureau of near eastern affairs to discuss the potential applicability of the framework at posts in other developing countries .
technological advances and changes in workplace habits have increasingly affected the operating environment for time and attendance ( t&a ) reporting in recent years . this document ( 1 ) provides agencies with the flexibility needed to streamline t&a reporting systems and reduce their costs while maintaining adequate internal control , ( 2 ) updates the requirements for electronic signature control , and ( 3 ) addresses the need for controls over alternative workplace arrangements . 3512 ( c ) , ( d ) ) , for issuing standards and guidance on internal control for the federal government . perhaps the most significant influence on changes to t&a reporting , however , is advancing technology and the accelerated adoption of automation driven largely by the need for increased efficiency , as promoted by the government paperwork elimination act ( gpea ) . for example , trends in the government to streamline operations through automation and encourage more flexible work schedules and places have provided a major impetus for changes in t&a reporting . we are responsible under the federal managers' financial integrity act of 1982 ( fmfia ) ( 31 u.s.c . we have modified the language from our earlier exposure draft on this topic to emphasize ( 1 ) the link between internal control over t&a information and the overall objectives of the internal control standards , ( 2 ) the importance of compliance objectives , ( 3 ) the role of the supervisor in ensuring proper recording of t&a information , and ( 4 ) to address comments received on the exposure draft . in order to address the potential impact on internal control of the above - mentioned changes in t&a reporting , and because of our commitment to improving financial management in the federal government , we are updating our guidance related to controls over employee t&a reporting . although focused on electronic systems that process information obtained from and provided to sources outside the government , gpea encourages agencies to seek internal applications of paperless systems and use of electronic signatures . the overall functional requirements for human resources and payroll systems for civilian personnel are defined in the joint financial management improvement program's human resources & payroll systems requirements , jfmip - sr - 99-5 ( washington , d.c.: april 1999 ) , office of management and budget ( omb ) circular a - 127 , financial management systems ( washington , d.c.: july 23 , 1993 ) and omb's implementation guidance revised implementation guidance for the federal financial management improvement act ( washington , d.c.: jan. 4 , 2001 ) . also , we have issued a checklist human resources and payroll systems requirements , gao / aimd - 21.2.3 ( washington , d.c.: march 2000 ) based on the jfmip requirements document . this document relates solely to internal control for a t&a reporting system . consistent with the internal control standards , agency development of control activities over t&a information should give due consideration to ( 1 ) the control environment in which t&a processing occurs , ( 2 ) applicable risks , ( 3 ) the needs of users of t&a information , and ( 4 ) the results of control monitoring and evaluation .
recent events , including the september 11 , 2001 , terrorist attacks , have highlighted the importance of ensuring proper security at federal facilities . officials at some of these police forces have raised concerns that disparities in pay and retirement benefits have caused their police forces to experience difficulties in recruiting and retaining officers . additionally , the recent pay increases received by officers at 12 of the 13 police forces , along with the potential implementation of various human capital flexibilities , might also help to address recruitment and retention issues experienced by many of the police forces . however , we did not attempt to determine the extent to which these differences accounted for differences in police officer compensation . as the headquarters location for many federal agencies , the washington , d.c. , metropolitan area is home to numerous federal uniformed police forces . these concerns increased with the significant expansion of the federal air marshal program , which created numerous relatively high - paying job opportunities for existing federal uniformed police officers and reportedly lured many experienced officers from their uniformed police forces . however , officials at the 13 police forces included in our review reported that officers separated from their positions for such reasons as to ( 1 ) obtain better pay and / or benefits at other police forces , ( 2 ) work less overtime , and ( 3 ) assume greater responsibility . given that tsa's federal air marshal program has now been established , and the buildup in staffing has been substantially completed , the increase in turnover experienced in fiscal year 2002 at 12 of the 13 police forces may have been a one - time occurrence . among the reasons given were better pay at other agencies ; better benefits , including law enforcement retirement , at other agencies ; better morale at other agencies ; more challenging work at other agencies ; promotional opportunities at other agencies ; too much overtime at their police forces ; and retirements from their police forces . officers with fewer than 5 years of experience on their forces accounted for about 79 percent ( 117 ) of the separations to other federal law enforcement positions , and officers with 5 years to less than 10 years of experience accounted for an additional 16 percent ( 23 ) . this increase almost equaled the number ( 316 ) of officers who voluntarily separated from their forces to join tsa . finally , the u.s. secret service noted that fundamental differences exist among the agencies' authorities , responsibilities , duties , and training requirements , and that this could account for differences in compensation . we have stated in recent reports that the effective , efficient , and transparent use of human capital flexibilities must be a key component of agency efforts to address human capital challenges . we also interviewed officials at the transportation security administration ( tsa ) and the office of personnel management ( opm ) . federal police forces provide either standard federal retirement benefits or federal law enforcement retirement benefits . as agreed with your offices , our objectives for this report were to ( 1 ) determine the differences that exist among these federal uniformed police forces regarding entry - level pay , retirement benefits , and types of duties ; ( 2 ) provide information on the differences in turnover rates among these federal uniformed police forces , including where officers who separated from the police forces went and the extent to which human capital flexibilities were available and used by the police forces to address turnover ; and ( 3 ) provide information on the possible difficulties police forces may have experienced in recruiting police officers and the extent to which human capital flexibilities were available to help these police forces to recruit officers .
over the past decade , we and others have raised concerns about the adequacy of security at nuclear weapons facilities within the department of energy ( doe ) and the national nuclear security administration ( nnsa ) — a separately organized agency within doe . our followup report will focus on the extent to which physical security has improved ; the effectiveness of the process for establishing safeguards and security requirements following the september 11 , 2001 , attacks ; and the remaining vulnerabilities . in order to strengthen the safeguards and security program of the nuclear weapons complex , we recommend that the nnsa administrator and secretary of energy formalize the roles and responsibilities of site offices and headquarters for conducting oversight ; ensure that sites are performing oversight using a survey approach that provides an integrated comprehensive view of security conditions and is consistent with doe orders ; ensure that contractors' corrective action plans are prepared and documented consistently and are based on qualitative root - cause , risk - assessment , and cost - benefit analyses , and that appropriate incentives are used to help motivate contractors toward effectively addressing findings ; and develop and implement a plan to ensure that nnsa allocates safeguards and security staff so that it provides effective safeguards and security oversight over the long term . for example , we reported in 2002 that doe had not addressed problems in implementing security initiatives , while an independent study by the commission on science and security , conducted at the request of doe , found deficiencies in cyber security . finally , to provide effective oversight , nnsa needs to develop an approach , beyond its “virtual” organization , that ensures its limited security resources are able to provide oversight , over the long term , where and when it is needed . concerns over security within the nuclear weapons complex were brought into sharper focus by the september 11 , 2001 , terrorist attacks . nnsa relies upon its safeguards and security program to ensure the physical security of the nation's nuclear weapons complex . nnsa is responsible for ensuring that its contractors' security activities are effective and conform to doe's orders and policy requirements . nnsa has not been fully effective in managing its safeguards and security program in four key areas , and therefore , it cannot be assured that its contractors are working to maximum advantage to protect its sites . we have modified our recommendation to target this specific long - term concern . these processes include , among other things , ( 1 ) annual , comprehensive surveys conducted by subject matter experts from across the complex and ( 2 ) ongoing reviews of one or more aspects of contractors' program ( surveillance ) by nnsa site officials . rather , our objective was to assess the way nnsa manages its overall security program . first , nnsa has not fully defined safeguards and security roles and responsibilities . nnsa continues to change its management structure , making it difficult to define roles and responsibilities clearly . consistency problems are likely to continue without effective nnsa guidance for corrective actions . the lack of qualitative performance measures affects the quality of the correction plan .
significant funding increases are also planned , which would bring the fiscal year 2003 munitions budget to over $10 billion . in september and october of 2001 , congress provided emergency funding of $1.3 billion for munitions , with a supplemental increase in the fiscal year 2002 munitions budget of $397 million . the department of defense planned to spend about $7.9 billion on acquiring munitions in fiscal year 2002 . since 1994 , the department of defense inspector general and gao have issued numerous reports identifying weaknesses and expressing concerns about the accuracy of the process used by the department to determine munitions requirements . accordingly , this review was undertaken , pursuant to gao's legislative authority , to determine the extent to which ( 1 ) improvements have been made to the department of defense's munitions requirements determination process and ( 2 ) the process is being used to guide current munitions acquisitions . ongoing military operations associated with the global war on terrorism have heightened concerns about the unified combatant commands having sufficient quantities of munitions . the department expected that its efforts to improve the munitions requirements process should correct over - or understated requirements and provide the combatant commands with needed munitions . our april 2001 report discussed steps being taken by the department to improve the process and additional actions still needed . in response to that report , the department outlined actions underway that address all aspects of the report's recommendations . notwithstanding the improvements the department said it would make to the munitions requirements determination process , combatant commands have continued to report munitions shortages . the department of defense concurred with the recommended linkage of munitions requirements and combatant commanders' needs . the department of defense's budget is the product of a complex process designed to develop an effective defense strategy that supports u.s. national security objectives . in april 2001 , we reported continuing problems with the capabilities - based munitions requirements determination process because the department ( 1 ) had yet to complete a database providing detailed descriptions of the types of targets on large enemy installations that would likely be encountered , based on warfighting scenarios ; ( 2 ) had not set a time frame for completing its munitions effectiveness database ; and ( 3 ) was debating whether to include greater specificity in its warfighting scenarios and to rate the warfighting scenarios by the probability of their occurrence . other munitions requirements are also determined , and include munitions needed ( 1 ) for forces not committed to support combat operations , ( 2 ) for forward presence and current operations , ( 3 ) to provide a post - theater of war combat capability , and ( 4 ) to train the forces , support service programs , and support peacetime operations . as a result , the amount of munitions funds needed will remain uncertain , and assessments of the size and composition of the industrial production base will be negatively affected . despite the department's efforts to standardize the process and generate consistent requirements , many questions have continued to be raised about the accuracy or reliability of the munitions requirements determination process . we recommend that the secretary of defense establish a direct link between the munitions needs of the combatant commands — recognizing the impact of weapons systems and munitions preferred or expected to be employed — and the munitions requirements determinations and purchasing decisions made by the military services .
the food and drug administration ( fda ) , the federal agency that approves drugs for marketing , is responsible for administering the law and has procedures for ensuring the study of drugs in pediatric patients . a drug used to treat children that has not been tested or labeled for pediatric use may place children at risk of under - or overdosing , and when age - appropriate formulations of the drugs do not exist , such as liquids or chewable tablets , the drug may be improperly administered to children . to help address these concerns , in 1997 congress passed a law that gives sponsors 6 months of additional exclusive marketing rights for their products in return for conducting clinical drug studies in children , commonly known as the pediatric exclusivity provision . as agreed with the committees of jurisdiction , we addressed the following questions: ( 1 ) to what extent are children of racial and ethnic minority groups represented in clinical studies for drugs granted exclusive marketing rights , ( 2 ) are drugs that are used to treat diseases that disproportionately affect racial and ethnic minority groups being studied for safety and effectiveness in children under the pediatric exclusivity provision , and ( 3 ) does fda have appropriate management systems to monitor the representation of children of racial and ethnic groups in studies submitted for additional exclusive marketing rights ? . while children can be stricken with many of the same diseases afflicting adults and are often treated with the same drugs , only about one - third of drugs in use today have been studied and labeled for pediatric use . fda officials are concerned that drug effectiveness and adverse effects can vary among children from different racial and ethnic groups . specifically , if fda officials believe that studying a drug may lead to health benefits for children , fda issues a formal “written request” for clinical drug studies in pediatric patients to the drug sponsor . pediatric drug research has increased substantially since the enactment of the pediatric exclusivity provision . although fda has requested race and ethnicity data on subjects in clinical drug trials , no formal evaluations have assessed the extent to which children of different racial and ethnic groups are represented in clinical studies of new drugs , thus the extent to which these drugs have been tested on children in minority groups is unknown . to ensure that children of racial and ethnic minority groups are included in clinical studies for new drugs , the best pharmaceuticals for children act of 2002 ( bpca ) expanded the pediatric exclusivity provision to require , among other things , that fda “take into account adequate representation” of children from racial and ethnic minority groups when negotiating written protocols with the study sponsors of pediatric drugs . concern exists that if children from racial and ethnic minority groups are not included in adequate numbers in clinical studies of drugs , the administration of the drugs to children in these groups may result in atypical responses or unexpected side effects . if the sponsor agrees to comply with the terms of the written request and submits final study results to fda that meet the terms of the request , fda will grant the sponsor 6 months of additional exclusive marketing rights .
the department of defense ( dod ) relies on a broad array of intelligence systems to study the battlefield and to identify and hit enemy targets . these systems include reconnaissance aircraft , satellites , and ground - surface - based stations that receive , analyze , and disseminate intelligence data . given the importance of the dcgs initiative to the war fighter , you asked us to assess ( 1 ) whether dod has adequately planned for these processing systems and ( 2 ) whether dod's process for testing and certifying the interoperability of the systems is working effectively . dod recognizes this problem , and it has undertaken a range of initiatives aimed at improving interoperability among all of its systems . a key problem facing dod is the inability of these systems to operate effectively together for technical reasons ( such as incompatible data formats ) and / or operational reasons . one multibillion - dollar initiative underway since 1998 is to pare down the number of ground - surface systems that process intelligence data and upgrade them to enhance their functionality and to ensure that they are interoperable with other dod systems . the eventual goal is the migration to an overarching , interconnected family of systems for processing intelligence data known as the distributed common ground - surface system ( dcgs ) . such problems can considerably slow the time involved with identifying and analyzing a potential target and deciding whether to attack it , as well as delivering an order to the war fighter in charge of the attack . gao examines the use of public funds ; evaluates federal programs and policies ; and provides analyses , recommendations , and other assistance to help congress make informed oversight , policy , and funding decisions . moreover , dod is fielding new systems and new versions of old systems without following its own certification process . to ensure that an effective distributed common ground - surface system is adequately planned and funded , we recommend that the secretary of defense direct the assistant secretary of defense for command , control , communications , and intelligence to expand the planning efforts for dcgs to include a migration plan or road map that at a minimum lays out ( 1 ) current system capabilities and desired capabilities ; ( 2 ) specific initiatives , programs , projects and schedules to get dod and the services to their goal ; ( 3 ) measures to gauge success in implementing the migration plan as well as the enterprise architecture ; and ( 4 ) mechanisms for ensuring that the plan is followed . this delay has hampered dod's ability to ensure interoperability in the systems now being developed and deployed . given the multi - billion - dollar commitment and many technical and operational challenges with the migration initiative , it is critical that dod have effective plans to guide and manage system development . more fundamentally , dod still lacks visibility over spending on its intelligence systems since spending is spread among the budgets of dod's services and components . at the same time , because funding has already been raised as a barrier , dod should include an analysis of innovative funding mechanisms into its review .
thank you for inviting me to discuss the challenges and risks facing the national aeronautics and space administration ( nasa ) . we recognize the complexity and difficulty in establishing not only the cause of the columbia accident , but also in understanding the agency's environment in which management decisions are made . since its inception , nasa has undertaken numerous programs that have greatly advanced scientific and technological knowledge . you asked that we provide information concerning nasa , particularly the management of the space shuttle program . but the agency is at a critical juncture , and major management improvements are needed . as you are aware , nasa's activities span a broad range of complex and technical endeavors . in january of this year , we identified four challenges facing nasa . controlling international space station costs . reducing space launch costs . strengthening strategic human capital management . we believe our body of work can help the board in this area . weak contract management and financial controls pose risks across the agency . improving contract management . nasa is taking steps to address its workforce challenges . recognizing the need to revitalize the shuttle program's workforce , nasa discontinued its downsizing plans in december 1999 and initiated efforts to hire new staff . as nasa moves ahead in acquiring and implementing its new financial management system , nasa needs to ensure that its systems and processes provide the right data to oversee its programs and contractors — specifically , data to allow comparisons of actual costs to estimates , provide an early warning of cost overruns or other related difficulties , and monitor contract performance and make program requirement trade - off decisions . while nasa has made noteworthy progress in strengthening its contract oversight , much work remains . therefore , we have placed this area on our high - risk list . nasa has addressed many of these acquisition - related weaknesses , but key tasks remain , including completing the design and implementation of a new integrated financial management system . while nasa is taking comprehensive steps to address this problem across all mission areas , implementing a strategic approach to marshal , manage , and maintain human capital has been a significant challenge . these include a scholarship - for - service program ; a streamlined hiring authority for certain scientific positions ; larger and more flexible recruitment , relocation , and retention bonuses ; noncompetitive conversions of term employees to permanent status ; a more flexible critical pay authority ; a more flexible limited - term appointment authority for the senior executive service ; and greater flexibility in determining annual leave accrual rate for new hires . these include cost estimates , controls designed to provide early warnings of cost and schedule overruns , and risk mitigation plans . much of nasa's success depends on the success of its contractors — who received more than 85 percent , or $13.3 billion , of nasa's funds in fiscal year 2002 . in addition , nasa must employ proven best practices , including ( 1 ) aligning its selection of commercial components of the system with a nasa - wide blueprint , or “enterprise architecture ; ” ( 2 ) analyzing and understanding the dependencies among the commercial components before acquiring and implementing them ; ( 3 ) following an event - driven system acquisition strategy ; ( 4 ) employing effective acquisition management processes , such as those governing requirements management , risk management , and test management ; ( 5 ) ensuring that legacy system data are accurate to avoid loading and perpetuating data errors in the new system ; and ( 6 ) proactively positioning nasa for the business process changes embedded in the new system , for example , by providing adequate formal and on - the - job training .
the act established the local television loan guarantee board ( board ) , which is comprised of the secretary of the treasury , the chairman of the board of governors of the federal reserve system , the secretary of agriculture , and the secretary of commerce , or their designees , primarily to approve loan guarantees and the department of agriculture ( usda ) rural utilities service ( rus ) as program administrator ( administrator ) to issue and administer approved loan guarantees . to facilitate access to local television stations for households located in nonserved and underserved areas , the congress passed the launching our communities' access to local television act of 2000 ( local tv act or act ) . the act created the local television loan guarantee program ( program or local tv program ) . today , approximately 23.4 million households in the united states have limited or no access to local television broadcast signals . this report addresses the act's requirement that we perform an annual audit of the ( 1 ) administration of the provisions of the act and ( 2 ) financial position of each applicant who receives a loan guarantee under the act , including the nature , amount , and purpose of investments made by the applicant . the program provides for loan guarantees of up to 80 percent of loans totaling no more than $1.25 billion to finance projects to enable local television access to communities where distance and topography limit access to over - the - air television broadcast signals or cable service . the program was funded in fiscal year 2002 ; however , because it was not fully implemented in that year , there were no loan guarantee applicants for gao to audit . therefore , this report primarily addresses whether program administration during fiscal year 2002 satisfied the provisions of the act . to help ensure better program management and that loan application and loan guarantee origination fees are sufficient to fully cover certain costs of administering the program , we recommend that the board and the administrator develop a process to ensure that future costs of the program are accumulated , documented , and reported in accordance with federal accounting standards and related guidance . according to board and rus officials , three factors contributed to program delays: ( 1 ) initial uncertainties over program funding , ( 2 ) inadequate dedicated staff resources for program activities , and ( 3 ) the decision to issue a proposed rule . specifically , the act required the board to: ( 1 ) direct the administrator to prescribe regulations within 120 days after the congress appropriated funds , ( 2 ) develop underwriting criteria in consultation with the director , office of management and budget ( omb ) and an independent public accounting firm ( ipa ) within 120 days after the congress appropriated funds , ( 3 ) establish and collect loan application and loan guarantee origination feesto offset the cost of administering the program under the act , including the costs of the board and the administrator , and ( 4 ) consider other numerous specialized technical and business requirements prior to approving a loan guarantee . we obtained and evaluated information from the local tv board including its internal operating regulations , minutes from board meetings , the ipa's technical and price proposals , the solicitation to obtain information related to the legal advisory services for the board , and other budget and cost information to obtain an understanding of the activities that occurred to implement the program during fiscal year 2002 .
people are at the heart of an organization's ability to perform its mission , yet a key challenge for many federal agencies , including the department of defense ( dod ) , is to strategically manage their human capital . along with congress and the administration , we have been focusing increased attention on the need for improved human capital management across the government . the two critical success factors to strategic human capital planning that we identified in our model are ( 1 ) integration and alignment of human capital approaches and ( 2 ) human capital decisionmaking that is data - driven . since 1997 , a number of dod studies have recommended that dod adopt a strategic approach to managing its human capital . we also reviewed dod's plans for overseeing the progress and implementation of its human capital plans . in march 2002 , we published a model to assist federal agencies in their human capital management . for this report , our specific objectives were to review the extent that these two plans , in addressing active duty military benefits , promote ( 1 ) the integration and alignment of human capital approaches to meet organizational goals and ( 2 ) the use of reliable data to make human capital decisions — the two critical success factors identified in our model . for instance , we testified in march 2001 that dod must step up its efforts to identify current and future workforce needs , assess where it is relative to those needs , and develop strategies for addressing any related gaps . we too have encouraged dod to improve its human capital management by taking a more strategic approach . more recently , in our work on benefits for active duty military personnel , we noted that dod lacked a human capital strategy that would align all elements of dod's human capital management , including pay and benefits , with its broader organizational objectives . these human capital approaches may include policies and practices for recruitment , compensation ( which includes pay as well as benefits ) , promotion , career development , and retention . under our model , one of the four cornerstones of strategic human capital management is strategic human capital planning . the other plan addresses quality of life issues affecting service members and their families . as a follow - on to our work on active duty military benefits , we reviewed two human capital strategic plans that dod published in april 2002 . according to dod officials , the plans are intended to complement one another and , together with a third human capital plan addressing civilian personnel , constitute dod's overall human capital strategy . one of these plans addresses military personnel priorities . we have undertaken a separate review of dod's civilian human capital strategic management . benefits are one of the important human capital tools an agency has at its disposal for shaping its workforce and meeting organizational goals . as such , they may provide a useful lens for examining the current state of dod's strategic human capital planning as represented by the two human capital plans we reviewed . first , the plans do not specifically address how dod will integrate and align benefits and other human capital approaches to meet its overall organizational goals .
specifically , i will discuss ( 1 ) how the september 11 , 2001 , terrorist attacks affected the financial markets and the actions market participants and infrastructure providers took to restore trading ; ( 2 ) the steps taken by 15 stock exchanges , electronic communication networks ( ecn ) , clearing organizations , and payment systems providers to address physical and electronic security and business continuity planning since the attacks ; and ( 3 ) the steps financial regulators have taken to ensure that the markets are better prepared for future disasters . in addition , the effectiveness of the securities and exchange commission's ( sec ) technology and operations risk oversight efforts — which clearly have increased in importance — have been limited by program , staff , and resource limitations . today , i will present the findings from our report potential terrorist attacks: additional actions needed to better prepare critical financial market participants , gao - 03-414 ( washington , d.c.: feb. 12 , 2003 ) . the september 11 , 2001 , terrorist attacks severely disrupted the u.s. financial markets because of the loss of life , damage to buildings , loss of telecommunications and power , and restrictions that were placed on access to the affected area . i appreciate the opportunity to appear before you today to discuss gao's work on how key financial market participants and the financial regulators are working to improve the resiliency of their operations and the financial markets in the event of future terrorist attacks . our report made recommendations designed to better prepare the markets to deal with future disasters and to enhance sec's technology and operations risk oversight capabilities . although the financial regulators have begun efforts to improve the resiliency of clearance and settlement functions within the financial markets , they have not fully developed goals , strategies , or sound practices to similarly improve the resiliency of trading functions . our review of 15 stock exchanges , ecns , clearing organizations , and payments system providers between february and june 2002 showed that all were taking steps to implement physical and electronic security measures and had developed business continuity plans . however , organizations still had limitations in one or more areas that increased the risk of disruptions to their operations if such disasters occurred in the future . if certain organizations had sustained serious damage , the markets would probably not have been able to reopen by september 17 , 2001 . however , financial market participants were able to recover relatively quickly from the terrorist attacks , as a result of market participants' and infrastructure providers' heroic efforts and because the securities exchanges and clearing organizations largely escaped direct damage . market participants and regulators have acknowledged that the attacks revealed limitations in their business continuity capabilities and that these limitations would need to be addressed to improve their ability to recover if such events occurred in the future . some of these issues were also highlighted in a january 2003 report issued by the sec inspector general . for example , the federal reserve provided over $323 billion in funding to banks between september 11 and september 14 , 2001 , to prevent organizations from defaulting on their obligations and creating a widespread solvency crisis .
i am here today to discuss our work on the nationwide problem of leaking underground storage tanks ( ust ) and the recommendations that we made to address this problem in our may 2001 report on the environmental protection agency's ( epa ) tank program . because the states are primarily implementing the provisions of the program , we conducted a survey of all 50 states and the district of columbia in the fall of 2000 to determine the extent to which tanks comply with program requirements , how epa and the states inspect tanks and enforce requirements , and whether upgraded tanks still leak . to help states implement their programs , epa provides all states funding ( about $187,000 per state ) . epa has authorized 32 states to implement the program with agency oversight and monitoring , while 16 states operate their own program under their own laws with limited epa oversight . at the end of fiscal year 2002 , the fund had a balance of about $1.9 billion . as you know , studies show that tanks leaking petroleum products and other hazardous substances contaminate the soil or water supplies and can pose health risks , such as nausea and kidney damage , as well as a costly cleanup burden . since our original report , we have continued to examine and update epa program data and responses to our recommendations , along with other information . we also suggested that the congress may want to ( 1 ) consider increasing the amount of funds it appropriates from the trust fund and allow states to spend a limited portion on inspections and enforcement , ( 2 ) authorize epa to require physical inspections of all tanks on a periodic basis , ( 3 ) authorize epa to prohibit fuel deliveries to non - compliant tanks , and ( 4 ) require states to adopt this enforcement authority . this examination shows that while the agency has taken a number of corrective actions , the problems that we identified in may 2001 persist and have yet to be comprehensively resolved . in 1984 , the congress created the ust program to protect the public from potential leaks from the more than 2 million operating tanks located across the nation , mostly at gas stations . under the program , epa required tank owners to install new leak detection equipment by the end of 1993 and new spill - , overfill - , and corrosion - prevention equipment by the end of 1998 . while epa has not yet set such inspection goals , it has been working with states to use third - party inspectors and other options to increase their inspection coverage . in addition , epa retains direct authority over a small number of tanks primarily located on indian tribal lands . in addition , in a june 2002 vermont department of environmental conservation survey of state funding programs , nine states reported that they did not have adequate funding to cover their current cleanup program costs . in addition , 27 states lacked the authority to prohibit fuel deliveries to stations with problem tanks — one of the most effective tools for ensuring compliance with program requirements — and relied instead on issuing citations and fines to violators .
interest in cabin air quality heightened in 2003 , with reports that a small number of severe acute respiratory syndrome ( sars ) infections may have occurred on board aircraft serving areas with sars outbreaks . the council report's 10 recommendations focused on five aspects of cabin air quality and its environment: ( 1 ) the establishment of cabin air quality surveillance and research programs , ( 2 ) faa's oversight of the operation of aircraft ventilation systems , ( 3 ) exposures on aircraft due to the transport of small animals in aircraft cabins , ( 4 ) distribution of health related information , and ( 5 ) recommended procedures as a result of a ventilation system shutdown . in 2001 , the national research council issued a report that assessed airborne contaminants in commercial aircraft , including an evaluation of their toxicity and associated health effects ; addressed cabin pressure ( oxygen supply ) and ventilation ; and recommended approaches to improving data on cabin air quality . specifically , our research focused on the following questions: ( 1 ) what is known about the major potential health effects of air quality in commercial airliner cabins on passengers and flight attendants ? . specifically , you asked us to address the following questions: ( 1 ) what is known about the major potential health effects of air quality in commercial airliner cabins on passengers and flight attendants ? . faa generally agreed with the report's contents and its recommendations . the ranking democratic member of the subcommittee on aviation , house committee on transportation and infrastructure , asked us to provide information on steps that the aviation community is taking to address concerns about cabin air quality .  ( 3 ) what technologies are available today to improve the air quality in commercial airliner cabins , and which , if any , should be required ? .  ( 2 ) what actions has the national research council recommended to improve cabin air quality , and what is the status of those actions ? . to help ensure that faa's research and surveillance efforts on airliner cabin air quality answer critical outstanding questions about the nature and extent of potential health effects of cabin air quality on passengers and flight attendants , gao recommends that the secretary of transportation direct the faa administrator to develop a detailed plan for the research and surveillance efforts , including key milestones and funding estimates , in accordance with generally accepted practices for oversight and independence ; appoint a committee of acknowledged experts in the fields of aircraft ventilation and public health , including representatives of epa and niosh , to assist in planning and overseeing the research and surveillance efforts recommended by the national research council in 2001 ; leverage the findings of international research on airliner cabin air quality to inform faa's surveillance and research efforts ; and report to congress annually on the progress and findings of the research and surveillance efforts and funding needs . the administrator should also consult with medical associations and health organizations , such as cdc , on other ways to increase the dissemination of this information .  ( 3 ) what technologies are available today to improve the air quality in commercial airliner cabins , and which , if any , should be required ? .
to meet this requirement and provide congress with a comprehensive accounting of u.s. humanitarian and reconstruction assistance to afghanistan for the fiscal year 2002-2003 period , we ( 1 ) analyzed u.s. obligations and expenditures ; ( 2 ) identified the results of assistance projects through september 30 , 2003 ; ( 3 ) evaluated u.s. and international assistance coordination mechanisms and the u.s. assistance strategy ; and ( 4 ) examined the major obstacles that affected the achievement of u.s. policy goals and the reconstruction effort . the revised strategy should , among other things , ( 1 ) contain measurable goals , specific time frames , and resource levels ; ( 2 ) delineate responsibilities ; ( 3 ) identify external factors that could significantly affect the achievement of its goals ; and ( 4 ) include a schedule for program evaluations that assess progress against the strategy's goals . departments of agriculture , defense , health and human services , justice , state , and treasury ; the u.s. agency for international development ( usaid ) ; the united nations ( u.n. ) ; the afghan government ; and nongovernmental organizations and private contractors responsible for implementing u.s. government – funded projects . twenty - three years of war and destructive domestic policies and more than 5 years of drought destroyed afghanistan's government , judicial , economic , and social institutions and its transportation , health , sanitation , and other infrastructure . to meet the requirements of the directive and provide congress with a comprehensive accounting of u.s. assistance to afghanistan for fiscal years 2002 – 2003 , we ( 1 ) analyzed u.s. obligations and expenditures ; ( 2 ) identified the results of assistance projects through september 30 , 2003 ; ( 3 ) evaluated u.s. and international assistance coordination mechanisms and the u.s. assistance strategy ; and ( 4 ) examined the major obstacles that affected the achievement of u.s. policy goals and the reconstruction effort . section 106 of the act directs the u.s. general accounting office ( gao ) to monitor u.s. humanitarian and reconstruction assistance to afghanistan . the act articulates u.s. policy goals in afghanistan that include the creation of a stable afghan society that is not a threat to itself or others and is not a base for terrorism . with the passage of the afghanistan freedom support act in december 2002 , congress authorized the use of federal funds for the delivery of humanitarian , development , and security assistance to afghanistan . state emphasized that despite security and other challenges , significant progress had been made , not only with respect to humanitarian and short - term assistance , but also in advancing long - term security , reconstruction , and governance objectives . in october 2001 , responding to its protection of al qaeda terrorists who had attacked the united states , coalition forces forcibly removed the taliban regime . further , most of the u.s. agencies providing assistance to afghanistan did not have readily available comprehensive financial data on their efforts , limiting the ability of individuals and institutions charged with coordinating and overseeing the assistance to execute these responsibilities . consequently , overall progress towards afghanistan's reconstruction goals by the end of fiscal year 2003 was limited .
the social security administration ( ssa ) is the nation's largest provider of income assistance to individuals with disabilities , paying $91 billion in federal benefits to 11.4 million beneficiaries with a disability and their families in 2003 . specifically , we examined ( 1 ) the status of ssa's process unification initiative , ( 2 ) ssa's assessments of possible inconsistencies in decisions between adjudication levels , and ( 3 ) whether ssa's new proposal incorporates changes to improve consistency in decisions between adjudication levels . state agencies called disability determination services ( dds ) decide whether claimants meet ssa's definition of disability by applying ssa's decision - making criteria . however , ssa continues to face challenges in its efforts to provide consistent disability decisions . these challenges , and others associated with modernizing its disability programs , contributed to our decision to include federal disability programs on our list of high - risk government programs . ssa noted that it has made changes to address training needs that have been identified by its reviews . use the information from these improved analyses to develop a more focused and effective strategy for ensuring uniform application of ssa's guidance and to improve the consistency of decisions . each year , about 2.5 million people file claims with ssa for disability benefits . to accomplish this , ssa should clarify guidance for making disability decisions and develop mandatory training for adjudicators on issues identified as contributing to inconsistency . in september 2003 , ssa's commissioner unveiled a new proposal that laid out the vision of a long - term strategy for improving the disability decision - making process and helping people with disabilities return to work . primarily , ssa took issue with: ( 1 ) our characterization of the agency's progress over the past several years in analyzing and reducing the inconsistency of decisions , ( 2 ) our recommendation that the agency incorporate multivariate analysis into its assessments , and ( 3 ) our finding that the agency has not acted on the results of its reviews of decisions . ssa has partially implemented its process unification initiative . partly on the basis of early studies of potential causes of inconsistent decisions , ssa included in its process unification initiative efforts to provide consistent guidance to all adjudicators , clarify policy , provide training , test potential process changes , and perform a new quality review of allowances decided by aljs . ssa does not plan to implement its proposed changes before it has successfully implemented its accelerated electronic disability ( aedib ) system . ssa also has not updated its more effective approach of analyzing its disability hearings quality review data to identify problem areas and help improve its understanding of the factors that may be contributing to inconsistency . several of the changes in the new proposal are intended to improve the accuracy , timeliness , and consistency of decisions , such as having the dds decision makers more fully develop and document their decisions , providing for centralized quality review of all decisions , and providing both adjudication levels equal access to medical expertise . in response to your interest in the effectiveness of ssa's past and future efforts to improve and assess the consistency of decisions between levels , we evaluated these agency efforts .
our objectives were to assess ( 1 ) the progress made to develop , review , and approve facility and vessel security plans by july 1 , 2004 ; ( 2 ) the coast guard's monitoring and oversight strategy for ensuring that facility and vessel security plans are implemented ; and ( 3 ) the accuracy of the coast guard's estimates of costs for complying with mtsa security planning and implementation requirements . since the terrorist attacks of september 11 , 2001 , the nation's 361 ports have increasingly been viewed as potential targets for future attacks for many reasons . for example , security experts remain concerned about the potential for using the maritime transportation system as a conduit for smuggling weapons of mass destruction or other dangerous materials into the country . the maritime transportation security act ( mtsa ) contains much of the federal government's approach to addressing these security vulnerabilities . these stakeholders include law enforcement and other government agencies at every level ( federal , state , and local ) ; vessel owners and operators ; railroads ; port authorities ; factories and other businesses ; and people who work in port areas or live nearby . further , cargo and cruise ships present potentially desirable terrorist targets , given the potential for loss of life , ecological destruction , or disruption of commerce . one of its central maritime transportation security provisions is a requirement that security plans be developed and implemented for specific facilities ( such as factories , cargo terminals , and power plants ) ; certain individual cargo and passenger vessels ; and entire ports . enacted in november 2002 and largely administered by the united states coast guard , an agency within the department of homeland security , mtsa is designed , in part , to help protect the nation's ports and waterways from terrorist attacks through a wide range of security improvements . this aggressive timeline for both developing and implementing security plans reflects the seriousness of the port security issue . and ports often are not only gateways for the movement of goods , but also industrial hubs and close to population centers , presenting additional opportunities for terrorists bent on urban destruction . progress has been made , though the extent to which all facilities and vessels will have adequate plans ready to implement as of july 1 , 2004 , is still unclear . the coast guard estimated that the security improvements imposed by these requirements would likely cost port stakeholders $7.3 billion over 10 years — most of it borne by facility and vessel owners and operators . specifically , assessing the progress made to develop , review , and approve the security plans for facilities and vessels by july 1 , 2004. assessing the u.s. coast guard's monitoring and oversight strategy for ensuring that all necessary port security improvements are implemented . although perspectives may vary , the specter of further terrorist incidents has led to widespread agreement that port security should be strengthened — and soon . coordinating a security response for this myriad of potential targets is a daunting proposition , in part because so many different stakeholders are involved . the basic aim of such plans is to address potential vulnerabilities that could be exploited to kill people , cause environmental damage , or disrupt transportation systems and the economy , by developing measures to mitigate these vulnerabilities .
ffmia requires the cfo act agencies to implement and maintain financial management systems that comply substantially with ( 1 ) federal financial management systems requirements , ( 2 ) applicable federal accounting standards , and ( 3 ) the u.s. government standard general ledger ( sgl ) at the transaction level . to address this long - standing weakness of the federal government , the chief financial officers ( cfo ) act of 1990 designates executive branch officials with responsibility for the modernization of financial management systems , so that the systematic measurement of performance ; the development of cost information ; and the integration of program , budget , and financial information for management reporting can be achieved . this report , our eighth , discusses ( 1 ) the auditors' assessments of agency systems' compliance with ffmia for fiscal year 2003 and the financial management systems problems that continue to affect systems' ffmia compliance and ( 2 ) the challenges agencies have faced when implementing financial systems to help move toward ffmia compliance . many federal agencies still lack the ability to produce the data needed to efficiently and effectively manage day - to - day operations and provide an acceptable level of accountability to taxpayers . the federal financial management improvement act of 1996 ( ffmia ) builds on the foundation laid by the cfo act by reflecting the need for agencies to have systems that can generate reliable , useful , and timely information with which to make fully informed decisions and to ensure accountability on an ongoing basis . the act also requires auditors to state in their audit reports whether the agencies' financial management systems substantially comply with the act's requirements . furthermore , we are required to report annually on the implementation of the act . we conducted our work from april through august 2004 in the washington , d.c. , area in accordance with u.s. generally accepted government auditing standards . agencies face significant challenges implementing these standards . as the federal government moves forward with agency implementations of new financial management systems and for systems implemented to satisfy governmentwide initiatives , adherence to proven disciplined processes to minimize risks and improve management of these implementations is critical . beginning in 1990 , the congress has passed a series of management reform legislation to improve the general and financial management of the federal government . as shown in figure 2 , the combination of reforms ushered in by the ( 1 ) cfo act of 1990 , ( 2 ) government performance and results act of 1993 , ( 3 ) government management reform act of 1994 , ( 4 ) ffmia , ( 5 ) clinger - cohen act of 1996 , and ( 6 ) accountability of tax dollars act of 2002 , if successfully implemented , provides a solid basis for improving accountability of government programs and operations as well as routinely producing valuable cost and operating performance information . for dhs to develop a strong financial management infrastructure , it will need to address these and many other financial management issues . the three drivers are the ( 1 ) president's management agenda ( pma ) , ( 2 ) congressional and other oversight , and ( 3 ) the joint financial management improvement program ( jfmip ) .
key elements necessary for effective program management that are missing or inadequate include ( 1 ) no integrated strategy or milestones for meeting the 2006 deadline ; ( 2 ) no identification of funding resources needed to meet the 2006 deadline ; ( 3 ) inadequate performance measures ; ( 4 ) inadequate identification of the legal , regulatory , and environmental external impediments that could impact progress ; ( 5 ) inadequate formal decision - making framework ; and ( 6 ) no formal program evaluations . key elements necessary for effective program management that are missing or inadequate include ( 1 ) an integrated strategy and milestones for meeting the 2006 deadline ; ( 2 ) an identification of total resources needed to achieve the program's goals ; ( 3 ) measures of progress toward achieving the goals ; ( 4 ) identification of external factors , particularly those related to legal , regulatory , and environmental issues , which could impact the program's progress , and strategies to mitigate these factors ; ( 5 ) a decision - making framework ; and ( 6 ) an evaluation and corrective action plan . specifically , our objectives were to ( 1 ) determine whether marad will meet the statutory deadline of september 2006 to dispose of its obsolete ships and , if not , what factors may prevent it from doing so ; and ( 2 ) assess the extent to which marad has used alternative methods , other than ship scrapping , to dispose of its obsolete ships and the barriers to using such alternatives . to determine whether marad will meet its september 2006 deadline and identify factors affecting this goal and to assess whether marad has considered alternative approaches to scrapping , we reviewed the agency's performance plans and program status reports and applicable laws and regulations . more than 100 deteriorating and obsolete ships that are part of the national defense reserve fleet are anchored along the east , west , and gulf coasts , awaiting disposal because they are no longer needed for national defense . the government performance and results act of 1993 , for example , embodies key principles that provide an effective management framework to improve the likelihood of successfully implementing programs and assessing results . good management practices include identifying external factors that may be impediments to program success and actions needed to mitigate these impediments . members of congress , the states , and environmental groups have expressed concerns about the environmental hazards posed by these ships . external factors and mitigation plans . these challenges include domestic disposal capacity limitations ; environmental , legal , and regulatory restrictions on export ; and similar restrictions on other disposal options . to assess whether the maritime administration ( marad ) is likely to meet the statutory deadline of september 2006 and , if not , what factors may prevent it from doing so , we reviewed marad's 2001 report to congress , in which it presented its plan to meet the deadline , and its subsequent 2002 and 2004 status reports to congress . dot stated that despite the complex challenges that marad's ship disposal program faces , through its efforts and actions , much has been achieved including the disposal of 26 vessels .
as requested , this report discusses the views of nationally recognized experts on key issues concerning wastewater security , including the potential vulnerabilities of wastewater systems ; activities that most warrant federal support to mitigate the risk of terrorism ; and the criteria that the experts believe should be used to determine how any federal funds are allocated among recipients to improve their security and the methods the experts suggest should be used to distribute these funds . in 2003 , congress responded by considering legislation that would have authorized $200 million for use in making grants to wastewater utilities to conduct vulnerability assessments and implement security improvements , $15 million for technical assistance for small systems , and $5 million over 5 years for refinement to vulnerability assessment methodologies . wastewater systems in the united states provide essential services to residential , commercial , and industrial users by collecting and treating wastewater and discharging it into receiving waters . should such funds be appropriated , key judgments about which recipients should get funding priority , and how those funds should be spent , will have to be made in the face of great uncertainty about the likely target of an attack ( i.e. , a large but well - protected facility versus a smaller but less - protected facility ) ; the nature of an attack ( cyber , chemical , biological , radiological ) ; and its timing . while more federal resources have been directed toward drinking water security than wastewater security , some maintain that wastewater systems , like drinking water systems , also possess vulnerabilities that could be exploited . numerous wastewater utilities have begun to address security concerns by completing vulnerability assessments or by undertaking security upgrades . in light of the events of september 11 , 2001 , congress and the executive branch have placed increased attention on improving the security of the nation's water infrastructure — including wastewater systems — to protect against future terrorist threats . to date , the federal government's role in promoting wastewater security has been limited primarily to supporting various training activities on completing vulnerability assessments and emergency response plans and several research projects addressing how contaminants affect treatment systems and other areas . the experts on our panel have taken these uncertainties into account in deriving their own judgments about these issues . as agreed with your offices , unless you publicly announce the contents of this report earlier , we plan no further distribution until 30 days from the report date . what specific activities should the federal government support to improve wastewater security ? . since 2002 , epa has provided more than $10 million to help address the security needs of the wastewater sector . they note , however , that the implementation of security measures imposes additional financial costs on a sector that is already experiencing difficulty in meeting the financial challenges of an aging infrastructure . accordingly , the industry has sought federal assistance through the congressional appropriations process . even though the wastewater industry has not been required by law to undertake the security measures undertaken by drinking water utilities , many in the industry maintain that enhanced security must be pursued . however , legislation supporting an expanded federal role , including a substantially greater financial commitment , has been proposed in the past and may be considered again in the future .
the shutdown of these reactors has been a long - standing nonproliferation goal of the united states , and efforts to secure their closure have continued for over a decade . russia's continued operation of three plutonium production reactors , which together produce enough weapons - grade plutonium each year for about 300 nuclear weapons , poses a serious proliferation threat . to address concerns about large carryover balances of program funding , we recommend that the secretary of energy and the administrator of the national nuclear security administration monitor funding requirements to ensure that funds are obligated in a determine whether future funding requirements need to be reduced in light of the slow rate of spending to date on the program . this report ( 1 ) describes doe's efforts to manage and implement the program since it was transferred from dod , ( 2 ) assesses the challenges that doe faces in achieving its goal of shutting down the reactors , and ( 3 ) identifies doe's current expenditures and projected costs to implement the program . final shutdown of russia's three plutonium production reactors is uncertain because doe faces challenges in implementing its program . this plutonium — up to 1.2 metric tons produced annually — is being added to russia's already vast stockpile of weapons - usable nuclear material . doe has developed an overall management plan for its program that ( 1 ) emphasizes detailed project planning , ( 2 ) seeks to identify project risks , and ( 3 ) develops alternative strategies to reduce risks . some actions that russia has taken raise serious questions about its commitment to the nonproliferation and safety - related goals of doe's program . both agencies stated that russia rejected these initiatives primarily due to its security concerns about granting u.s. officials access to the reactors . by 1992 , russia had shut down all but 3 of its 13 plutonium production reactors — 2 continue to operate in the closed nuclear city of seversk and 1 in the closed nuclear city of zheleznogorsk . the history of u.s. - russian nonproliferation activities has demonstrated that some well - intentioned programs have had limited success because the agreements governing them lacked specificity or oversight was inadequate . russia's recent rejection of doe's initiatives to reduce the amount of plutonium being produced by the reactors and to improve the safety of the reactors prior to their shutdown raises serious questions about russia's commitment to the fundamental nonproliferation and safety goals of the program . doe's national nuclear security administration said the draft report provided a balanced evaluation of its program to shut down russia's three plutonium production reactors . gao examines the use of public funds ; evaluates federal programs and policies ; and provides analyses , recommendations , and other assistance to help congress make informed oversight , policy , and funding decisions . doe's slow rate of spending on program activities has led to about $179.1 million in unobligated and unspent funds . without implementing doe's proposed safety upgrades , the safety risks posed by the reactors will continue to increase dramatically . perhaps the most important of these challenges is ensuring russia's commitment to key aspects of the program .
other facets include the people who implement and use the technology and the processes that govern its implementation , among which are the standards used to define the characteristics and performance of the technology . as requested , my testimony today will focus on electronic voting systems , and in doing so i will address ( 1 ) the role of these systems within the larger election process , ( 2 ) attributes that can be used to examine these systems' capabilities , ( 3 ) the importance of both system design and implementation to the performance of these systems , and ( 4 ) the challenges confronting local jurisdictions in using any type of voting equipment , particularly electronic voting systems . in light of concerns associated with the voting systems used in the 2000 election , we produced a series of reports , issued in 2001 , in which we examined virtually every aspect of the election process , including types of voting technology . as we reported in 2001 , the particular technology used to cast and count votes is a critical part of this process , but it is only one facet of a multifaceted election process . in addition , we interviewed commissioners of the newly appointed election assistance commission ( eac ) regarding its efforts to date and its plans , and we attended eac and other commission hearings on electronic voting systems . for federal elections , the congress has constitutional authority over both congressional and presidential elections . states are responsible for the administration of both their own elections and federal elections , but the congress has enacted laws in several major areas of the voting process , including the timing of federal elections , voter registration , and absentee voting requirements . accordingly , we recognized that no voting technology , however well designed , can be a magic bullet that will solve all the problems that can arise in the election process . we recommended that the secretaries of defense and state improve ( 1 ) the clarity and completeness of service guidance , ( 2 ) voter education and outreach programs , ( 3 ) oversight and evaluation of voting assistance efforts , and ( 4 ) sharing of best practices . we augmented this work with reviews of more recent studies of electronic voting systems and other relevant documents . i appreciate the opportunity to participate in today's hearing on electronic voting systems . at the same time , we also recognized that if not properly managed , this one facet of the election process can significantly undermine the integrity of the whole . jurisdictions must be able to ensure that the technology will provide benefits over its useful life that are commensurate with life - cycle costs ( acquisition as well as operations and maintenance ) and that these collective costs are affordable and sustainable . our follow - up work was performed from february 2004 to may 2004 in washington , d.c. all the work on which this testimony is based was performed in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . these challenges are not dissimilar to those faced by any organization seeking to leverage modern technology to support mission operations . the departments of defense and state agreed with our overall findings and recommendations , and as of may 2004 , the recommendations had largely been implemented .
in fiscal year 2003 , the federal food stamp program , administered by the u.s. department of agriculture's ( usda ) food and nutrition service ( fns ) , reported it made payment errors totaling about $1.4 billion in benefits . fns's quality control ( qc ) system measures payment accuracy and monitors how accurately states determine food stamp eligibility and calculate benefits . fns and the states will continue to face a challenge in balancing the goals of payment accuracy , increasing program participation rates , and the need to contain program costs . due to concerns about ensuring payment accuracy , we examined ( 1 ) what is included in the national food stamp payment error rate and how has the rate changed over time , ( 2 ) what is known about the causes of food stamp payment errors , and ( 3 ) what actions usda and states have taken to reduce these payment errors . in addition , some food stamp participants receive benefits from other programs , such as medicaid or the cash assistance program temporary assistance for needy families ( tanf ) . however , given the size of the food stamp program , the costs to administer it , and the current federal budget deficit , achieving program goals more cost - effectively may become more important . to determine the causes of food stamp payment errors for fiscal years 1999 through 2003 , we analyzed the food and nutrition service's ( fns ) quality control ( qc ) system data of active cases used in error rate calculations . it is not completely clear why some states have been more successful at lowering their error rates than others . these differences add to the complexity of determining and recertifying eligibility and program benefits . for example , households with earned income may be required to report more income changes to caseworkers than households without earned income , such as those that are dependent solely on retirement benefits . fns has long focused its attention on states' accountability for error rates through its qc system by assessing penalties and providing financial incentives . however , payment errors reflect the misuse of public funds and may undermine public confidence in the program . although the caseworkers who process these eligibility determinations may be the same as those who administer the food stamp program , the rules for the various programs can differ . however , they have little data to determine which practices have been most successful or cost - effective . depending on household circumstances , some cases may require more adjustments than others . fns's primary focus has been on monitoring progress in reducing error rates , which can help ensure eligible households receive the correct benefits and maintain public support for the program . despite fns and state mechanisms used to track the initiatives and share promising practices , there are no data available on which initiatives are most cost - effective . however , although it is difficult to determine which actions are most likely to succeed in particular circumstances , we found examples of strategies that did not succeed because they lacked adequate management attention or were not effectively implemented . the three major causes of errors have remained the same over time and are closely linked to the complexity of program rules and reporting requirements .
in this context , you asked us to determine ( 1 ) the foundation's roles and responsibilities for raising funds to support the park service , ( 2 ) the amount and kinds of donations the foundation has raised between fiscal years 1999 and 2003 , and ( 3 ) the extent to which the contributions obtained by the foundation assist the park service in addressing park priorities . for the last few decades , the national park service ( park service ) has relied increasingly on private donations in meeting its mission to promote and protect the national parks . to improve its communication with the park service and improve management controls , we are making four recommendations to the national park foundation , namely that it take the following four steps: enter into an overall written agreement with the park service that includes its fund - raising strategy and clarifies the roles and responsibilities of the foundation and the park service in their partnering relationship ; identify and document all current and future fund - raising agreements made with the park service , specifying the terms of work agreed to by each party ; develop a process , either through training or briefings , to help ensure complete and consistent understanding of its fund - raising strategy and roles and responsibilities with the park service headquarters , regional , and local park officials ; and in developing its fund - raising approach , consider the list of individual park priorities compiled and provided by the park service — this list could be used for identifying patterns of park needs for systemwide projects as well as for identifying specific needs that may be of interest to potential donors . however , there have been some recent concerns within the park service that the foundation is not supporting its priority needs . to reduce the confusion and misunderstanding and improve communication between the national park foundation and the park service , we are recommending that the secretary of the interior require the director of the national park service to take the following five steps: work collaboratively with the foundation to develop an overall written agreement that , among other things , articulates the foundation's fund - raising strategy and clarifies the roles and responsibilities of the foundation and the park service in their partnering relationship ; identify and document all current and future fund - raising agreements made with the foundation , specifying the terms of work agreed to by each party ; provide a list of individual park project priorities , including those potentially fundable by nonprofits , and communicate them to the foundation for consideration in fund - raising ; develop and implement internal controls such that fund - raising agreements are documented in writing and subsequent performance is tracked against the agreement ; and clarify whether the exclusivity terms in foundation agreements with proud partners apply to park - based cause - related marketing arrangements and communicate this information to all of the park service's fund - raising partners . although national parks remain primarily a public responsibility , parks benefit from other sources of support , including individuals , corporations , and nonprofit organizations . however , the proper implementation of these steps should help resolve the communication problems that exist between the foundation and the park service and strengthen their partnership .
in response to your request for information about u.s. trade capacity building assistance , this report ( 1 ) identifies the nature and extent of u.s. trade capacity building assistance ; ( 2 ) describes how agencies implement such assistance , including coordination ; and ( 3 ) assesses whether agencies evaluate its effectiveness . this report ( 1 ) identifies the nature and extent of u.s. trade capacity building ; ( 2 ) describes how agencies implement such assistance , including coordination ; and ( 3 ) assesses whether agencies evaluate its effectiveness . many developing countries have expressed concern about their inability to take advantage of global trading opportunities because they lack the capacity to participate in international trade . in 2002 , the president's trade policy agenda pledged the united states would provide tools and training to countries needing help to benefit from the global trading system . in 2001 , the least - developed countries called for technical assistance to strengthen their institutions and trade - related infrastructure , and the world trade organization doha ministerial declaration stated that technical cooperation and capacity building were important and should be used to help countries benefit from the multilateral trading system . as a result , u.s. government agencies have provided trade capacity building assistance through a variety of programs to help these countries . the united states considers the ability to participate in and benefit from the global trading system key factors in reducing poverty , achieving economic growth , raising income levels , and promoting stability . we assessed the u.s. government trade capacity building database , which reflects annual governmentwide surveys initiated in 2001 about u.s. trade capacity building activities and is administered by the u.s. agency for international development ( usaid ) . the administrator , u.s. agency for international development , should direct the agency to set milestones for completing its efforts to develop trade capacity building performance indicators to be used by ( 1 ) its field missions to monitor and measure the results of their trade capacity building efforts and ( 2 ) its relevant agency bureaus to conduct periodic program evaluations . the u.s. agency for international development should share its findings with other agencies that fund and implement trade capacity building assistance . we focused our review on the six u.s. agencies funding and implementing 96 percent of the trade capacity building assistance , concentrating primarily on usaid , because it provided the bulk of the funding , as well as the office of the u.s. trade representative ( ustr ) . ways to increase trade opportunities include strengthening economic policies ; removing trade barriers ; and building well - functioning economic , political , and legal institutions . we conducted fieldwork in el salvador , ghana , and egypt , choosing these countries because they were among the 20 countries receiving the most trade capacity building funding , and they represented different regions and income levels ( low and middle income ) . this warrants a comprehensive , coordinated approach to its delivery , based on solid evidence of its effectiveness in generating economic development and growth through trade . in addition , without evaluations identifying what trade capacity building activities are effective , the agencies will have difficulty determining whether their efforts are achieving their overall trade capacity building goals .
however , mission support problems continued to occur at the laboratories in areas such as business operations ( accounting , procurement , and property management ) and emergency management ( identifying possible hazards and threats and developing plans and procedures to address the hazards ) . for more than 50 years , the university of california ( university ) has operated the los alamos national laboratory in new mexico and the lawrence livermore national laboratory in california for the department of energy ( doe ) . instead , in january 2001 , doe's national nuclear security administration ( nnsa ) decided to extend the university's contracts through september 2005 . these areas include project management ( managing projects to ensure they are completed on time and within budget and achieve their intended purpose ) and nuclear safety ( conducting operations and activities in a way that ensures the safety of workers , the public , and the environment ) . our report ( 1 ) describes the actions taken to address the major mission support problems identified when nnsa extended the contracts in 2001 , ( 2 ) describes the actions taken to address additional mission support problems that have emerged or become more significant since the contracts were extended in 2001 , and ( 3 ) assesses the major challenges nnsa and the university face in sustaining improvements in mission support activities at the two laboratories . these two research laboratories , with a $2.9 billion fiscal year 2003 budget , have a science and technology mission that focuses on maintaining the nation's nuclear weapons , preventing nuclear proliferation , and furthering scientific knowledge in chemistry , structural biology , and mathematics . in december 2003 , the congress enacted legislation to require nnsa to compete the contracts for both laboratories when the current terms expire in 2005 . you asked us to identify the steps that nnsa and the university have taken to improve contractor performance in mission support activities at the laboratories and to assess whether any improvements can be sustained over time . besides conducting this research and development work , managing and operating the two sites encompasses a broad range of mission support functions , such as maintaining roads and providing communications , managing facilities to ensure that needed repairs are done to buildings , purchasing and accounting for products and services , and ensuring good relations with local communities . another mission support area — facilities management — had also become an area of concern , as buildings continued to age and the need for maintenance and repairs increased . mission support problems led congressional committees and others to call on doe to open these two contracts to competitive bidding . the two laboratories have a reputation for conducting world - class science and technology work . nnsa had identified problems with management accountability ; safeguards and security management ; facility safety , including nuclear facility operations ; critical skills , knowledge , and technical capabilities ; and project management . nnsa officials believed they could successfully address the laboratories' mission support problems using contract mechanisms such as setting clearer performance expectations and requiring the contractor to meet those expectations in order to earn incentive fees . starting in the 1990s , however , performance problems in various mission support areas have been reported at both laboratories .
our work focused on the initial implementation efforts of the following seven departments and the agencies within those departments that have the most developed competitive sourcing programs: agriculture ; defense ; education ; health and human services ( hhs ) ; the interior ; the treasury ; and veterans affairs ( va ) . to complement efforts already underway that address funding and human capital challenges and to help agencies realize the potential benefits of competitive sourcing and ensure greater transparency and accountability , we recommend that the director of omb take the following three actions: ensure greater consistency in the classification of positions as commercial or inherently governmental when positions contain a mix of commercial and inherently governmental tasks by reviewing current guidance and developing additional guidelines , as necessary , for agencies and omb examiners ; work with agencies to ensure they are more strategic in their sourcing decisions and are identifying broader functional areas and / or enterprisewide activities , as appropriate , for possible public - private competition ; and require agencies to develop competition plans that focus on achieving measurable efficiency and performance improvement outcomes . the environment in which the federal government currently operates — with new security threats , demographic changes , rapidly evolving technologies , increased pressure for results , and growing fiscal imbalances — demands that agencies engage in a fundamental review of how they accomplish their missions . but the use of public - private competition represents a major management change for agencies and has raised concerns about the fairness of the process and the potential impact on federal jobs . therefore , after discussions with your staff , we agreed to ( 1 ) describe the progress agencies have made in establishing a competitive sourcing program in response to the president's management agenda , ( 2 ) identify major challenges agencies are facing , and ( 3 ) identify strategies they are using to select activities for competition based on mission - related needs . agencies increasingly rely on a range of technical and support services to meet mission objectives . these four themes are ( 1 ) clear , well - articulated , and compelling missions ; ( 2 ) strategic use of partnerships ; ( 3 ) a focus on the needs of clients and customers ; and ( 4 ) strategic management of people . successful implementation of this initiative requires results - oriented goals and strategies ; clear criteria and analysis to support agency decisions ; and adequate resources . it is important for agencies to decide how best to acquire and deliver such services , including whether to obtain services in - house or through private sources . one way to inform this decision is to use competitive sourcing , a strategy under which agencies open the government's commercial activities to competition among public and private sector sources . this initiative seeks to expand competition between the public and private sectors to encourage innovation , increase efficiency , and to improve performance . omb needs to work with agencies to ensure their long - range plans are strategically focused . omb will also review agency plans to understand how the agency has selected activities and their potential for savings and performance improvements .
develop and implement useful performance measures that define fema' s progress in increasing stakeholders' awareness and use of the new maps , including improved mitigation efforts and increased participation rates in purchasing flood insurance . during the 10 years from fiscal year 1992 through fiscal year 2001 , flooding caused over 900 deaths and resulted in approximately $55 billion in damages . recognizing that fema is currently in the early stages of its map modernization effort , our objectives for this review were to answer the following questions: ( 1 ) how is map modernization intended to improve the accuracy and accessibility of the nation's flood maps ? . since its inception 36 years ago , the national flood insurance program ( nfip ) has combined the development of flood maps to identify the areas at greatest risk of flooding with mitigation efforts to reduce or eliminate flood risks to people and property and the availability of insurance that property owners can purchase to protect themselves from flood losses . floods inflict more damage and economic losses upon the united states than any other natural disaster . fema has established performance measures for all four of its program objectives . fema has established four primary objectives for implementing map modernization: ( 1 ) establish and maintain a premier data collection and delivery system , ( 2 ) expand outreach and better inform the user community , ( 3 ) build and maintain mutually beneficial partnerships , and ( 4 ) achieve effective program management .  ( 3 ) to what extent does fema's strategy for managing the map modernization program support the achievement of these benefits and what , if any , limitations could affect the implementation of the strategy ? .  ( 2 ) what are the expected benefits of more accurate and accessible flood maps ? . without useful operational definitions for its planned surveys to measure map acceptance and use , fema cannot reasonably measure and demonstrate whether map modernization has achieved its intended benefits in such areas as community and individual flood mitigation efforts or increased flood insurance purchase rates . with congressional support and funding , fema has embarked on a $1 billion , 5-year effort to update the nation's flood maps . finally , in some cases , the performance measures established for the program and the contractor may not be sufficient to permit fema to measure whether map modernization is achieving its intended benefits . to describe how map modernization is intended to improve the accuracy and accessibility of the nation's flood maps , we interviewed federal emergency management agency ( fema ) headquarters officials and agency officials in three of the regional offices: region iv in atlanta , georgia ; region viii in denver , colorado ; and region vi in denton , texas . ensure that it has the staff capacity to effectively implement the nationwide mapping contract and the overall map modernization program . through its cooperating technical partners ( ctp ) program , fema has developed partnerships with a variety of states and communities that have developed their own data and provided their own funds to help update local flood maps . nonetheless , without developing such a measure ( or measures ) , fema will be less able to ensure that its map modernization program will have resulted in one of fema's primary intended benefits .
we agreed to provide information on ( 1 ) the progress made in deploying wireless e911 services throughout the country , ( 2 ) the factors that are affecting this progress , and ( 3 ) current federal government actions to promote the deployment of wireless e911 services . fcc has considerable regulatory authority over wireless carriers and has placed location accuracy standards and deployment deadlines on the wireless carriers . the pace of wireless e911 deployment has been a key concern for the congress . gao examines the use of public funds ; evaluates federal programs and policies ; and provides analyses , recommendations , and other assistance to help congress make informed oversight , policy , and funding decisions . the wireless communications and public safety act of 1999 designated 911 as the universal emergency telephone number within the united states and called on fcc to encourage and support efforts by the states to deploy wireless e911 services by working with state and local officials , the telecommunications industry , consumer groups , and those involved in public safety services.there is also a congressional e911 caucus that aims to educate lawmakers , constituents , and communities about the importance of 911 systems.you asked us to provide an overview of the deployment of wireless e911 services across the country . with almost 150 million americans now subscribing to a mobile phone service and new concerns about homeland security facing our nation , the ability to reach 911 from sidewalks , highways , and rural areas has become increasingly important . because many of these hurdles have now been overcome , fcc has stated that it will not hesitate to use its enforcement power when the wireless carriers fail to meet their current deployment timetables . state public utility commissions have some authority over wireless carriers' terms and conditions of service . according to the federal communications commission ( fcc ) , around one - third of 911 calls are now made from mobile phones . fcc has technical and educational initiatives under way to help the parties involved to share information on deployment practices , problems , and experiences . beyond enforcing deadlines on wireless carriers , fcc has taken actions to identify both roadblocks and best practices in wireless e911 implementation . if this holds true , consumers and emergency management officials will be faced with a geographic patchwork of wireless e911 areas: some will have service ; some will not . to provide information on the progress made in deploying wireless e911 services throughout the country , we conducted a telephone survey of the state e911 contacts . funding for psap equipment upgrades remains a major issue for many states and localities and continues to hamper nationwide deployment . according to fcc , the commission does not have clear jurisdiction over wireline carriers with regard to wireless e911 implementation , and the commission looks to the state public utility commissions , which have clear and sufficient authority to take the lead . the state public utility commissions also have a great deal of authority over the lecs , including authority over intrastate service rates , while fcc retains some authority over lec interconnection agreements with wireless carriers and other issues . however , no single entity has regulatory authority and oversight over the entire implementation process .
to determine whether policies and procedures were in place for acquiring needed firefighting resources during the initial days of the biscuit fire , and the extent to which these policies and procedures were followed when the fire was first identified , we reviewed national policies and procedures that included the national interagency standards for fire and fire aviation operations and the national interagency mobilization guide . in total , the federal government spent more than $1.6 billion to suppress fires that burned almost 7 million acres . in 2002 , the united states experienced one of the worst wildland fire seasons in the past 50 years . gao examines the use of public funds ; evaluates federal programs and policies ; and provides analyses , recommendations , and other assistance to help congress make informed oversight , policy , and funding decisions . these fires included the largest and costliest fire in oregon in the past century — the biscuit fire . the fire season in 2002 began early , with major fires in arizona , colorado , and new mexico draining many firefighting resources out of the pacific northwest during early summer . the california department of forestry and fire protection ( cdf ) has maintained its own firefighting certification system for its firefighting personnel . in this context , we reviewed ( 1 ) whether policies and procedures were in place for acquiring needed firefighting resources during the initial days of the biscuit fire , and the extent to which these policies and procedures were followed when the fire was first identified ; ( 2 ) what resource management issues , if any , affected the ability of firefighting personnel to effectively fight the biscuit fire ; and ( 3 ) what differences , if any , existed in key personnel certification standards at federal and state agencies involved in fighting wildland fires — particularly in oregon — and whether any such differences affected efforts to respond to the biscuit fire . since no request was made , the priority of the biscuit fire relative to other ongoing fires within the fortuna dispatch center's direct protection area was not discussed on the first day of the biscuit fire , and the outcome of such a request , had it been made , remains unclear . there are some differences in certification standards for personnel between state and federal wildland firefighting agencies , but these differences did not appear to have affected efforts to respond to the biscuit fire . as a result , when lightning storms hit california and oregon from july 12 to 15 , there were limited resources available to fight the hundreds of ongoing fires , including five fires that eventually burned together to form the biscuit fire . the biscuit fire was not declared extinguished until december 31 , 2002 , more than 5 months after it began . in all , the biscuit fire destroyed 4 primary residences and 10 other structures , resulted in about 15,000 residents being put on evacuation notice , required thousands of firefighters and other resources , and cost over $150 million to fight . the forest service and its interagency firefighting partners employ an incident management system that is designed to provide the appropriate management and leadership team capabilities for firefighting efforts .
in light of past problems with and continuing concerns about funding major atc system acquisitions under the atc modernization program , you asked us to examine ( 1 ) faa's experience in meeting cost , schedule , and / or performance targets for major system acquisitions under its atc modernization program ; ( 2 ) the steps faa has taken to address long - standing challenges with the atc modernization program and additional steps that are needed ; and ( 3 ) the potential effects of the constrained budget environment on faa's ability to modernize the atc system . in 1981 , the federal aviation administration ( faa ) began what it initially envisioned as a 10-year modernization program to upgrade and replace the national airspace system's ( nas ) facilities and equipment to meet projected increases in traffic volumes , enhance the system's margin of safety , and increase the efficiency of the air traffic control ( atc ) system — a principal component of the nas . to date , faa has spent $43.5 billion for its nas modernization effort and plans to spend an additional $9.6 billion through fiscal year 2009 , primarily to upgrade and replace atc systems and facilities . our review did not focus on faa's efforts to modernize its facilities . to improve faa's management of the modernization program , congress , in 1995 , gave the agency acquisition and human capital flexibilities , which faa has largely implemented . for more than two decades , atc system acquisitions under the nas modernization program have experienced significant cost growth , schedule delays , and performance problems . acquisition management system: the ato has taken a number of steps to improve its acquisition management system ( ams ) . to help ensure that key administration and congressional decision - makers have more complete information to assess the potential impact of annual budget submissions on individual atc system acquisitions , the overall atc modernization program , and related larger - scale nas modernization activities funded through the facilities and equipment budget , we recommend that the secretary of transportation direct faa to identify which activities under the atc modernization program have had funding deferred , reduced , or eliminated and to provide detailed information about the impact of those decisions on faa's ability to modernize the atc system and related components of the nas in the near , mid , and longer term . according to faa , the agency has spent about 58 percent , or $25.1 billion , of the $43.5 billion total for nas modernization on system acquisitions designed to replace or upgrade various atc systems . in fiscal year 2005 , these 16 major atc system acquisitions account for about 36 percent of faa's facilities and equipment budget . in 2000 , congress and the administration took further steps to improve the modernization program's management . as a result , the atc modernization program has been on our list of high - risk programs since 1995 . specifically , we selected the 16 atc system acquisitions with the largest life - cycle costs that met the following criteria: each system had cost , schedule , and performance targets ; was discussed in prior gao and department of transportation inspector general ( dot ig ) reports , had not been fully implemented or deployed by 2004 , and received funding in 2004 .
our objectives were to determine ( 1 ) what factors were primarily responsible for the price increase , ( 2 ) if the prices charged customers during fiscal year 2000 through fiscal year 2003 recovered the reported actual costs of performing the work , and ( 3 ) if the air force has taken effective steps to improve efficiency and control the activity group's costs . the air force depot maintenance activity group supports combat readiness by providing services necessary to keep air force units operating worldwide . because the activity group's customers are expected to request about 20.8 million hours of in - house work in fiscal year 2004 , this means that customers will have to pay about $4.9 billion for work that they would have paid about $2.5 billion in fiscal year 2000 . the group's in - house operations generate about $5 billion in annual revenue principally by repairing and overhauling a wide range of assets , including fighter aircraft such as the f - 15 , intercontinental ballistic missiles such as the minuteman and peacekeeper missiles , jet aircraft engines , electronics , avionics , software , and inventory items for the military services , other government agencies , and foreign governments . gao examines the use of public funds ; evaluates federal programs and policies ; and provides analyses , recommendations , and other assistance to help congress make informed oversight , policy , and funding decisions . this should include initiative information on costs , return on investment , and quantifiable results for all process improvement initiatives . of the 19 initiatives containing some cost information , only 10 initiatives had recorded costs totaling $6,328,000 . periodically review the data contained in the data repository to ( 1 ) determine whether the data provided by the air logistics centers is complete and useful and ( 2 ) identify ways to consolidate initiatives and share lessons learned from the initiatives with the three centers . the remaining 13 initiatives had recorded return on investment information with no dollar savings identified or as not applicable . we also met with officials from air force materiel command and the air logistics centers to discuss ( 1 ) process improvement initiatives , especially information on initiative costs , savings , and the sharing of information and ( 2 ) whether all initiatives were included in the database . the air force lacks systematic and effective processes for controlling costs . our review was performed from june 2003 through april 2004 in accordance with u.s. generally accepted government auditing standards . the air force materiel command has not effectively implemented its data repository , which is a key part of its process improvement program . dod policy requires working capital fund activity groups to ( 1 ) establish sales prices that allow them to recover their expected costs from their customers and ( 2 ) operate on a break - even basis over time — that is , not make a profit nor incur a loss . in fact , dod has already taken action to help eliminate the excess cash in the air force working capital fund by transferring $1.1 billion of the excess cash to the army and navy operation and maintenance appropriation accounts in april 2004 .
in addition to this funding , the department of health and human services' ( hhs ) administration for children and families ( acf ) monitors states' compliance with key federal goals , specified in part by the adoption and safe families act ( asfa ) of 1997 , to keep children safe and ensure their placement in stable and permanent homes . since 1994 , designated federal matching funds have been available to states to develop and implement comprehensive case management systems — statewide automated child welfare information systems ( sacwis ) — to manage their child welfare cases as well as to report child abuse and neglect , foster care , and adoption information to the federal government . my testimony today will focus on three key issues: ( 1 ) states' use of title iv - b funds in providing a wide array of services to prevent the occurrence of abuse , neglect , and foster care placements , as well as other child welfare services ; ( 2 ) factors that hinder states' ability to protect children from abuse and neglect ; and ( 3 ) hhs's role in helping states to overcome the challenges they face in protecting children from abuse and neglect . title iv - b of the social security act , comprised of two subparts , is the primary source of federal funding for services to help families address problems that lead to child abuse and neglect and to prevent the unnecessary separation of children from their families . funding under title iv - e of the social security act is used primarily to pay for the room and board of children in foster care . as you are aware , state child welfare agencies determined that over 900,000 children had been the victims of abuse or neglect by their parents or other caretakers in 2001 . through its formal review process , known as the child and family services review ( cfsr ) , hhs uses specific assessment measures , such as agencies' ability to conduct timely abuse and neglect investigations and regularly visit children in their homes , to assess the performance of states' child welfare systems . additionally , more than 800,000 children are estimated to spend some time in foster care each year , with the federal government allocating approximately $7 billion each year to investigate abuse and neglect , provide placements to children outside their homes , and deliver services to help keep families together . washington , d.c.: july 31 , 2003 ; and child welfare: enhanced federal oversight of title iv - b could provide states additional information to improve services . those findings were based on multiple methodologies , including a survey of child welfare directors on states' use of title iv - b funds ; an analysis of 600 exit interview documents completed by staff who severed their employment from 17 state , 40 county , and 19 private child welfare agencies ; and a survey of all 50 states and the district of columbia regarding their experiences in developing and using information systems and their ability to report data to hhs . although hhs plays a role in monitoring child welfare programs , additional oversight or technical assistance could assist states in meeting the needs of children served by child welfare agencies .
in the context of these two arrangements , you asked us to determine the ( 1 ) legal authority niehs and ord used to enter into the arrangements with acc ; ( 2 ) extent to which niehs and ord evaluated and managed the possibility that conflicts of interest could result from their arrangements with acc ; ( 3 ) extent to which niehs complied with nih's gift acceptance policy when accepting acc's funds ; and ( 4 ) extent to which similar research arrangements exist within other offices and programs of nih and epa , as well as other regulatory agencies . in fiscal year 2002 , the federal government devoted an estimated $45 billion to research , $35 billion of which funded research conducted by universities , industry , nonprofit organizations and state and local governments . some agencies fund this extramural research through direct federal grants to or contracts with researchers , which are generally considered an effective way to encourage federal and nonfederal research partnerships . a goal of both research arrangements is to provide scientific tools or knowledge that will ultimately help improve the effectiveness of human health and ecological risk assessments . in addition , nih emphasized that is it not a regulatory agency and suggested changes to the report to clarify its role . in addition , we contacted officials at the food and drug administration ( fda ) and the federal aviation administration ( faa ) , both of which , like epa , are regulatory agencies that have significant extramural research budgets . the american chemistry council ( acc ) — a nonprofit organization that represents the chemical industry — has entered into two such research arrangements ; one with the national institute of environmental health sciences ( niehs ) in the national institutes of health ( nih ) , and the other with the office of research and development ( ord ) in the environmental protection agency ( epa ) . however , nih's policy — both the wide discretion allowed in deciding on whether and how officials should evaluate conflicts of interest and the lack of required documentation — provides little assurance of systematic evaluation of gifts that may present potential conflicts of interest for the agency . the director of nih should further revise the nih gift acceptance policy to require nih officials to evaluate gifts , particularly from organizations that represent regulated industry , for potential conflicts of interest and to document the basis for their decisions , including what , if any , steps are needed to manage potential conflicts . as requested by the ranking member of the subcommittee on environment , technology and standards , house committee on science , and the ranking member of the subcommittee on research , house committee on science , we determined the ( 1 ) legal authority the national institutes of health's ( nih ) national institute of environmental health sciences ( niehs ) and the environmental protection agency's ( epa ) office of research and development ( ord ) used to enter into arrangements with the american chemistry council ( acc ) ; ( 2 ) extent to which niehs and ord evaluated and managed the possibility that conflicts of interest could result from their arrangements ; ( 3 ) extent to which niehs complied with nih's gift acceptance policy when accepting acc's funds ; and ( 4 ) extent to which similar research arrangements exist within other offices and programs within nih and epa , as well as other regulatory agencies .
incomplete or inaccurate real estate appraisals resulting in property overvaluations could expose the department of housing and urban development's ( hud ) federal housing administration ( fha ) — which insured about 3.7 million single - family mortgage loans with a total value of about $425 billion in fiscal years 2001 to 2003 — to greater financial risks . to address these objectives , we reviewed the activities of hud's headquarters and its four homeownership centers ( hocs ) in atlanta , georgia ; denver , colorado ; philadelphia , pennsylvania ; and santa ana , california . specifically , this report examines ( 1 ) how hud ensures that appraisers it approves to perform appraisals under its single - family mortgage insurance programs are qualified to be placed on the appraiser roster ; ( 2 ) the extent to which hud uses a risk - based approach when monitoring the appraisers participating in its single - family mortgage insurance programs ; and ( 3 ) hud's efforts to take enforcement actions against appraisers it identifies as not complying with its requirements . effectively overseeing the appraisers who prepare appraisals for its single - family mortgage insurance programs has historically been a challenge for hud . to reduce the financial risks assumed by hud and to further enhance its oversight of appraisers participating in hud's single - family mortgage insurance programs , we recommend that the secretary of hud direct the assistant secretary for housing - federal housing commissioner to institute reasonable controls on the process of placing appraisers on the appraiser roster to ensure that applicants' conformance to eligibility criteria is verified ; consider a requirement to include , when targeting appraisers for review , those appraisers who have recently completed a sanction period in order to ensure that these appraisers have corrected their relevant deficiencies ; maintain the historical information , particularly early loan default information , used to target appraisers for review in order to ensure that the hocs target and review appraisers based on the criteria in hud guidance ; and implement a cost - effective field review contractor oversight process that includes on - site monitoring . however , certain weaknesses in implementing these initiatives limit their ability to ( 1 ) lower hud's risk of insuring properties that are overvalued and ( 2 ) minimize potential losses to fha's mortgage insurance fund . while we agree that hud has made significant improvements , our objectives concern hud's appraiser oversight as it currently exists , regardless of past weaknesses . we have also reported in the past that due in part to poor appraiser oversight , hud's single - family mortgage insurance programs remained a high - risk area for the department . finally , hud disagreed with our conclusion that weaknesses in implementing its appraiser oversight initiatives limit the department's ability to ( 1 ) lower its risk of insuring properties that are overvalued and ( 2 ) minimize potential losses to fha's mortgage insurance fund . we did not estimate the impact that hud's appraiser oversight has on the financial health of fha's mortgage insurance fund . furthermore , hud's inspector general noted in its most recent semiannual report to congress that its audits and investigations continue to reveal fraud and abuse in hud's single - family mortgage insurance programs .
the increasing popularity of e - mail , instant messaging , and wireless technology , to name a few , poses a long - term threat to the postal service's core business — first - class mail ( primarily letters ) and standard mail ( primarily advertising ) . the united states postal service faces formidable financial , operational , and human capital challenges because of unfunded liabilities , stagnant revenues , inefficient operations , and a business model that is unsustainable . part of its reform strategy is to find more efficient ways to procure goods and services . in the face of these challenges , the postal service has been under pressure to cut costs while improving overall performance . to assist congressional efforts to enact fundamental postal reform , you asked us to determine ( 1 ) the extent to which the postal service has been successful in implementing and realizing savings from its supply chain management initiatives and ( 2 ) whether these initiatives have had an effect on small businesses . while the postal service achieved notable success in fiscal year 2003 , this respite is likely to be short - lived because first - class mail continues to decline , key costs are rising , and productivity gains are likely to slow . in april 2001 , we placed the postal service's transformation and long - term outlook on our high - risk list , and we recently reported that comprehensive postal service reform is urgently needed . in fiscal year 2003 alone , the postal service spent over $11.3 billion on such items as supplies , services , rent , and transportation . to reduce spending , postal service officials have been focusing on supply chain management , the process used to integrate the flow of goods and services from the suppliers to delivery of the end product to the retail customer . since fiscal year 2000 , with the help of supply chain management initiatives , the postal service reported that it has saved about $866 million by leveraging its buying power and insisting on continuous improvement . commercial companies use this management process to help reduce costs and to do business in the most efficient way possible . as agreed , we focused our work on three major supply chain management initiatives: bulk fuel program , an effort to leverage the postal service's buying power for the millions of gallons of fuel purchased by highway contractors who transport mail ; reverse auctions , a web - based tool that enables highway contractors to compete for contracts in an electronic bidding format ; and national contracts , the consolidation of smaller contracts for goods and services into large , nationwide contracts . nevertheless , the postal service has developed a 3-year plan to maintain a supplier base that includes small , minority - owned , and woman - owned businesses and tracks contracts awarded to those businesses . the postal service is an independent establishment of the government's executive branch that is expected to act like a business and is not subject to the small business act . the difficulties the postal service has encountered are primarily due to ( 1 ) resistance from many highway contractors ; ( 2 ) setbacks in the postal service's plans to expand the number of fuel delivery locations under the program ; and ( 3 ) lack of an automated system to accurately capture fuel prices , which means that inaccurate and burdensome manual calculations must be used .
the office of national drug control policy ( ondcp ) is charged with reducing illicit drug use , manufacturing and trafficking , drug - related crime and violence , and drug - related health consequences . to achieve these goals , the office formulates a national drug control strategy that includes multipronged approaches to combating national drug use . among these approaches is an effort to reduce and prevent drug use among america's youth by conducting educational and community action programs , including a national youth anti - drug media campaign . although annenberg was responsible for providing overall support to westat with respect to the entire scope of work detailed in the prime contract , it was specifically directed to provide particular support for the following six tasks: ( 1 ) project management , ( 2 ) development of the campaign evaluation plan , ( 3 ) instrument development , ( 4 ) data analysis and report generation , ( 5 ) preparation of contract reports , and ( 6 ) modification of the campaign evaluation plan . since then , over $1 billion has been appropriated for the media campaign . the campaign combines paid and donated advertising with public communications outreach in an effort to change teen and parental beliefs and behaviors regarding drug use . congress first authorized funding for the media campaign in fiscal year 1998 , with the expectation that demonstrable changes in youth drug behaviors would be apparent within 3 years . as such , the report expressed concern about the amount of resources consumed by consultants and the extent to which funds were spent for consulting services rather than media time and space for advertisements . in a committee report for the fiscal year 2004 appropriations cycle , the senate appropriations committee asserted that drug use was increasing in spite of the campaign and that some observers had concluded that the campaign was having no noticeable impact . this report focuses on the following question: what services did contractors and their subcontractors provide in support of ondcp's media campaign and what were the estimated award amounts for these services for fiscal years 2002 through 2004 ? . we are currently conducting a separate review examining the design and execution of ondcp's primary effort to evaluate the media campaign's effectiveness . given these issues , the committee report directed us to review how consultants were used in support of the media campaign . in addition , the report asserted that a large portion of the campaign's budget pays for outside media and advertising consultants . ogilvy & mather retained 20 subcontractors for nearly $5 million to provide two types of services: ( 1 ) multicultural media planning and buying agencies and ( 2 ) substance use behavioral change experts , who constituted the behavioral change expert panel ( bcep ) . the ad council retained one subcontractor , madison advertising management , ltd. , ( mam ) , to provide advertising production cost review services for about $636,000 . fleishman - hillard awarded about $8 million of its total contract award to 80 subcontractors for public communications and outreach services . ondcp's 2005 appropriation provides $120 million for the media campaign , which represents a $25 million decline from the 2004 appropriation and a $75 million decline from the first - year funding in 1998 .
the department of defense ( dod ) is experiencing significant and increasing reliance on software and information systems for its weapon capabilities , while at the same time traditional dod prime contractors are subcontracting more of their software development to lower tier and sometimes nontraditional defense suppliers . dod is also using more commercial - off - the - shelf ( cots ) software to reduce development costs and allow for frequent technology updates , which further increases the number of software developers with either direct or indirect access to weapon system software . we have previously made recommendations to dod to adopt more effective software development practices and to increase oversight of software intensive systems to improve acquisition outcomes . while dod attempts to better its software acquisition policies and implement new initiatives , it must take steps to ensure that security is an integral element in decision making and that program managers mitigate risks accordingly . to determine how the department of defense ( dod ) measures the extent of foreign involvement in software development in weapon systems and how risks associated with using foreign suppliers for software development are measured and mitigated , we reviewed relevant dod guidance , policies , regulations , and procedures . while these plans and initiatives may help to increase dod's focus on software security and may lead to the development and identification of several potential software security best practices , dod software assurance officials acknowledge that significant effort remains to adequately mitigate software risks to weapon systems . dod also noted the need to enhance its risk management processes to factor in vulnerabilities analysis of proposed software products , security risks of suppliers' processes , and counterintelligence threat information . for example , certification and accreditation processes , such as ditscap , should include verification that software development practices contain adequate security measures to address identified risks and threats . at your request , we ( 1 ) examined dod's efforts to identify and address risks associated with foreign involvement in software development in weapon systems and ( 2 ) determined how weapon system program offices manage these risks in individual programs . in support of dod guidance , air force , army , and navy regulations implement dod - wide acquisition policies . dod partially concurred with our three recommendations based on the concern that they place too much responsibility for risk mitigation on program managers . as dod's need for software increases , knowledge about foreign suppliers in software development is critical for identifying and mitigating risks . the increased dependence on software capability , combined with an exposure to a greater variety of suppliers , results in more opportunities to exploit vulnerabilities in defense software . dod agreed that software security risks should be defined for dod weapon programs , but noted that program managers should not be solely responsible for defining security requirements , including those for identifying and managing software suppliers . because of economic incentives and business relationships , these suppliers are using offshore locations and foreign companies to complete various software development and support tasks . we recommend that the secretary of defense take the following three actions to address risks attributable to software vulnerabilities and threats: require program managers , working with software assurance experts , acquisition personnel , and other organizations as necessary , to specifically define software security requirements , including those for identifying and managing software suppliers .
as a result , we focused on four federal departments that support programs and other efforts to prevent and reduce tobacco use among youth: the department of health and human services ( hhs ) and its component agencies — cdc , substance abuse and mental health and services administration ( samhsa ) , national institutes of health ( nih ) , and health resources and services administration ( hrsa ) ; the department of defense ( dod ) ; the department of justice ( doj ) ; and the department of education ( education ) . we focused our review on describing ( 1 ) programs , research , and activities that aim to prevent and reduce tobacco use among youth , ( 2 ) the efforts of federal departments and agencies to monitor their programs , and ( 3 ) the coordination among federal departments and agencies in their efforts to prevent and reduce tobacco use among youth . in its most recent estimates of selected health consequences of cigarette smoking , the centers for disease control and prevention ( cdc ) reported that , on average , over 440,000 deaths and $76 billion in medical expenditures were attributable to cigarette smoking each year from 1995 through 1999 . to do our work , we obtained and reviewed program documents , strategic and performance plans , pertinent program reports and special studies , surveillance and other data , and federal web sites from the department of health and human services ( hhs ) including the office of the secretary , the office of the assistant secretary for planning and evaluation , office of public health and science , agency for healthcare research and quality , centers for disease control and prevention ( cdc ) , centers for medicare & medicaid services , health resources and services administration ( hrsa ) , indian health service , national institutes of health ( nih ) , and substance abuse and mental health services administration ( samhsa ) ; the departments of defense ( dod ) , justice ( doj ) , and education ; the environmental protection agency ; the federal trade commission ; and the office of national drug control policy ( ondcp ) . reducing the number of tobacco - related deaths , along with the associated costs , represents a significant public health challenge for the federal government . tobacco use is the leading cause of preventable death in the united states . the first surgeon general's report to the congress that specifically focused on tobacco use among youth concluded that preventing youth from starting to use tobacco is key to reducing the deaths and incidence of disease attributable to tobacco use . to identify federal programs , research , and activities that aim to address tobacco use among youth , we reviewed the catalog of federal domestic assistance , which is a database of federal grant programs , and other pertinent documents . however , this effort has been delayed largely due to hrsa's competing funding priorities and limited resources . given the harmful effects of tobacco use and the rates of smoking among youth , you asked us to provide information on federal efforts to prevent and reduce youth smoking . to determine how federal departments and agencies coordinate their efforts , we reviewed their strategic plans and annual performance plans and reports and also descriptions of coordination efforts .
furthermore , as a part of this analysis , we recommend that epa assess the number of oil and gas sites impacted by the phase ii rule ; the costs to industry of compliance with the rule and whether these costs are solely attributable to the storm water rule ; and the environmental implications and benefits of the storm water rule , including , but not limited to , potential benefits for endangered species . polluted storm water runoff can lead to u.s. surface water degradation . this report provides information about ( 1 ) oil and gas construction activities for which permits have been obtained under phase i and ( 2 ) oil and gas construction activities that are likely to be affected by phase ii and its financial and environmental implications . separate from epa's efforts , oil and gas industry representatives informed us of a department of energy ( doe ) study to evaluate the impact of the phase ii rule on the oil and gas industry . if effects are likely , the agencies , including epa , must consult with the fish and wildlife service ( fws ) or the national marine fisheries service ( nmfs ) to ensure that the activities , such as issuing permits , will not jeopardize a species' continued existence or adversely modify its designated critical habitat . oil and gas industry representatives were most concerned about costs that stem from delays companies may face when identifying a construction activity's impact on endangered species . in an effort to satisfy its responsibilities under the endangered species act , epa consulted with fws and nmfs to create language for its construction general permit that requires operators to self - certify that they have examined their project's potential effects on endangered species . subsequently , on january 18 , 2005 , the agency proposed a further extension of the compliance date to june 12 , 2006 , to complete its review and take final action . fish and wildlife service ( fws ) and national marine fisheries service ( nmfs ) , which are the regulatory agencies for the endangered species act , could increase if a significantly larger number of sites initiated communications or consultation requests . briefly , the procedures in the permit require companies to determine if federally listed threatened or endangered species or their critical habitats are present on or near the project area , determine if the construction activity's storm water discharges or related activities are likely to affect any threatened or endangered species or designated critical habitat on or near the project area , determine if measures can be implemented to avoid adverse effects , and if adverse effects are likely , work with fws or nmfs to modify the project and / or take other actions to gain authorization for the activity . so that epa may fully understand the implications of phase ii of its storm water rule prior to deciding whether the oil and gas industry should be subject to it , we recommend that epa complete its phase ii analysis before making any final decision . however , as we performed audit work for this engagement , epa had not issued any analysis of the rule's impact ; nor could epa management representatives provide a specific estimate of when its analysis would be completed or when a final decision would be reached .
we are also ( 1 ) reviewing records documenting key activities and interactions among these agencies , and examining their current responses to the lead problem , ( 2 ) contacting academic and non - governmental experts in lead contamination , and ( 3 ) examining how other water systems facing similar circumstances notified and educated their customers on lead health risks , and how they interacted with federal , state , and local agencies to respond to the problem . at the request of this subcommittee , we are examining issues concerning lead in drinking water generally and the situation in washington , d.c. , in particular . you asked that we ( 1 ) examine the current structure and level of coordination among key government entities that implement the safe drinking water act's regulations for lead in the district of columbia , and identify any improvements to increase efficiency and accountability , ( 2 ) determine how other drinking water systems that exceeded the epa action level for lead have conducted public notification and outreach , ( 3 ) assess the availability of data necessary to determine which adult and child populations are at greatest risk of exposure to elevated lead levels , and what information wasa is gathering to help track their health , ( 4 ) evaluate the state of research on lead exposure , and how this information could help inform other drinking water utilities of potential problems in their systems . thank you for the opportunity to discuss our work to date on the issues surrounding elevated levels of lead in washington , d.c. drinking water . although rarely the sole cause of lead poisoning , lead in drinking water can significantly increase a person's total lead exposure . as our work continues , we will seek to examine ( to the extent appropriate ) specific ways in which improved coordination between epa and wasa could help both agencies better fulfill their responsibilities . according to epa , its philadelphia office is responsible for providing technical assistance to the aqueduct and wasa on how to comply with federal regulations ; ensuring that they report the monitoring results to epa by required deadlines ; taking enforcement actions if violations occur ; and using those enforcement actions to return the water systems to compliance in a timely fashion . we will also examine interrelationships among other key agencies ( such as the aqueduct and the d.c. department of health ) ; how other water systems in similar situations interacted with federal , state , and local agencies ; and what the experiences of these other jurisdictions may suggest concerning how improved coordination can better protect drinking water in the district of columbia . their exposure to lead may delay their physical or mental development . accordingly , we do not take a position on these issues and on how they bear on the question of interagency coordination and communication , and instead report them only as stated by the affected parties . to respond to these questions , we are interviewing key officials and staff with the federal and local agencies responsible for managing drinking water and monitoring health for lead exposure in washington , d.c. , including officials at epa's headquarters and in its philadelphia office , wasa , the washington aqueduct , and the d.c. department of health .
my testimony today will summarize and update , where possible , key findings from our 2002 report related to ( 1 ) trends in crime against volunteers and the agency's system for generating such information , ( 2 ) the agency's field implementation of its safety and security framework , and ( 3 ) the underlying factors that contributed to peace corps' performance in the field . the administration intends to increase this number to about 14,000 over the next few years , and congress has increased appropriations for the peace corps to support this expansion . i am pleased to be here to discuss peace corps' efforts to ensure the safety and security of its volunteers . about 7,500 peace corps volunteers currently serve in 70 “posts” ( country missions ) around the world . volunteers often live in areas with limited access to reliable communications , police , or medical services . my testimony is based on our july 2002 report , information we obtained from the peace corps to update our analysis , and recent testimony before the house of representatives . i will also discuss actions that peace corps has taken to improve the safety and security of its volunteers since we issued our report . in many countries , female volunteers face special challenges ; more than a third of female volunteers report experiencing sexual harassment on at least a monthly basis . the agency is still clarifying its guidance on how to apply its revised framework , revising its indicators of progress , and establishing a base line for judging performance in all areas of safety and security . to improve safety and security practices in the field , in 2002 , the agency increased the number of field - based safety and security officers charged with reviewing post practices and assisting them in making improvements , and created a safety and security position at each post . however , peace corps is still in the process of implementing many of these actions and their full effect has yet to be demonstrated . to develop our analysis , we analyzed peace corps' crime data ; reviewed agencywide safety and security policies , guidelines , training materials , volunteer satisfaction surveys , and inspector general reports ; interviewed key staff and more than 150 volunteers ; and examined practices for selecting volunteer sites , developing emergency action plans , and performing other tasks . we reported that a number of factors , including staff turnover , informal supervision and oversight mechanisms , and unclear guidance hampered peace corps' efforts to ensure high - quality performance for the agency as a whole . in conclusion , since we issued our report in july 2002 , it is clear that the agency has taken a number of steps designed to improve the safety and security of its volunteers . we also recommended that peace corps develop performance indicators and report on its safety and security initiatives . recent tests of the emergency action plans indicate that the agency has made improvements in the length of time needed to contact volunteers . the analyst has focused on upgrading the crime data system and shifting the responsibility for data collection and analysis from the medical office to the newly created safety and security office , to place the responsibility for crime data in an office dedicated to safety and security .
i will provide a perspective on ( 1 ) fema's approach to mitigating flood - related losses through the flood insurance program and other grant programs , ( 2 ) the effect of repetitive loss properties on the flood insurance program , and ( 3 ) recent actions taken or proposed to address the impact of repetitive loss properties on the program by fema and the congress . during the 10 years from fiscal year 1992 through fiscal year 2001 , flooding resulted in about $55 billion in damages and about 900 deaths . the federal emergency management agency ( fema ) within the department of homeland security ( dhs ) is the primary federal agency responsible for assisting state and local governments , private entities , and individuals to prepare for , mitigate , respond to , and recover from natural disasters , including floods . floods have been , and continue to be , the most destructive natural hazard in terms of economic loss to the nation , as well as the cause of hundreds of deaths in communities across the nation . however , in the past , we have identified a number of concerns about the program's financial viability , including how repetitive loss properties have contributed to the program's long - term losses . recent actions have been taken or proposed by the administration and members of congress to address the challenge posed by repetitive loss properties . fema's national flood insurance program has served as a key component of the agency's efforts to minimize or mitigate the damage and financial impact of floods on the public , as well as to limit federal expenditures needed after floods occur . the program has been credited by the administration with saving $1 billion annually by improving floodplain management and setting building standards — such as one to elevate structures — that have minimized flood damages . i appreciate the opportunity to participate in today's hearing to discuss the national flood insurance program and the effect on the program of repetitive loss properties — properties with two or more losses greater than $1,000 in a 10-year period . during that period , the federal government paid about $7.7 billion in federal flood insurance claims financed primarily through policyholder premiums paid into the national flood insurance fund . fema has taken a multifaceted approach to mitigating flood - related losses . through the flood insurance program , fema identifies and maps flood prone communities and makes insurance available to property owners in communities that agree to adopt and enforce building standards to mitigate the impact of floods . such outcome - based measures could allow fema to assess the impact of savings to the national flood insurance program resulting from its mitigation of repetitive loss properties . these actions have the potential to reduce future program losses and improve the financial condition of the program . fema also provides funding for mitigation planning activities and projects before and after floods occur through various mitigation grant programs . while repetitive loss properties represent only about 1 percent of the current 4.4 million properties insured by the program , they have accounted for about 38 percent of all program claim costs historically and are projected by fema to cost about $200 million annually .
the president's budget for fiscal year 2005 identified approximately $60 billion for information technology ( it ) projects . this report responds to your request that we describe and assess omb's processes for ( 1 ) placing projects on its management watch list and ( 2 ) following up on corrective actions established for projects on the list . the officials added that the fiscal year 2005 budget process required agencies to successfully correct project weaknesses and business case deficiencies ; otherwise , omb would limit agencies' spending on new starts and other developmental activities . in that budget , the office of management and budget ( omb ) stated that , of approximately 1,200 major it projects , about half — 621 projects , representing about $22 billion — were on a ‘‘management watch list.'' this information was reiterated in testimony in march 2004 , during which omb officials stated that the list consisted of mission - critical projects that needed to improve performance measures , project management , and it security . omb identified weaknesses in these three areas , among others , in its analysis of the business cases that agencies submitted to justify project funding . to accomplish these objectives , we reviewed and analyzed omb's policy and budget guidance for fiscal year 2005 and interviewed omb officials ( further details on our objectives , scope , and methodology are provided following the background section ) . in helping to formulate the president's spending plans , omb is responsible for evaluating the effectiveness of agency programs , policies , and procedures ; assessing competing funding demands among agencies ; and setting funding priorities . our objectives were to describe and assess omb's processes for ( 1 ) placing projects on its management watch list and ( 2 ) following up on corrective actions established for projects on the list . report to the congress on progress made in addressing risks of major it investments and management areas needing attention . we agree that our review described and assessed omb's processes for ( 1 ) placing the 621 projects representing about $22 billion on its management watch list and ( 2 ) following up on corrective actions established for projects on the list . the president's budget for fiscal year 2006 includes 1,087 it projects , totaling about $65 billion . this undermined its ability to assess governmentwide trends and issues . in addition , major projects with significant management deficiencies may have continued to absorb critical agency resources . among other things , the exhibit 300 requires agencies to provide information summarizing spending and funding plans ; performance goals and measures ; project management plans , goals , and progress ; and security plans and progress . omb also is to ensure that agency reports , rules , testimony , and proposed legislation are consistent with the president's budget and with administration policies . according to omb , its predominant mission is to assist the president in overseeing the preparation of the federal budget and to supervise budget administration in executive branch agencies . analyze the prioritized list to develop governmentwide and agency assessments of the progress and risks of it investments , identifying opportunities for continued improvement .
i appreciate the opportunity to testify on the results of our work on the management of first responder grants in the national capital region ( ncr ) . what has been the department of homeland security's ( dhs ) role to date in enhancing the preparedness of ncr through such actions as coordinating the use of federal emergency preparedness grants , assessing preparedness , providing guidance , targeting funds to enhance preparedness , and monitoring the use of those funds ? . what challenges exist within ncr to organizing and implementing efficient and effective regional preparedness programs ? . our report addressed the following questions: what federal funds have been allocated to local jurisdictions in ncr for emergency preparedness , for what specific purposes , and from what sources ? . to respond to these questions , we met with and obtained documentation from officials of dhs including its office for national capital region coordination ( oncrc ) , the senior policy group , the metropolitan council of governments , state emergency management agencies , and first responder officials from ncr jurisdictions . our report is being released today , and my testimony highlights the major findings and recommendations of that report . these 16 grants were selected to cover a range of programs , including the largest funding sources ; grants provided for general purposes , such as equipment and training ; and grants provided for specific purposes , such as fire prevention and bioterrorism . what gaps , if any , remain in the emergency preparedness of ncr ? . oncrc has concentrated its efforts on developing a coordinated assessment and plan for the use of urban area security initiative funds . effectively managing first responder federal grants funds requires the ability to measure progress and provide accountability for the use of public funds . third , there is no established process or means for regularly and reliably collecting data on ( 1 ) the amounts of first responder grants available to each jurisdiction and ( 2 ) the budget plans and criteria used for determining spending allocations and budget priorities . the lack of benchmarks and performance goals may contribute to difficulties in developing a coordinated region - wide plan for determining how to spend federal funds and assessing the benefits of that spending . as with other major policy areas , demonstrating the results of homeland security efforts includes developing and implementing strategies , establishing baselines , developing and implementing performance goals and data quality standards , collecting reliable data , analyzing the data , assessing the results , and taking action based on the results . according to dhs , a governance structure was approved in february 2004 that will provide the essential region - wide coordination that is necessary . we identified 25 emergency preparedness programs that provided funding to ncr jurisdictions in fiscal years 2002 and 2003 , and we selected 16 of them for detailed review . to help ensure that emergency preparedness grants and associated funds are managed in a way that maximizes their effectiveness , we recommend that the secretary of the department of homeland security take the following three actions to fulfill dhs's statutory responsibilities in ncr: work with ncr jurisdictions to develop a coordinated strategic plan to establish goals and priorities for enhancing first responder capacities that can be used to guide the use of federal emergency preparedness funds .
our report ( 1 ) provides information on the amount of federal assistance provided to assist alaska native villages during federal fiscal years 1998 through 2003 ; ( 2 ) describes how selected federal funds have been used to assist alaska native villages ; and ( 3 ) provides data on the number and average cost of houses built by villages and alaska native regional housing authorities . 105-83 ; and alaska regional housing authorities identified by the department of housing and urban development ( hud ) . this study's objectives were to ( 1 ) provide information on the amount of federal assistance to alaska native villages during federal fiscal years 1998 through 2003 ; ( 2 ) describe how selected federal funds have been used to assist alaska native villages ; and ( 3 ) provide data on the number and average cost of houses built by villages and alaska native regional housing authorities . however , recently , some federal laws have limited the ability of alaska native villages to receive direct funding . for many years , the federal government both provided funding to assist alaska natives and their communities to meet a wide range of social and economic needs — funding that has amounted to millions of dollars annually — and administered many of the programs that provided the assistance . however , with the passage of certain federal legislation , native villages — entities within the state that are recognized by the bureau of indian affairs ( bia ) to receive services from the federal government — and other native organizations began to receive more responsibility for administering programs that assist their communities . currently , the federal government provides direct financial assistance to many of the more than 200 federally recognized alaska native villages and other native organizations . improving rural alaska's energy infrastructure has been the commission's primary focus since 1999 . in addition , the federal government provides financial assistance to the state , which has passed through some of these funds to alaska native villages . this report responds to section 112 , division b , of the consolidated appropriations act of 2004 , which directed us to review federal programs benefiting rural alaska communities . funding for the administration is included in our analysis as part of overall funding for the department of health and human services . to provide information on funding to alaska native villages , we analyzed data from the federal assistance award data system ( faads ) , which identifies recipients of federal awards , federal programs for which awards were made , and award amounts . moreover , these entities also began to receive funding directly from the federal government to administer the programs . as agreed with your staff , we focused our review on federal programs benefiting alaska native villages . according to the census bureau , about 120,000 people who live in alaska are native — aboriginal americans , many of whom reside in rural areas of the state long inhabited by their ancestors . we classified as regional native nonprofits: native associations that were identified in the alaska native claims settlement act ( ancsa ) or the organizations that succeeded them , which , throughout this report , we refer to as ancsa regional nonprofits ; native health organizations identified in p.l .
however , in an era of limited resources and growing mission demands , congress has authorized agencies to use approaches other than full , up - front funding to finance capital acquisitions such as land improvement projects , buildings , and equipment . subsequently , as requested , we have analyzed in greater detail two of the identified approaches: energy savings performance contracts ( espc ) and public / private partnerships ( partnerships ) . the objectives of this study were to determine ( 1 ) what specific attributes of energy savings performance contracts ( espc ) and public / private partnerships ( partnerships ) contributed to budget scoring decisions , ( 2 ) the costs of financing through espcs and partnerships compared to the costs of financing via timely , full , and up - front appropriations , and ( 3 ) how espcs and partnerships are implemented and monitored . given this estimate agencies have relied heavily on costly leasing instead of ownership to meet new needs . borderline agencies and transactions should be included in the budget unless there are exceptionally persuasive reasons for exclusion.” with specific regard to capital investments , the commission recommended strongly against a capital budget that would spread outlays over an asset's life , noting that it would likely “distort decisions about the allocation of resources.” we have long supported an inclusive budget that discloses up - front the full commitments of the government . while leasing to meet long - term needs almost always results in excessive long - term costs to taxpayers and does not necessarily reflect the best approach to capital asset management , it also provides the government opportunities to spend more on other mission objectives . finding a solution for this problem has been difficult . accordingly , these alternative financing mechanisms have been used by agencies to acquire assets by spreading the cost over a number of years in their budgets . in particular , we determined ( 1 ) what specific attributes of espcs and partnerships contributed to budget scoring decisions , ( 2 ) the costs of financing through espcs and partnerships compared to the costs of financing via timely , full , and up - front appropriations , and ( 3 ) how espcs and partnerships are implemented and monitored . this same problem arises for any asset that is acquired to meet long - term needs . moreover , when capital costs are not fully recognized up - front , before funds are committed , important information about the full budgetary effects may not be considered as trade - offs are made among competing priorities . agencies are faced with requirements for energy savings and need appropriations to implement energy conservation measures . we selected case studies from agencies that had awarded a large dollar volume of espcs awarded under the department of energy's ( doe ) federal energy management program's ( femp ) umbrella contract , had broad partnership authority , or were discussed in our prior report . this is of particular concern at a time of rising budget deficits and concern about underrecognition of long - term costs and commitments . congress could use this information in evaluating whether to further extend espc authority beyond its current expiration date .
in addition , an evaluation of the difficulties of implementing the chosen fee would need to be conducted in order to understand the consequences for the agencies' programs and expenditures and to deal fairly with such issues as preference and permit value . we provided information on the ( 1 ) extent of livestock grazing on , and program purposes for , land managed by 10 federal agencies ; ( 2 ) amount spent in fiscal year 2004 by these agencies and other federal agencies that have grazing - related activities , to manage livestock grazing on public lands ; ( 3 ) total receipts collected for grazing privileges by the 10 federal agencies with grazing programs and the amounts disbursed to counties , states , or the federal government ; and ( 4 ) grazing fees charged by the 10 federal agencies , western states , and private ranchers , and the reasons for any differences among the fees . however , interior stated that the report did not sufficiently discuss significant indirect benefits from grazing to other blm programs that are difficult to quantify . dod did not provide official written comments , but the air force and army provided technical comments , which we incorporated as appropriate . but any change in the current fee may necessitate that congress reconsider the purpose of the fee and policy trade - offs of different fees . in this context , you asked us to determine for 2004 the ( 1 ) extent of grazing on , and program purposes for , lands managed by the 10 federal agencies in the fiscal year ; ( 2 ) amount spent in the fiscal year by these agencies , and other federal agencies that have grazing - related activities , to manage livestock grazing on public lands ; ( 3 ) total receipts collected during the fiscal year for grazing privileges by the 10 federal agencies with grazing programs , and the amounts disbursed to counties , states , or the federal government ; and ( 4 ) fees charged by the 10 federal agencies , western states , and private ranchers , and the reasons for any differences among the fees . although other federal agencies' grazing programs are much smaller than blm's and the forest service's , they demonstrate the application of competitive and market - based approaches to charging user fees for grazing programs and recovering some program expenditures . since the early 1900s , the federal government has required ranchers to pay a fee for grazing their livestock on millions of acres of federal land located primarily in western states . depending on the approach taken to set and implement a grazing fee for lands managed by blm and the forest service , the federal government could close the gap that exists between those programs' grazing expenditures and receipts . however , faced with a growing and unsustainable fiscal imbalance , the government cannot accept all of its existing programs , policies , and activities as “givens.” now , as in the 1990s , tightened federal budgets and a persistent federal deficit create the need to examine federal programs that spend more funds than they generate in receipts and to determine whether the purposes of these programs warrant increasing user fees .
based on the congressional request letter of may 2005 and subsequent discussions with your staffs , we agreed to determine ( 1 ) what agencies have done to coordinate the implementation of the federal lands recreation enhancement act ( rea ) , including preparing for the new interagency federal lands pass ; ( 2 ) what agencies have done to implement the rea fee and amenity requirements and sufficiency of guidance for rea implementation ; ( 3 ) the extent to which the agencies have control and accounting procedures for collected recreation fee revenues ; ( 4 ) how participating agencies prioritize and approve activities and projects funded with fee revenues ; and ( 5 ) the extent to which units have unobligated fund balances and if recreational fees are being used to fund projects formerly funded with other appropriations . over the past several years , congress has expressed concern about the operation and maintenance of federal recreation sites and the ability of federal land management agencies to continue providing visitors high - quality recreational opportunities , while at the same time protecting natural and other resources . this guidance for implementing such controls should identify and encourage the use of best practices , such as routine audits . in order to improve the forest service's implementation of the federal lands recreation enhancement act and improve the accountability and controls for collected recreation fees , we recommend that the secretary of agriculture direct the chief of the forest service to take the following two actions: promptly issue final regulations and implementing guidance on the fee program , including detailed policy and procedure guidance ; and ascertain the extent to which its units do not have effective processes and procedures for accounting for and controlling collected fees and develop guidance for implementing appropriate and effective internal controls over cash management . to help address these concerns , congress passed legislation in 1996 authorizing an experimental initiative called the recreational fee demonstration program ( fee demo ) , under which participating agencies were authorized to establish and collect recreation fees at a number of sites and to use the revenues to enhance visitor services , manage and protect resources , and reduce maintenance backlogs , among other uses . agencies participating in the fee demo program included the department of the interior's ( doi ) bureau of land management ( blm ) , fish and wildlife service ( fws ) , and the national park service ( nps ) , as well as the u.s. department of agriculture's ( usda ) forest service ( fs ) . as requested , we determined ( 1 ) what agencies have done to coordinate the implementation of rea , including preparing for the new interagency federal lands pass ; ( 2 ) what agencies have done to implement rea fee and amenity requirements and sufficiency of guidance for rea implementation ; ( 3 ) the extent to which the agencies have control and accounting procedures for collected recreation fee revenues ; ( 4 ) how participating agencies prioritize and approve activities and projects funded with fee revenues ; and ( 5 ) the extent to which units have unobligated fund balances and if recreational fees are being used to fund projects formerly funded with other appropriations .
as we reported , lr2000 does not track the critical information needed to effectively manage and oversee financial assurances , including the operation's basic status , such as whether the operation is ongoing or has ceased and should be reclaimed ; some types of financial assurances being used , such as corporate guarantees , bond pools , and trust funds ; and the adequacy of financial assurances to pay the cost of required reclamation . as a result , funds are not available to pay at least $56.4 million in reclamation costs for operations that had ceased and not been reclaimed since blm began requiring financial assurances . until blm establishes monitoring and accountability mechanisms to ensure that all operations have required financial assurances — based on sound reclamation plans and current cost estimate — and improves the information it collects to effectively manage financial assurances , these problems will continue . to ensure that hardrock operations on blm land have adequate financial assurances , we recommend that the secretary of the interior direct the director of blm to take the following two actions: require the blm state office directors to establish an action plan for ensuring that operators of hardrock operations have required financial assurances and that the financial assurances are based on sound reclamation plans and current cost estimates , so that they are adequate to pay all of the estimated costs of required reclamation if operators fail to complete the reclamation , and modify lr2000 to ensure that it tracks critical information on hardrock operations and associated financial assurances so that blm headquarters and state offices can effectively manage financial assurances nationwide to ensure regulatory requirements are met . because blm does not have an effective management process and critical management information , it has not ensured that some current and previous operators have adequate financial assurances , as required by federal regulations and / or blm guidance . furthermore , some operations either do not have any , or have outdated reclamation plans and / or cost estimates . however , some operators did not reclaim blm land disturbed by hardrock operations related to exploration , mining , and mineral processing when their operations ceased . however , we continue to believe that until blm timely enters , tracks , and uses this critical information it will not be able to effectively manage financial assurances to ensure that federal regulations and blm guidance are followed . blm has developed and revised regulations and issued policy under this provision . in particular , financial assurances were not adequate to pay all estimated costs for required reclamation for 25 of the 48 operations because ( 1 ) some operations had no assurances , ( 2 ) some operations' assurances were less than the most recent reclamation cost estimates , and ( 3 ) some financial assurance providers declared bankruptcy and could not pay . we continue to believe that this evidence clearly calls for a plan of action that includes monitoring and accountability mechanisms to ensure that the requirements in the federal regulations and blm guidance to have adequate financial assurances are met . since then , thousands of operators have extracted billions of dollars worth of hardrock minerals from land now managed by the department of the interior's bureau of land management ( blm ) — the agency that manages the largest amount of federal land .
we are making 14 recommendations to energy to ( 1 ) improve controls over the review and approval process for contractor invoices ; ( 2 ) strengthen accountability for government - owned equipment purchased by contractors ; ( 3 ) improve reporting and control of overall contract costs , including subcontractor costs ; and ( 4 ) pursue opportunities for recovery of improper and questionable costs identified in this report . the energy employees occupational illness compensation program act of 2000 ( eeoicpa ) was passed by congress , in part , to provide for timely compensation of former nuclear weapons workers who sustained illnesses that could be linked to exposure to toxic substances while employed at a department of energy ( energy ) facility . concerned with the relatively small number of finalized cases and the overall effectiveness of the program , the senate energy and natural resources committee held three hearings from november 2003 through march 2004 that highlighted programmatic challenges to achieving the program's objectives and energy's limited progress in overcoming them . specifically , we determined whether ( 1 ) internal controls over program payments were adequately designed to provide reasonable assurance that improper payments to contractors would not be made or would be detected in the normal course of business and ( 2 ) program payments were properly supported as a valid use of government funds . subtitle d of eeoicpa instructed energy to assist its contractors' employees by developing and submitting state workers' compensation claim applications to an independent physician panel for review of each claimant's potential eligibility for workers' compensation benefits . we also reviewed controls designed to monitor overall contractor costs . we reviewed the design of controls over program payments , including payments made to contractors . subtitle d of eeoicpa did not instruct energy to pay the benefits due an eligible worker , but instead authorized energy to assist the claimant in filing a claim to receive compensation from a state workers' compensation program . for example , we reported that a shortage of qualified physicians serving on the review panels continued to constrain energy's capacity to decide cases more quickly . we primarily focused on payments to key contractors that received approximately 60 percent of the $92 million in program expenditures through september 2005 . further , in may 2004 , we issued a report identifying issues with the claims review process . prior to the amendment of eeoicpa , in a letter dated august 30 , 2004 , you asked us to review costs incurred by energy in its administration of subtitle d by considering the design of internal controls over expenditures and the propriety of program payments . in october 2004 , eeoicpa was amended to repeal subtitle d and add a new subtitle e to be administered by the secretary of labor . we used a variety of forensic auditing techniques , including data mining , to identify payments for detailed review . to address these objectives , we considered payments made by the office of worker advocacy ( owa ) , the energy office tasked with administering subtitle d , from the inception of the program in october 2000 through september 30 , 2005 . energy also said it would revise its current policies or procedures as appropriate and described corrective actions it had already undertaken to improve its controls , including those over interagency contracting .
postal service's ( usps ) international mail facilities or private carriers ; the department of health and human services' ( hhs ) food and drug administration ( fda ) , which is responsible for ensuring the safety , effectiveness , and quality of domestic and imported drugs ; the department of justice's drug enforcement administration ( dea ) , which regulates controlled substances ; and the department of homeland security's u.s. immigration and customs enforcement ( ice ) , which has law enforcement responsibilities that include investigations of prescription drugs coming into the united states through the mail and express carriers .  ( 4 ) what efforts have federal agencies undertaken to coordinate the enforcement of the prohibitions on personal importation of prescription drugs ? .  ( 3 ) what factors affect federal agency efforts to enforce the prohibition on prescription drug importation for personal use through international mail and carrier facilities ? . however , in recent years , congress and others have debated whether americans should be allowed to purchase drugs from pharmacies located in foreign countries . also , the office of national drug control policy ( ondcp ) formulates the nation's drug control strategy and addresses policy issues concerning the illegal distribution of controlled substances , as its authority does not extend over noncontrolled substances . since that time , american consumers have been increasingly drawn to the convenience , privacy , and cost advantages that might be accrued by purchasing prescription drugs over the internet . with milestones and performance measures , it could be able to better monitor progress and assess efforts to enforce the laws . they include the department of homeland security's ( dhs ) u.s. customs and border protection ( cbp ) , which can inspect international mail and packages for potentially illegal drugs entering the united states through the u.s . in view of the fda's continuing concern about the statutory notification requirement and its impact on enforcement , we also recommend that the secretary of hhs assess the ramifications of removing or modifying the requirement , report on the results of this assessment , and , if appropriate , recommend changes to congress . the principles of the act include ( 1 ) establishing measurable goals and related measures , ( 2 ) developing strategies for achieving results , and ( 3 ) identifying the resources that will be required to achieve the goals . hhs observed that , given the increased volume of illegally imported prescription drugs since its initial request for modification of fda's notification process , other actions might be needed , and hhs would work with its federal partners to determine the actions required . at a minimum , this strategic framework should include establishment of an approach for estimating the scope of the problem , such as the volume of drugs entering the country through mail and carrier facilities ; establishment of objectives , milestones , and performance measures and a methodology to gauge results ; determination of the resources and investments needed to address the flow of prescription drugs illegally imported for personal use and where resources and investments should be targeted ; and an evaluation component to assess progress , identify barriers to achieving goals , and suggest modifications .
visitor and immigrant status indicator technology ( us - visit ) program of the department of homeland security ( dhs ) is a governmentwide program for controlling and monitoring the pre - entry , entry , visa status , and exit of foreign visitors . require , through agreements , that agencies managing contract actions on the program office's behalf implement effective contract management practices consistent with acquisition guidance for all us - visit contract actions , including , at a minimum , ( 1 ) establishing and maintaining a plan for performing contract management activities ; ( 2 ) assigning responsibility and authority for performing contract oversight ; ( 3 ) training the people performing contract oversight ; ( 4 ) documenting the contract ; ( 5 ) verifying that deliverables satisfy requirements ; ( 6 ) monitoring contractor - related risk ; and ( 7 ) monitoring contractor performance to ensure that the contractor is meeting schedule , effort , cost , and technical performance requirements . our objective was to determine whether the department of homeland security ( dhs ) has established and implemented effective controls for managing and overseeing contracts related to the u.s . develop and implement practices for overseeing contractor work managed by other agencies on the program office's behalf , including ( 1 ) clearly defining roles and responsibilities for both the program office and all agencies managing us - visit – related contracts ; ( 2 ) having current , reliable , and timely information on the full scope of contract actions and activities ; and ( 3 ) defining and implementing steps to verify that deliverables meet requirements . by impairing the reliability and effectiveness of accounting for us - visit contracts , these weaknesses have diminished the program's ability to effectively manage and oversee work performed by contractors — work that is essential for the program to achieve its goals . in doing so , dhs has relied heavily on contractor support , obtained through multiple existing contracts managed by several dhs and non - dhs agencies . as previous audits have shown , dhs suffers from numerous material weaknesses in financial management , some of which are directly related to ice ( the dhs component that provides financial management services to the program office ) . because of the importance of effective contractor management and oversight to this program , you asked us to determine whether the department has established and implemented effective controls for managing and overseeing us - visit – related contractors . the department is taking an incremental approach to acquiring and implementing us - visit , with the initial increments focused on enhancing existing systems , modifying facilities , and augmenting program office staff . until dhs addresses these contract management and oversight weaknesses , the us - visit program will remain at risk of not delivering required capabilities and promised benefits on time and within budget , and it will be vulnerable to financial mismanagement . other key practices were only partially implemented or not implemented by all agencies . to achieve this objective , we reviewed the contracting policies and procedures of dhs and non - dhs agencies responsible for us - visit – related contracts . require dhs and non - dhs agencies that manage contracts on behalf of the program to ( 1 ) clearly define and delineate us - visit work from non - us - visit work as performed by contractors ; ( 2 ) record , at the contract level , amounts being billed and expended on us - visit – related work so that these can be tracked and reported separately from amounts not for us - visit purposes ; and ( 3 ) determine if they have received reimbursement from the program for payments not related to us - visit work by contractors , and if so , refund to the program any amount received in error .
as agreed with your offices , we are providing information on: ( 1 ) examples of strategies being used to help tanf recipients increase their incomes through employment ; ( 2 ) the key factors related to implementing and operating such strategies ; and ( 3 ) the actions hhs has taken to facilitate the use of these strategies . the centerpiece of this legislation is the temporary assistance for needy families ( tanf ) block grant , under which states receive federal funds to design and operate their own welfare programs within federal guidelines . since states have implemented welfare reforms , they have spent almost $200 billion in federal and state tanf funds to meet the broad goals of the law , including ending the dependence of low - income parents on government benefits through job preparation , work , and marriage . potential benefits include improved household incomes , reductions in government benefit programs , and increased contributions to the nation's workforce . seek out additional opportunities to work with the secretaries of labor and education to jointly conduct and promote research and distribute information and implementation assistance related to enhancing skills and earnings capacity among low - income parents . much less is known , however , about how welfare - to - work programs can increase participants' earnings , and ultimately household incomes . in addition to tanf funds , state welfare agencies draw on a vast array of federal , state , and community programs and services to assist tanf recipients' work efforts , including employment , training , and education programs overseen by the departments of labor and education . much remains to be explored about whether and how best to incorporate education and training into the lives of low - income parents to improve employment outcomes . while many entities at all levels of government are involved in providing support and services to tanf recipients , the department of health and human services ( hhs ) is responsible for overseeing welfare reform at the federal level . 2. review existing research dissemination and technical assistance efforts across its relevant units to better ensure a comprehensive process for distributing information and implementation assistance to the wide range of program administrators and programs involved in welfare reform . to help ensure that the federal government considers research on these promising strategies and better informs welfare agencies and programs about how they might incorporate such strategies for tanf recipients , we recommend that the secretary of hhs: 1. review its current research agenda and identify opportunities to conduct and promote additional research on increasing earnings capacity among low - income parents . current federal and state welfare reforms are built upon a considerable research base showing that welfare - to - work programs can succeed in moving welfare recipients into jobs and reduce their reliance on public assistance . as congress considers reauthorization of welfare reform , much attention has focused on helping welfare families transition to more stable and higher - paying employment and ending welfare dependence . in some cases , hhs' comments included information on research , dissemination , or technical assistance activities that it had not shared with us earlier ; these have been added to the report .
in march 2003 , citing the failure of iraq to live up to agreements to disarm itself of weapons of mass destruction ( wmd ) , and other concerns , the united states and its coalition allies invaded iraq . during late 2002 and early 2003 , the u.s. department of defense ( dod ) had made plans to find and eliminate the suspected wmd . this report ( 1 ) assesses department of defense ( dod ) readiness to collect and secure radiological sources in iraq from the start of the 2003 war , ( 2 ) presents information on the number of radiological sources the defense threat reduction agency ( dtra ) secured by the time of the june 2004 transition to the interim iraqi government , ( 3 ) describes the assistance the united states has provided , and plans to provide in the future , to the iraqi government to help regulate radiological sources in iraq , and ( 4 ) examines dod and department of energy ( doe ) actions to assess their experiences in iraq and apply any lessons learned to possible future radiological source collection missions . this report ( 1 ) assesses dod readiness to collect and secure radiological sources in iraq from the start of the 2003 war ; ( 2 ) presents information on the number of radiological sources dtra had secured by the time of the june 2004 transition to the interim iraqi government ; ( 3 ) describes the assistance the united states has provided , and plans to provide in the future , to the iraqi government to help regulate radiological sources in iraq ; and ( 4 ) examines dod and doe actions to assess their experiences in iraq and apply any lessons learned to possible future radiological source collection missions . although dod has assessed its overall wmd mission in iraq , the agency has not assessed its narrower mission to collect and secure radiological sources . dod's defense threat reduction agency ( dtra ) was to be responsible for hiring a contractor to dispose of wmd and their component materials , such as biological agents , chemicals , and radioactive materials . because dod has not comprehensively reviewed its experiences in collecting and securing radiological sources in iraq , its current efforts to improve its preparations to secure or destroy wmd in future missions will not benefit from important lessons learned from its radiological source mission . in addition , to ensure that planning and preparing for potential future missions is carried out in advance , we recommend that the secretary of defense provide specific guidance for collecting and securing radiological sources , including integrating the objective of collecting and securing radiological sources with military combat objectives , including specifying how security protection , if needed , would be provided to the organization with responsibility for managing radiological sources and whether combat troops would be required to secure sources and provide protection for operations to collect and secure radiological sources ; determining criteria to define which radiological sources ( 1 ) are of greatest risk and should be collected , ( 2 ) are being properly used and secured and thus can be left in place , and ( 3 ) pose minimal threat and thus do not need to be collected ; specifying the health and safety standards , after considering how u.s. standards for handling , securing , transporting , and disposing of radiological sources were modified for use in iraq ; officially designating the organization responsible within dod for collecting , securing , and disposing of sources and establishing agreements between that organization and other dod organizations that may be involved with these efforts ; establishing agreements and points of contact with doe and other federal agencies , as needed , to specify the coordination , technical expertise , equipment , and facilities that may be needed to collect and secure sources in , or remove them from , a foreign country ; identifying under which circumstances and for what purposes dod will contract with private firms to conduct activities to collect and secure radiological sources , and address legal and contracting issues to ensure the timely use of contractors ; and establishing guidelines concerning the role of radiological experts from the country where sources need to be collected and secured .
we recommend that the secretary of labor take steps to ( 1 ) better utilize information in labor's database , such as indicators of program performance , for management oversight , particularly for apprenticeship programs in occupations with expected future labor shortages ; ( 2 ) develop a cost - effective strategy for collecting data from council - monitored states ; ( 3 ) conduct labor's reviews of apprenticeship activities in states that regulate their own programs on a regular basis to ensure that state activities are in accord with labor's requirements for recognition of apprenticeship programs ; and ( 4 ) offer substantive feedback to states from its reviews . specifically , we assessed ( 1 ) the extent to which the u.s. department of labor monitors the operations and outcomes of registered apprenticeship programs in the states where it has direct oversight , ( 2 ) its oversight activities for council - monitored states , and ( 3 ) the outcomes for construction apprentices in programs sponsored jointly by employers and unions in relation to those sponsored by employers alone . our objectives were to determine ( 1 ) the extent to which the u.s. department of labor monitors the operations and outcomes of registered apprenticeship programs in the states where it has direct oversight , ( 2 ) its oversight activities for council - monitored states , and ( 3 ) outcomes for construction apprentices in programs sponsored jointly by employers and unions in relation to those sponsored by employers alone . it has granted 27 other states , the district of columbia , and 3 territories authority to register and oversee their own programs , and ensures programs comply with federal standards and meet additional state standards . the national registered apprenticeships system , administered by the office of apprenticeship training , employer and labor services ( oatels ) within the department of labor , has an important role in the development of this skilled workforce . the anticipated shortage of skilled construction workers has heightened concerns about the relationship between program outcomes and program quality , the prospect for expanding the supply of skilled workers through apprenticeships , and labor's oversight of these programs . we also visited four states , both federal ( texas ) and council - monitored ( california , new york , and washington ) , that had large numbers of construction apprentices ( from about 52,000 to 6,500 ) . in addition , some have raised concerns that the failure to complete programs could be indicative of poor program quality . with a budget of $21 million , oatels promulgates standards to safeguard the welfare of apprentices and registers apprenticeship programs that meet those standards , which include requirements for related instruction , on - the - job training , and equal employment opportunity for apprentices . between 2002 and 2012 an estimated 850,000 jobs will open in the construction industry , but experts predict that there will not be enough skilled workers to fill them . labor has infrequently reviewed states to which it has delegated oversight responsibility . while labor and apprenticeship councils provide oversight , recent studies have shown that a significant number of construction apprentices are not completing their programs and that construction programs sponsored by employers without union participation have lower completion rates and wages for apprentices .
since its creation in 1958 , the national aeronautics and space administration ( nasa ) has owned and operated a small fleet of aircraft to provide passenger transportation . to assess reasonableness of costs , use , and agency oversight and management of the national aeronautics and space administration's ( nasa ) passenger aircraft services , we met with officials of nasa's office of infrastructure and administration aircraft management office and appropriate officials at the johnson space center , houston , texas ; marshall space flight center , huntsville , alabama ; kennedy space center , cape canaveral , florida ; wallops flight facility , wallops island , virginia ; and dryden flight research center , edwards , california . subtitle f. we also reviewed nasa's implementing publications , nasa policy directive ( npd ) 7900.4b , nasa aircraft operations management ( april 2004 ) ; nasa policy regulation ( npr ) 7900.3a , aircraft operations management ( april 1999 ) ; and center - specific implementing instructions . in this regard , you requested that our audit address ( 1 ) the relative cost of nasa passenger aircraft services compared with commercial coach costs , ( 2 ) whether nasa's retention and operation of aircraft for passenger transportation was in accordance with applicable governmentwide guidance , and ( 3 ) the effectiveness of nasa's oversight and management of its passenger aircraft services . a - 11 , preparation , submission and execution of the budget part 7: planning , budgeting , acquisition and management of capital assets ( revised june 2005 ) ; general services administration's ( gsa ) federal property management regulations , 41 c.f.r . we also identified and assessed ( 1 ) nasa's implementing policies and procedures with respect to omb and gsa policy guidance , ( 2 ) the process used to approve and document passenger aircraft utilization , ( 3 ) associated aircraft management reports , ( 4 ) other recent assessments and studies done with respect to nasa passenger aircraft services , and ( 5 ) the extent to which accurate , current agencywide data were available to agency managers for day - to - day decision making on passenger aircraft usage and costs . congress should consider whether legislation is necessary to ensure that ( 1 ) nasa disposes of all of its passenger aircraft not used in accordance with omb's explicit policy prohibition against owning aircraft to support travel to routine site visits , meetings , speeches , and conferences ; and ( 2 ) funding for future nasa passenger aircraft purchases and operations is restricted to those necessary to meet mission requirements consistent with omb guidance . immediate actions to dispose of all aircraft not needed to address mission requirements and adoption of more flexible , less costly alternatives to satisfy future mission requirements would best position nasa to meet its stewardship responsibilities for taxpayer funds it receives , and better enable it to meet its current fiscal challenges . these aircraft are in addition to approximately 80 aircraft that nasa reported using in its research and development and program support operations . nasa also contracted with charter carriers or had interagency agreements with other federal agencies to obtain additional passenger air transportation services .
the department of defense ( dod ) has expressed continuing concerns about servicemembers' use of predatory consumer loans . and ( 2 ) are dod and active duty servicemembers fully utilizing the tools that dod has to curb the use and effects of predatory lending practices ? . our recommendation will ( 1 ) require the boards to meet regularly and ( 2 ) provide installation commanders additional focus and oversight into conditions that may adversely affect servicemembers on their installations . these tools include: ( 1 ) the armed forces disciplinary control boards , which can make recommendations to installation commanders who can then use or threaten to use their “off - limits” authority to prohibit servicemembers from using a business that engages in predatory lending practices ; ( 2 ) free legal assistance with contracts and other financial transactions ; and ( 3 ) personal financial management ( pfm ) programs that offer servicemembers assistance , such as financial management training and counseling . these loans can result in financial problems that may lead to severe negative consequences for the military as a whole ( e.g. , decreases in unit readiness and morale ) as well as for the servicemembers themselves ( e.g. , criminal and adverse personnel actions , including possible discharge from the military ) . this confusion is particularly problematic because it may harm dod's efforts to reduce the use and effects of predatory lending practices . we are making the following two recommendations to the secretary of defense: to improve dod's ability to curb the use and effects of predatory lending practices , we recommend that the secretary of defense direct the under secretary of defense for personnel and readiness to amend existing regulations to require installation commanders to convene the armed forces disciplinary control boards at least semiannually to investigate and make recommendations to commanders on matters related to eliminating conditions which adversely affect the health , safety , morals , welfare , morale , and discipline of the armed forces , to include servicemembers' use of lenders who may use predatory lending practices . dod policy officials have expressed concerns over certain types of high - cost , short - term consumer loans that are typically provided by lenders who lie outside the system of federally insured financial institutions . dod and service policy officials identified dod's primary tools for curbing the use and effects of predatory loans . in its comments , dod noted that it is in the initial stages of staffing and coordinating changes to the armed forces disciplinary control boards' joint regulations and will take two actions — require boards to meet four ( instead of two ) times a year and direct that businesses on the off - limits list for one service be off - limits for all services . dod has a number of tools to address the use and effects of loans that it considers predatory . dod's efforts to assess predatory lending are hampered by the lack of a precise definition of predatory lending — a problem shared with other organizations attempting to quantify the use and effects of predatory loans . in addition , dod has encouraged servicemembers to seek , for example , payday loan alternatives available from on - installation banks , on - installation credit unions , and service - affiliated relief / aid societies .
one of the two major manufacturers of influenza vaccine for the united states warned in late august 2004 that deliveries would be delayed because a small quantity of its vaccine failed sterility tests . as the traditional influenza vaccination period started in fall 2004 , the nation faced the unexpected loss of nearly half its projected vaccine supply . on october 5 , 2004 , the manufacturer announced that because of potential contamination , it would be unable to release any vaccine for the u.s. market . before the october 5 announcement , hhs's centers for disease control and prevention ( cdc ) and its advisory committee on immunization practices ( acip ) had recommended that those at high risk of severe complications from influenza and those in other priority groups — such as health care workers and those aged 50 – 64 years — receive an influenza vaccination . the department of health and human services ( hhs ) had expected that this manufacturer would produce about 47 million doses — close to half of the 100 million doses estimated for the 2004 – 05 influenza season . after the announcement , with no other u.s. - licensed manufacturers able to replace the large amount of lost vaccine on such short notice , concerns arose about the effects of the loss , especially on those most vulnerable to complications from influenza . it is too early , however , to assess the effectiveness of these efforts in coordinating actions of federal , state , and local health agencies and others who play a part in the annual influenza vaccination process . media reports of long lines of seniors waiting hours for a chance at a vaccination , of others at high risk who could not find a vaccination , and of individuals turned away who never returned when supplies became available fueled worries that the nation was not adequately prepared to respond to the significant vaccine shortage or to an influenza pandemic ( a widespread or worldwide influenza epidemic ) . hhs also agreed that adjustments to vaccination recommendations and vaccine supply ideally should occur earlier in the influenza season , but such adjustments cannot always be implemented in a shortage year . in some instances , uncoordinated communication from federal to state and local jurisdictions , and to providers and the general public , contributed to confusion , frustration , and individuals' failure to seek or receive an influenza vaccination . the agency also provided details on other actions , such as approval of additional influenza vaccines for the u.s. market , that were under way . conversely , federal efforts to boost supply late in the season had little effect , because demand fell off sharply in december and january , and vaccine became available too late . aided by a relatively moderate influenza season , efforts to mitigate the sudden and unexpected shortage of influenza vaccine for the 2004 – 05 season were largely successful , although the season was not without problems . educating health care providers and the public about all available influenza vaccines and forms of prevention may increase the number of vaccinated individuals and also reduce the spread of influenza . this lack of preseason planning created confusion and delays during the optimal fall influenza vaccination window , when state and local public health agencies and health care providers most needed vaccine to protect individuals at high risk of severe complications .
keys to making this safety oversight system work are to: ( 1 ) establish programs that focus resources on areas of highest safety risk and on mitigating risks ; ( 2 ) provide training and other communication to ensure that inspectors maintain the skills and knowledge to consistently carry out the agency's oversight programs ; and ( 3 ) have processes and data to continuously monitor , evaluate , and improve the numerous oversight programs that make up the safety oversight system . this record is a result of the efforts of the federal aviation administration ( faa ) , airlines , manufacturers , and others in the aviation industry to maintain one of the safest aviation systems in the world . the u.s. commercial aviation industry , with less than one fatal accident per 5 million flights from 2002 through 2005 , has an extraordinary safety record . this statement focuses on these three key areas of faa's “early warning system” and is based on our recent reports on faa's inspection oversight programs , industry partnership programs , enforcement program , and training program . in order to maintain a high level of safety , it is critical to have a safety oversight system that is comprehensive , efficient , and effective and can provide an early warning of hazards that can lead to accidents . faa's workforce of about 3,200 inspectors stationed at more than 100 field offices throughout the world is responsible for carrying out the agency's processes to certify , inspect , and enforce safety regulations for all aspects of the aviation industry , including the aircraft and its component parts , over 100 commercial airlines , about 5,000 aircraft repair stations , and hundreds of thousands of pilots and mechanics . faa augments its inspector workforce with nearly 13,600 designated organizations and individuals ( designees ) that conduct the more routine aspects of industry oversight , such as administering tests to pilots and mechanics as part of their certification requirements , and augments the safety information that it obtains from inspections with industry partnership programs . it is equally important to have a skilled , well - trained workforce to implement and monitor this safety oversight system . evaluative processes and relevant data are particularly important as faa works to change its culture by incorporating a system safety approach into its oversight , and we have recommended that faa develop continuous evaluative processes for its oversight of non - legacy airlines , its designee programs , and its enforcement program , and systematically assess inspectors' technical training needs . faa's enforcement program , which is an outgrowth of its inspection process , is intended to ensure industry compliance with safety regulations and is another important element of its safety oversight system . furthermore , faa's ability to evaluate its programs is hindered by the lack of useful nationwide data . faa has made training an integral part of its safety oversight system , but several actions could improve the results of its training efforts . faa's aviation safety oversight system includes programs that focus on risk identification and mitigation through a system safety approach , the leveraging of resources , and enforcement of safety regulations , but the benefits of these programs are not being fully realized .
we appreciate the opportunity to participate in the subcommittee's hearing on us - visit ( the united states visitor and immigrant status indicator technology ) , a multibillion - dollar program of the department of homeland security ( dhs ) that is intended to achieve a daunting set of goals: to enhance the security of our citizens and visitors and ensure the integrity of the u.s. immigration system , and at the same time to facilitate legitimate trade and travel and protect privacy . to achieve these goals , us - visit is to record the entry into and exit from the united states of selected travelers , verify their identity , and determine their compliance with the terms of their admission and stay . this legislation also directed us to review these plans . since fiscal year 2002 , the house and senate appropriations committees have provided valuable oversight and direction to dhs on us - visit by legislatively directing it to submit annual expenditure plans for committee approval . our reviews have produced four reports that , among other things , described dhs progress against legislatively mandated milestones and identified fundamental challenges that the department faced in delivering promised program capabilities and benefits on time and within cost . for example , we reported in september 2003 that the program office did not have the human capital and acquisition process discipline needed to effectively manage the program . managing us - visit effectively requires high levels of capability and expertise . beyond these two questions , effective program management also means that the program is held accountable for results , which involves measuring and disclosing performance relative to explicitly defined program goals , outcomes , and commitments . they have also provided recommendations to promote dhs accountability for the program . to be sure that a program is doing the right thing , it needs to be justified by sufficient fact - based and verifiable analysis to show that the program as defined will properly fit within the larger homeland security operational and technological environments and that it will produce mission value commensurate with expected costs and risks . over the last 4 years , our reports have provided recommendations to dhs to ensure that these questions are answered and used as the basis for informed decision making about us - visit . to be done the right way , a program needs to be executed in a rigorous and disciplined manner , which means that it needs to employ the necessary mix of people , processes , and tools to reasonably ensure that promised program capabilities and expected mission value are delivered on time and within budget . in light of the challenges that we identified , we concluded that the program carries an appreciable level of risk , meaning that it must be managed effectively if it is to be successful . further , they concur with the need to implement them with due speed and diligence . according to dhs , the recommendations have made us - visit a stronger program . fundamentally , it entails being able to respond affirmatively to two basic questions . these recommendations have been aimed at helping the department to ensure that this program fulfills expectations: in other words , that the program is doing the right thing in the right way , and that it is holding itself accountable for doing so .
in 1976 , the indian health care improvement act sought to raise the health status of native americans through increased funding and personnel for the indian health service ( ihs ) . we examined ( 1 ) the extent to which primary care services were available to native americans , ( 2 ) the extent to which ancillary and specialty services were available to native americans , ( 3 ) the underlying factors associated with variations in service availability among ihs - funded facilities , and ( 4 ) strategies used by ihs - funded facilities to increase the availability of services . for some facilities in one of those areas , especially those in urban areas , it was difficult to retain billing staff needed to obtain reimbursements , because they could not match the private sector pay scale . this agency , located within the department of health and human services , arranges the provision of health care services for native americans across 12 federally designated areas that cover all or part of 35 states . for fiscal year 2005 , the congress appropriated approximately $2.6 billion for health care services to be made available through ihs , which included primary care services ( medical , dental , and vision ) ; ancillary services , including laboratory , diagnostic imaging , and pharmacy services ; and specialty care , including services provided by cardiologists , surgeons , and other physician specialists . native americans — american indians and alaska natives — have historically had poorer health than the u.s. general population , as evidenced by their higher incidence of certain medical conditions and their shorter average life spans . there remain concerns about the extent to which health care services are available — that is , both offered and accessible — to native americans served by ihs . our prior work identified issues regarding the availability of services for native americans , particularly services to meet the need for substance abuse treatment . we used a two - tiered approach to selecting facilities for site visits , which included selecting 3 of the 12 indian health service ( ihs ) areas and then selecting 13 facilities within those 3 areas . primary care , ancillary , and specialty services are offered through a combination of direct care , which is provided on site at ihs - funded facilities , and care purchased from other public and private providers — referred to here as “contract care.” ihs - funded facilities have varied in the health care services they have provided for native americans , and in some cases this has adversely affected the ability of native americans to obtain needed services . for example , to improve efforts to obtain reimbursements , four facilities had staff available to help patients apply for eligibility or reimbursement from other programs for which they were eligible . our site visits included interviews with officials at 13 ihs - funded facilities ( 4 hospitals , 8 health centers , and 1 health station ) , 8 of which were federally operated and 5 of which were tribally operated . the effectiveness of another strategy was limited by the willingness of outside providers to negotiate contracts with the facility . others negotiated with state medicaid offices in order to be able to bill for services ( see table 7 for a description of how facilities implemented the six strategies ) .
this testimony addresses ( 1 ) the specific efforts of u.s. agencies to improve intellectual property protection in other nations , ( 2 ) the means used to coordinate these efforts , and ( 3 ) challenges facing enforcement efforts abroad . thank you for the opportunity to discuss our work on u.s. efforts to protect u.s. intellectual property rights ( ipr ) overseas . the u.s. government provides broad protection for intellectual property through means such as copyrights , patents , and trademarks .  ; a report prepared by a department of justice intellectual property task force , and congressional action concerning an interagency intellectual property law enforcement council . as a result , u.s. goods are subject to substantial counterfeiting and piracy in many countries . as you know , the united states dominates the creation and export of intellectual property — creations of the mind . however , protection of intellectual property in many parts of the world is inadequate . the agencies are the departments of commerce , state , justice , and homeland security ; ustr ; the copyright office ; the u.s. agency for international development ( usaid ) ; and the u.s. international trade commission . the u.s. government , through numerous agencies , is seeking better intellectual property protection overseas . in addition , this testimony , based on our september 2004 report addressing these topics , provides an update on key ipr - related events since that time — an administration initiative referred to as the strategy targeting organized piracy , or stop ! . eight federal agencies , as well as the federal bureau of investigation ( fbi ) and the u.s. patent and trademark office ( uspto ) , undertake the primary u.s. government activities to protect and enforce u.s. intellectual property rights overseas . to understand more fully how u.s. agencies have performed in this regard , we have examined several issues . to address these issues , we analyzed key u.s. government reports and documents from eight federal agencies and two offices . we also conducted field work in four countries where serious problems regarding the protection of intellectual property have been reported ( brazil , china , russia , and ukraine ) and met with u.s. embassy and foreign government officials as well as representatives of u.s. companies and industry groups operating in those countries . the united states has brought a total of 12 ipr cases to the wto for resolution , but has not brought any since 2000 ( although the united states initiated a wto dispute panel for one of these cases in 2003 ) . fully implementing some of the report's recommendations will require a sustained , long - term effort by justice . key activities to develop and promote enhanced ipr protection in foreign countries are undertaken by the departments of commerce , homeland security , justice , and state ; the fbi ; uspto ; the copyright office ; and usaid . we subsequently updated our work in may and june of 2005 by meeting with key government officials and industry groups involved in recent u.s. government efforts . conversely , niplecc , the mechanism for coordinating intellectual property law enforcement , has accomplished little that is concrete and its ineffectiveness continues despite recent congressional action to provide funding , staffing , and clearer guidance regarding its international objectives .
since 1979 , egypt has received about $60 billion in military and economic assistance overall with about $34 billion in the form of foreign military financing ( fmf ) grants and loans that enable egypt to purchase u.s. - manufactured military goods and services . specifically , we ( 1 ) describe the types and amounts of fmf assistance provided to egypt , ( 2 ) assess the financing arrangements used to provide fmf assistance to egypt , and ( 3 ) evaluate how the united states assesses fmf assistance to egypt and its contribution to the advancement of u.s. foreign policy and security goals . according to department of state ( state ) and department of defense ( dod ) officials , fmf funds also contribute to the u.s. goal of maintaining regional stability and supporting egypt as a partner in the middle east . this should include establishing benchmarks and targets for these and other goals . these defense articles and services are to modernize egypt's armed forces and enhance egypt's military interoperability with the united states . to fund this program , approximately $1.3 billion has been appropriated annually and disbursed through a cash flow financing arrangement that allows egypt to spread the payments over several years . specific goals include ( 1 ) modernizing and training egypt's military ; ( 2 ) facilitating egypt's participation as a coalition partner ; ( 3 ) providing force protection to the u.s. military in the region ; and ( 4 ) helping guarantee u.s. access to the suez canal and overflight routes . to describe the types and amounts of foreign military financing ( fmf ) assistance to egypt , we examined government and private sector documents , databases , and reports ; we also interviewed u.s. government officials . specifically , the united states uses fmf funds set aside for egypt to purchase military equipment , services , and training from u.s. contractors on egypt's behalf . we agree that expedited transit in the suez canal ; support for humanitarian efforts in darfur , sudan , and elsewhere ; and continuing offers to train iraqi security forces are important benefits that the united states derives from its strategic relationship with egypt . this would include identifying risks , planning a course of action for mitigating those risks , and developing mechanisms to anticipate , identify , and react to change ; and conduct periodic program - level evaluations of the fmf program to egypt . after signing the camp david peace accords , egypt emerged as the second largest recipient of u.s. military aid in the world . at your request , we reviewed selected aspects of the fmf program for egypt including the composition and funding of the program and the u.s. government's assessment of its contributions . recently , congressional committees have sought to alter the balance of economic and military assistance provided to egypt and to review the results of the assistance . specifically , we recommend that the agencies define the current and desired levels of modernization and interoperability the united states would like to achieve . specifically , we interviewed u.s. department of defense ( dod ) , and defense security cooperation agency ( dsca ) officials .
this opportunity has many related pieces: addressing our nation's large and growing long - term fiscal gap ; deciding on the appropriate role and size of the federal government — and how to finance that government — and bringing the wide array of federal activities into line with today's world . more broadly , pension reform represents a real opportunity to address part of our long - term fiscal problems and reconfigure our retirement security systems to bring them into the 21st century . the pbgc's situation is an excellent example of the need for the congress to reconsider the role of government organizations , programs , and policies in light of changes that have occurred since pbgc's establishment in 1974 . we therefore must fundamentally reexamine major spending and tax policies and priorities in an effort to recapture our fiscal flexibility and ensure that our government can respond to a range of current and emerging security , social , economic , and environmental changes and challenges . pbgc's challenges bear many similarities to the challenges facing our social security system . as a result , timely action to address both private pension and social security reform is needed . both programs have adequate current revenues and assets to pay promised benefits for a number of years ; yet , both face large and growing accumulated deficits on an accrual basis . continuing on our current unsustainable fiscal path will gradually erode , if not suddenly damage , our economy , our standard of living , and ultimately our national security . in pursuing such reforms , consideration should be given to the interactive effects of any such reforms and how they contribute to addressing our nation's large and growing fiscal challenge , key demographic , economic and workforce trends , and the economic security of americans in their retirement years . to summarize our findings , while pension funding rules are intended to ensure that plans have sufficient assets to pay promised benefit to plan participants , significant vulnerabilities exist . further , very few sponsors of underfunded plans were required to pay an additional funding charge ( afc ) , a funding mechanism designed to reduce severe plan underfunding . although from 1995 to 2002 most of the 100 largest db plans annually had assets that exceeded their current liabilities , by 2002 over half of the 100 largest plans were underfunded , and almost one - fourth of plans were less than 90 percent funded . our recent work on db pension funding rules provides important insights in understanding the problems facing pbgc and the db system . further , because of leeway in the actuarial methodology and assumptions that sponsors may use to measure plan assets and liabilities , underfunding may actually have been more severe and widespread than reported . finally , our analysis confirms the notion that plans sponsored by financially weak firms pose a particular risk to pbgc , as these plans were generally more likely to be underfunded , to be subject to an additional funding charge , and to use assumptions to minimize or avoid cash contributions than plans sponsored by stronger firms . additionally , on average over 60 percent of sponsors of these plans made no annual cash contributions to their plans .
we issued two additional reports in september on ( 1 ) u.s. reconstruction efforts in the water and sanitation sector and ( 2 ) u.s. assistance for the january 2005 iraqi elections . in july 2005 , we issued two reports on ( 1 ) the status of funding and reconstruction efforts in iraq , focusing on the progress we have achieved and the challenges we face in rebuilding iraq's infrastructure and ( 2 ) the use of private security providers in iraq . based on these five reports , i will discuss ( 1 ) the funding used to rebuild and stabilize iraq and ( 2 ) the challenges the united states faces in its rebuilding and stabilization efforts . the united states , along with its coalition partners and various international organizations , has undertaken a challenging and costly effort to stabilize and rebuild iraq following multiple wars and decades of neglect by the former regime . the united states reconstruction assistance goal is to help the iraqi government develop a democratic , stable , and prosperous country , at peace with itself and its neighbors , a partner in the war against terrorism , enjoying the benefits of a free society and a market economy . finally , we expect to issue a report shortly on u.s. efforts to stabilize the security situation in iraq ( a classified report ) . specifically , we will examine the efforts to stabilize iraq and develop its security forces , including the challenge of ensuring that iraq can independently fund , sustain , and support its new security forces ; examine the management of the u.s. rebuilding effort , including program execution ; and assess the progress made in developing iraq's energy sectors , including the sectors' needs , existing resources and contributions , achievements , and future challenges . this enormous effort is taking place in an unstable security environment , concurrent with iraqi efforts to complete a constitutional framework for establishing a permanent government . my testimony today is based on several reports that we have issued to the congress over the past 3 months . i am pleased to be here today to discuss the u.s. efforts to rebuild and stabilize iraq . as of august 2005 , approximately $30 billion in u.s. appropriations had been made available for rebuilding and stabilization needs in iraq , about $21 billion had been obligated , and about $13 billion had been disbursed . we will continue to examine the challenges the united states faces in rebuilding and stabilizing iraq . this statement includes unclassified information only and is based on recent gao reports . second , inadequate performance data and measures make it difficult to determine the overall progress and impact of u.s. reconstruction efforts . third , the u.s. reconstruction program has encountered difficulties with iraq's inability to sustain new and rehabilitated infrastructure projects and to address maintenance needs in the water , sanitation , and electricity sectors . u.s. appropriated funding has largely focused on infrastructure repair and training of iraqi security forces and this funding has been reallocated as priorities changed . these funds were used for activities that included infrastructure repair of the electricity , oil , and water and sanitation sectors ; infrastructure repair , training , and equipping of the security and law enforcement sector ; and cpa and u.s. administrative expenses .
my statement today will identify ( 1 ) the extent to which the federal communications commission ( fcc ) has adopted market - based mechanisms for commercial uses of spectrum , ( 2 ) the extent to which market - based mechanisms have been adopted for federal government use of spectrum , ( 3 ) options for improving spectrum management , and ( 4 ) potential barriers to spectrum reform . as you know , the radio - frequency spectrum is used to provide an array of wireless communications services that are critical to the u.s. economy and various government missions , such as national security . demand for radio - frequency spectrum has exploded over the past several decades as new technologies and services have been — and continue to be — brought to the market in the private sector , and new mission needs unfold among government users . congress extended fcc's auction authority to 2011 with the passage of the deficit reduction act of 2005 . as a result , nearly all parties are becoming increasingly concerned about the availability of spectrum for future needs because most of the usable spectrum in the united states has already been allocated to existing services and users . while some countries have adopted market - based mechanisms to encourage the efficient use of spectrum by government agencies , the department of commerce's national telecommunications and information administration ( ntia ) has not adopted similar mechanisms for federal government use in the united states . the most frequently cited options include ( 1 ) extending fcc's auction authority , ( 2 ) reexamining the use and distribution of spectrum , and ( 3 ) ensuring clearly defined rights and flexibility in commercially licensed spectrum bands ; there was no consensus on these options , except for extending fcc's auction authority . the current management framework may pose barriers to reform since , while two agencies have been given responsibility for aspects of spectrum management , neither has been given ultimate decision - making authority over all spectrum use or the authority to impose fundamental reform , such as increasing the reliance on market - based mechanisms . many parties believe that spectrum management reform — such as greater reliance on market - based mechanisms that invoke the forces of demand and supply — is essential to meeting the growing and unpredictable demand for spectrum . to address these barriers , we have previously recommended that ( 1 ) the secretary of commerce and fcc establish and carry out formal , joint planning activities to develop a national spectrum plan to guide decision making ; and ( 2 ) the relevant administrative agencies and congressional committees work together to develop and implement a plan for the establishment of a commission that would conduct a comprehensive examination of current spectrum management . examples of market - based mechanisms include introducing flexibility in the use of spectrum , using auctions to assign licenses , and enhancing the use of secondary markets as a means for companies to obtain access to spectrum . we appreciate the opportunity to provide testimony on spectrum reform issues . given the success of fcc's use of auctions and the overwhelming support for extending fcc's auction authority , we suggested that the congress consider extending fcc's auction authority beyond the 2007 expiration date .
i am pleased to be here today to discuss two recently issued gao reports that assess the securities and exchange commission's ( sec ) response to trading abuses uncovered in the mutual fund industry . maintaining public confidence in the mutual fund industry is critical because about 95 million americans have invested more than $8 trillion in mutual funds , a significant share of the nation's privately held wealth . as you know , trading abuses — including fraudulent market timing and late trading violations — were uncovered in many well - known companies in the mutual fund industry and raised significant concerns about the industry's ethical practices . the federal regulators' failure to identify the abuses at an earlier stage has generated concern about the effectiveness of their examination and other oversight procedures . before september 2003 , sec did not examine fund companies for market timing abuses because agency officials ( 1 ) viewed other activities as representing higher risks , ( 2 ) concluded that companies had financial incentives to control frequent trading because it could lower fund returns , and ( 3 ) were told by company officials that the companies had established controls over frequent trading . sec has agreed to implement recommendations from our may 2005 report to strengthen these processes . to address our reporting objectives , we conducted in - depth reviews of 11 sec enforcement actions against mutual fund companies for market timing and other abusive practices . moreover , it is critical that sec and nasd have the capacity to identify abusive practices and to bring enforcement actions that punish violators and deter those who are contemplating similar abuses . more specifically , my testimony covers ( 1 ) the reasons that sec did not detect the market timing abuses at an earlier stage and lessons learned from the agency not doing so , ( 2 ) the steps sec has taken to strengthen its oversight of the mutual fund industry and strengthen industry business practices , and ( 3 ) enforcement actions taken by sec and criminal prosecutors in response to these abuses and sec management procedures related to the making of criminal referrals and ensuring staff independence from the mutual fund industry . questions have been raised as to why so many mutual fund companies and broker - dealers were able to engage in trading abuses , sometimes for years , without being detected by sec and nasd . penalties that sec obtained in settling the 14 enforcement actions with investment advisers range from $2 million to $140 million , with an average penalty of about $56 million . to improve its risk assessment capabilities , sec also has created and is currently staffing a new office to help the agency better anticipate , identify , and manage emerging risks and market trends . second , sec can strengthen its capacity to identify and assess any evidence of potential risks . in fact , the trading abuses only came to light after the new york state office of the attorney general ( nysoag ) received a tip from a hedge fund insider , conducted an investigation , and , in september 2003 , settled an enforcement action against a hedge fund company and a hedge fund official for market timing and late trading of several mutual funds .
through these programs , va provided almost $30 billion in cash disability benefits to more than 3.4 million veterans and their survivors in fiscal year 2004 . for years , the claims process has been the subject of concern and attention within va and by the congress and veterans service organizations . i am pleased to have the opportunity to comment on the claims processing challenges and opportunities facing the department of veterans affairs' ( va ) disability compensation and pension programs . many of their concerns have focused on long waits for decisions , large claims backlogs , and inaccurate decisions . va's disability programs have not been updated to reflect the current state of science , medicine , technology , and labor market conditions . our work and media reports of significant discrepancies in average disability payments from state to state have also highlighted concerns about the consistency of decision making within va . while va is making efforts to address these problems , several factors may impede va's ability to make and sustain significant improvements in its claims processing performance . in january 2003 , we designated modernizing va and other federal disability programs as a high - risk area , because our work over the past decade found that these programs are based on concepts from the past and continue to experience management problems .  ( see related gao products. ) . you asked us to discuss the challenges and opportunities va faces in processing disability compensation and pension claims . these include the potential impacts of laws , court decisions , and continued increases in the number and complexity of claims being filed . while va has improved the accuracy of its rating - related compensation decisions to 84 percent in fiscal year 2005 — close to its goal of 88 percent in fiscal year 2005 , it has 3 years to reach its strategic goal of 98 percent . in addition , va still experiences lengthy processing times and lacks a clear understanding of the extent of possible decision inconsistencies . to update our work , we reviewed recent claims processing performance data and va's fiscal year 2005 performance and accountability report , but did not perform independent verification of va's data . opportunities for improvement may lie in more fundamental reform of va's disability compensation programs . for example , as of the end of fiscal year 2005 , rating - related claims were pending an average of 120 days , 9 days more than at the end of fiscal year 2003 , and far from va's strategic goal of 78 days . for example , in recent years , gao has found that va and other federal disability programs have not been updated to reflect the current state of science , medicine , technology , and labor market conditions . in summary , va continues to face challenges processing disability claims . my statement draws on numerous gao reports and testimonies on va's compensation and pension claims processing operations . further , we have identified concerns about the consistency of decisions across va's regional offices . during the same period , the rating - related inventory grew by about 92,000 claims to a total of about 346,000 claims .
i appreciate the opportunity to participate in the subcommittee's hearing on the implementation of the freedom of information act ( foia ) . specific requests by the public for information through the act have led to disclosure of waste , fraud , abuse , and wrongdoing in the government , as well as the identification of unsafe consumer products , harmful drugs , and serious health hazards . generally speaking , foia establishes that federal agencies must provide the public with access to government information , thus enabling them to learn about government operations and decisions . to help ensure appropriate implementation , the act requires that agencies report annually to the attorney general , providing specific information about their foia operations . at that time we recommended that justice ( 1 ) encourage agencies to make material electronically available and ( 2 ) review agency annual reports to address specific data quality issues . to assess implementation of foia , we examined , consolidated , and analyzed annual report data for fiscal years 2002 through 2004 from 25 major agencies ( herein we refer to this scope as governmentwide ) . agencies other than va that reported receiving large numbers of requests in fiscal year 2004 included the social security administration ( ssa ) , the department of health and human services ( hhs ) , and the department of homeland security ( dhs ) , as shown in figure 3 . the department of justice and the office of management and budget ( omb ) both have roles in the implementation of foia . to develop a description of the foia process at federal agencies , we compiled and analyzed information from department of justice documentation and from our previous reports . as requested , in my remarks today , i will describe the foia process at federal agencies and discuss the implementation of foia . given this steadily increasing workload , it will remain critically important that strong oversight of foia implementation continue in order to ensure that agencies remain responsive to the needs of citizens . the department of justice oversees agencies' compliance with foia and is the primary source of policy guidance for agencies . since our report was issued , justice has taken steps to implement both of these recommendations . they include the 24 major agencies covered by the chief financial officers act , as well as the central intelligence agency and , beginning in 2003 , the department of homeland security ( dhs ) in place of the federal emergency management agency ( fema ) . only relatively small numbers were partially granted ( 3 percent ) , denied ( 1 percent ) , or not disclosed for other reasons ( 5 percent ) . in addition , agencies are required to meet certain time frames for making key determinations: whether to comply with requests ( 20 business days from receipt of the request ) , responses to appeals of adverse determinations ( 20 business days from filing of the appeal ) , and whether to provide expedited processing of requests ( 10 business days from receipt of the request ) . within the department of justice , the office of information and privacy ( oip ) has lead responsibility for providing guidance and support to federal agencies on foia issues .
this request is necessary to help us continue to support the congress in meeting its constitutional responsibilities and to help improve the performance and ensure the accountability of the federal government for the benefit of the american people . these fiscal pressures will require the congress to make tough choices regarding what the government should do , how it will do its work , who will help carry out its work in the future , and how government will be financed in the future . in the years ahead , our support to the congress will likely prove even more critical because of the pressures created by our nation's current and projected budget deficit and long - term fiscal imbalance . my testimony today will focus on our ( 1 ) performance and results with the funding you provided us in fiscal year 2004 , ( 2 ) streamlining and management improvement efforts under way , and ( 3 ) budget request for fiscal year 2006 to support the congress and serve the american people . we are grateful to the congress for providing us with the support and resources that have helped us in our quest to be a world - class professional services organization . i am pleased to appear before you today in support of the fiscal year 2006 budget request for the u.s. government accountability office ( gao ) . we , therefore , must fundamentally reexamine major spending and tax policies and priorities in an effort to recapture our fiscal flexibility and ensure that our programs and priorities respond to emerging security , social , economic , and environmental changes and challenges in the years ahead . we believe that investing in gao produces a sound return and results in substantial benefits to the congress and the american people . in this report , we emphasize the critical need to bring the federal government's programs and policies into line with 21st century realities . i am proud of the work we accomplish as we continue to provide our congressional clients with professional , objective , fact - based , non - partisan , non - ideological , fair , balanced , and reliable information in a timely manner regarding how well government programs and policies are working and , when needed , recommendations to make government work better . continuing on our current unsustainable fiscal path will gradually erode , if not suddenly damage , our economy , our standard of living , and ultimately our national security . we summarized the larger challenges facing the federal government in our recently issued 21st century challenges report . i believe that gao can be of invaluable assistance in helping the congress address these challenges . given current and projected deficits and the demands associated with managing a growing national debt , as well as challenges facing the congress to restructure federal programs , reevaluate the role of government , and ensure accountability of federal agencies , a strong gao will result in substantially greater benefits to the congress and the american people . in fiscal year 2004 , much of our work examined the effectiveness of the federal government's day - to - day operations , such as administering benefits to the elderly and other needy populations , providing grants and loans to college students , and collecting taxes from businesses and individuals .
i am pleased to be here today to discuss the social security administration's ( ssa ) procedures for issuing social security numbers ( ssns ) and benefits to foreign - born individuals . in 2004 , an estimated 35.7 million foreign - born people resided in the united states , and many legitimately have ssns . second , how does ssa determine who is and is not eligible to receive social security benefits ? . in light of concern that foreign - born individuals may have been given ssns inappropriately as well as recent legislation that changes how ssa assigns numbers and awards benefits for foreign - born individuals , you asked us to address two questions . first , how does ssa determine who is and is not eligible for an ssn ? . in both reports gao found that ssa was undertaking improvements in its procedures for issuing ssns and benefits to the foreign - born , but that ssa nonetheless remained vulnerable to errors and fraud . in february of 2005 , we reported on ssa's ability to develop and manage agreements with other nations to avoid duplicating social security and other taxes and benefits for workers who have been employed both in the u.s. and in another country , commonly known as totalization agreements . for example , in 2003 we reported on ssa's issuance of ssns to foreign - born noncitizens . gao has over the past few years studied several issues related to these topics . congress and ssa have also improved laws and procedures designed to strengthen program integrity in the payment of benefits to the foreign - born . some foreign - born individuals are eligible for one of three kinds of social security cards depending in part on their immigration status: ( 1 ) regular cards , ( 2 ) those valid for work only with authorization from the department of homeland security ( dhs ) , and ( 3 ) those that are not valid for work — nonwork cards . due to provisions of the social security protection act of 2004 , some foreign - born individuals who were not authorized to work will no longer be eligible for benefits . congress has enacted recent legislation strengthening the ssn enumeration process and documentation requirements . amendments to the social security act in 1996 require individuals to be lawfully present in the u.s. to receive social security benefits , though some noncitizens can receive benefits while living abroad , such as noncitizens who have worked in the u.s. and in a country with which the u.s. has a totalization agreement . the agreements help eliminate dual taxation and social security coverage that multinational employers and employees encounter when workers temporarily reside in a foreign country with its own social security program . ssa is implementing the law and is improving document verification and now requires third - party verification of noncitizen documents such as birth certificates and visual inspection of documents before issuing an ssn . ssa's totalization agreements coordinate taxation and public pension benefits . both ssa's inspector general and gao have identified weaknesses in ssa procedures for assigning ssns and issuing cards , also known as enumeration . ssa also continues to strengthen program integrity by , for example , restricting the number of replacement cards it issues .
my testimony today is based on our report being released today , entitled nuclear power plants: efforts made to upgrade security , but the nuclear regulatory commission's design basis threat process should be improved ( gao - 06-388 ) . our march 2006 report examined ( 1 ) the process nrc used to develop the april 2003 dbt for nuclear power plants , ( 2 ) the actions nuclear power plants have taken to enhance security in response to the revised dbt , and ( 3 ) nrc's efforts to strengthen the conduct of its force - on - force inspections . to defend against a potential terrorist attack , nrc issues and enforces security - related regulations and orders , and nuclear power plant licensees implement security measures to meet nrc requirements . i am pleased to be here today to discuss our recent work on security of the nation's 103 operating commercial nuclear power plants , located at 65 sites in 31 states . as you know , nuclear power plants were among the targets considered in the original plan for the september 11 , 2001 , terrorist attacks . furthermore , according to the nuclear regulatory commission ( nrc ) , which regulates and oversees the safe operation and security of nuclear power plants , there continues to be a general credible threat of a terrorist attack on the nation's commercial nuclear power plants , in particular by al qaeda and like - minded islamic terrorist groups . in november 2004 , nrc began using its force - on - force inspection program to test sites' ability to defend against the revised dbt . after revising the dbt , nrc required nuclear power plant sites to submit new security plans by april 29 , 2004 , for its review and approval and to implement the security described in their new plans by october 29 , 2004 . nrc originally included this provision in its regulations in 1967 ( prior to issuing the first dbt for nuclear power plants ) . despite these differences , both agencies used similar intelligence information to derive key aspects of their dbts . in particular , nrc formulates a design basis threat ( dbt ) — the threat that plants must defend against — and tests plants' ability to defend against the dbt . as a result , one of the nrc threat assessment staff's major challenges has been to decide how to apply this limited information to nuclear power plants in the united states . inclusion of such weapons in the nrc dbt for nuclear power plants would have required plants to take substantial additional security measures . such an attack could cause a release of radioactive material and endanger public health and safety through exposure to an elevated level of radiation . nrc has made a number of improvements to the force - on - force inspection program , several of which address recommendations we made in our september 2003 report on nrc's oversight of security at commercial nuclear power plants . terrorist attacks have generally occurred outside the united states , and intelligence information specific to nuclear power plants is very limited . nrc periodically reviews the potential terrorist threat to determine whether to make changes to the dbt .
concern about the nation's preparedness to respond to an influenza pandemic has been growing for some time , in part because of the increase in the number of identified human cases of avian influenza in asia . i am pleased to have the opportunity to provide information on our recent review of the 2004 – 05 influenza vaccine shortage , with lessons to consider as the nation improves its ability to respond to an influenza pandemic ( a global influenza outbreak resulting from a major genetic change in the influenza virus ) . studies suggest that a pandemic's effects in the united states could be severe , and shortages of vaccine could occur . the nation's experience responding to the shortage of annual influenza vaccine for the 2004 – 05 influenza season — in which the nation faced an unexpected loss of nearly half its projected vaccine supply — offers insight into the some of the challenges that federal , state , and local entities will face if a pandemic occurs . this body of work includes interviews with officials in the department of health and human services ( hhs ) , such as officials from the centers for disease control and prevention ( cdc ) and the national vaccine program office . the absence of such a plan led to delays and uncertainties on the part of state and local public health entities on how best to ensure access to vaccine by individuals at high risk of severe influenza - related complications . second , streamlined mechanisms to expedite vaccine availability are key to an effective response . during the 2004 – 05 shortage , for example , federal purchases of vaccine licensed for use in other countries but not the united states were not completed in time to meet peak demand . my statement includes findings from our recent report on last winter's influenza vaccine shortage and discusses lessons learned from that experience that could help prepare the nation to respond to future vaccine shortages in either an annual influenza season or an influenza pandemic . we also interviewed officials from public health departments and a major influenza vaccine manufacturer ; national organizations , including the association of state and territorial health officials and the association of immunization managers ; organizations that conduct mass immunization clinics ; and a large purchaser of influenza vaccine . some states' experience also highlighted the importance of mechanisms to transfer available vaccine quickly and easily from one state to another . third , effective response requires clear and consistent communication . consistency among federal , state , and local communications is critical for averting confusion . my statement also draws from several gao reports and testimonies on influenza vaccine supply , pandemic planning , and emergency preparedness for emerging infectious diseases that we have issued since october 2000 . since 2000 , we have encouraged the development of a plan to address critical issues that could arise in an influenza pandemic . at the start of the 2004 – 05 influenza season , when the nation unexpectedly lost roughly half its projected influenza vaccine supply , the nation lacked a contingency plan specifically for a severe vaccine shortage . state and local health officials also emphasized the value of updated information when responding to changing circumstances , using diverse media to reach diverse audiences , and educating providers and the public about prevention alternatives .
since the onset of operation enduring freedom ( oef ) in october 2001 and operation iraqi freedom ( oif ) in march 2003 , the department of defense ( dod ) has reported that more than 12,000 servicemembers have been injured in combat . specifically , we ( 1 ) reviewed va's efforts to expedite vocational rehabilitation services to seriously injured servicemembers and ( 2 ) determined the status of an agreement between dod and va to share health data . to ensure the continuity of medical care as a first priority as well as to coordinate efforts to ensure access to all other va benefits , such as vocational rehabilitation , va formed its seamless transition task force in august 2003 . one key problem has been the lack of systematic data from dod about who is seriously injured , the nature of their injuries , and where the servicemembers received treatment . as dod and va have worked toward a seamless transition , dod raised concerns about privacy issues and the sharing of individually identifiable health data . in january 2005 , we reported that while va has given high priority to providing services to oef / oif servicemembers , it was challenged in its efforts to identify , locate , and follow up with seriously injured servicemembers . you asked us to testify on va's and dod's efforts to provide a seamless transition for seriously injured oef / oif servicemembers . we recommended that va and dod collaborate to reach an agreement for va to have access to dod data for seriously injured servicemembers that both departments agree are needed to promote recovery and return to work and both departments concurred . thank you for inviting me to share our perspectives on seriously injured servicemembers who could benefit from services offered by the department of veterans affairs ( va ) , such as vocational rehabilitation , disability compensation , and health care , as they transition from servicemember to veteran status . to obtain systematic data from dod on seriously injured oef / oif servicemembers who may need va services , dod and va have been working on an agreement to exchange servicemembers' health data for over 2 years . while many return to active duty after they are treated , others who are more seriously injured are likely to be discharged from their military obligations and return to civilian life with disabilities . dod's and va's inability to resolve these differences has impeded coming to an agreement on exchanging servicemembers' individually identifiable health data . to do our work on the status of dod's and va's data sharing agreement , we reviewed a draft memorandum of understanding for the sharing of data between dod and va , pertinent provisions of the health insurance portability and accountability act of 1996 ( hipaa ) and the hipaa privacy rule , which govern the sharing of individually identifiable health data . dod's and va's inability to resolve these differences has impeded coming to an agreement on exchanging seriously injured servicemembers' individually identifiable health data . our january 2005 report on va's efforts to expedite vocational rehabilitation services to oef / oif servicemembers was based on interviews with officials at va headquarters and at 12 of va's 57 regional offices .
these issues relate to ( 1 ) the reasonableness of cost structures and agent practices in the title insurance market that are not typical of other insurance markets ; ( 2 ) activities identified in recent investigations that may have benefited real estate or other professionals rather than consumers ; and ( 3 ) proposed regulatory changes that would affect the way that title insurance is sold . as you are aware , title insurance is designed to ensure clear ownership of a property when it is sold or refinanced , and is a required part of most real estate purchases . we also had discussions with officials from national organizations whose members are involved in the marketing or sale of title insurance ; the national association of insurance commissioners ( naic ) ; the department of housing and urban development ( hud ) ; several state regulatory officials ; title insurers and agents ; and industry consultants . according to a recent national survey of lenders , title insurance can account for as much as one - third of loan origination and closing fees . recent investigations and studies have raised questions about practices and competition within the industry , in part because title insurance differs markedly from other types of insurance . for example , hud is considering revisions to regulations that implement the real estate settlement procedures act ( respa ) , and naic is considering changes to the model laws for title insurers and title agents . further review of the effects and feasibility of such changes will help congress , hud , and state regulatory agencies in their oversight and decision - making processes . second , although title agents play a key role in the underwriting process , the extent to which state insurance regulators review their operations is unclear . my remarks are based on a review of studies of the title insurance industry , title insurance regulations in selected states , and financial information on title insurers and agents . finally , multiple regulators oversee the different entities involved in the title insurance industry , but the degree of regulatory involvement and coordination among agencies is also not clear . first , while the amount of premium paid to or retained by title agents — generally to pay for title search and examination costs and agents' commissions — is commonly title insurers' largest expense , most states do not take these costs into account during premium rate reviews . the investigations alleged instances of real estate agents , mortgage brokers , lenders , and attorneys receiving referral fees ( or other inducements ) in return for steering business to particular title insurers or agents . my remarks today focus on our preliminary report , which identifies issues for further study that was completed as part of ongoing work in this area for the chairman of the house financial services committee . finally , some consumer advocates have suggested that requiring lenders to pay for the title policies from which they benefit might increase competition and ultimately lower costs for consumers , because lenders could then use their market power to force title insurers to compete for business based on price . third , while the competition among agents for their share of the business can be intense , the extent to which a competitive environment that benefits consumers exists within the title insurance market is also not clear .
we are pleased to be here today to discuss our work on how the departments of energy ( doe ) and defense ( dod ) use the designations official use only ( ouo ) and for official use only ( fouo ) , respectively , to manage information that is unclassified but sensitive . this report ( 1 ) identified and assessed the policies , procedures , and criteria that doe and dod employ to manage ouo and fouo information ; and ( 2 ) determined the extent to which doe's and dod's training and oversight programs assure that information is identified and marked according to established criteria . in summary , both doe and dod base their programs on the premise that information designated as ouo or fouo must ( 1 ) have the potential to cause foreseeable harm to governmental , commercial , or private interests if disseminated to the public or persons who do not need the information to perform their jobs ; and ( 2 ) fall under at least one of eight freedom of information act ( foia ) exemptions . my testimony today is based on our report issued earlier this month entitled managing sensitive information: departments of energy and defense policies and oversight could be improved ( gao - 06-369 ) . both agencies have policies in place to implement their programs . however , our analysis of these policies showed a lack of clarity in key areas that could allow inconsistencies and errors to occur .  ( see the appendix for a list and description of the exemptions of foia. ) . this lack of training requirements and oversight leaves doe and dod officials unable to assure that ouo and fouo documents are marked and handled in a manner consistent with agency policies and may result in inconsistencies and errors in the application of the programs . specifically: it is unclear which dod office is responsible for the fouo program , and whether personnel designating a document as fouo should note the foia exemption used as the basis for the designation on the document . both doe's and dod's policies are unclear regarding at what point a document should be marked as ouo or fouo and what would be an inappropriate use of the ouo or fouo designation . with regard to training and management oversight , we recommended that both doe and dod require personnel to be trained before they can designate information as ouo or fouo , and that they develop a system to conduct periodic oversight of ouo or fouo designations to assure that their policies are being followed . we also recommended that dod clarify its policies as to which office is responsible for the fouo program and that it require personnel designating a document as fouo also to note the foia exemption they used to determine that the information should be restricted . in addition , while both doe and dod offer training on their ouo and fouo policies , neither doe nor dod has an agencywide requirement that employees be trained before they designate documents as ouo or fouo . for example , ouo or fouo designations should not be used to conceal agency mismanagement . in closing , the lack of clear policies , effective training , and oversight in doe's and dod's ouo and fouo programs could result in both over - and underprotection of unclassified yet sensitive government documents .
the dod science and technology ( s&t ) community is tasked with ensuring that technologies are mature when dod's acquisition community takes over and integrates the technologies into weapon systems . the department of defense ( dod ) relies on the technological superiority of its weapon systems and armed forces to protect u.s. interests at home and abroad . in fiscal year 2006 , dod plans to spend approximately $13 billion in its science and technology efforts to develop technologies that are as innovative as stealth and global positioning were when they were first developed . although the united states has produced the best weapons in the world , its acquisition programs often incur cost overruns , schedule delays , and performance shortfalls that undermine dod's buying power . specifically , our objectives are to ( 1 ) identify techniques that commercial companies use to transition mature technologies before the start of product development and ( 2 ) assess the extent to which dod is using these techniques . this report examines the department of defense's ( dod ) efforts to improve its technology transition processes , with a focus on identifying specific management , funding , and organizational practices that could improve technology transition and weapon system outcomes . this dilemma is due in part to dod's difficulty transitioning technologies from a technology development environment to an acquisition program . dod has adopted some of these practices . dod relies on its s&t community to identify , pursue , and develop new technologies that improve and enhance military operations and ensure technological superiority over adversaries . development of dod's new weapon systems depends on two distinct phases: technology development and product development . achieving this balance is made more challenging because of the need to keep pace with or exceed the pace of innovation and to counter technologies developed by potential u.s. adversaries . this report examines dod's technology transition processes through the prism of best practices . specifically , our objectives were to ( 1 ) identify techniques that commercial companies use to transition mature technologies before the start of product development and ( 2 ) assess the extent to which dod is using these techniques . dod has continued to allow the acquisition community to take over this task before the s&t community considers the technologies ready for transition . numerous gao reports have addressed the problems of proceeding with immature technologies and have explained what leading commercial companies do to ward off such problems . boeing also has metrics that assess the technology's impact on orders for new airplanes and on its ability to reduce manufacturing costs . while dod is very aware of the need for new advanced technology in its weapon systems , it has not always been effective in transitioning mature and relevant technologies to product development . dod should take steps to improve its transition of technologies to more efficiently deliver capabilities to its warfighters . also , darpa uses relationship managers to expedite the efficient transition of technologies to products and dod has established other programs that institutionalize some best practices . in doing its work , the s&t community must strike a balance between meeting the short - term needs of today's warfighters and the long - term needs of future years' warfighters .
despite a massive deployment of resources and support from both military and civilian agencies , many have regarded the federal response as inadequate . when hurricane katrina made its final landfall along the louisiana / mississippi border on august 29 , 2005 , it quickly became one of the largest natural disasters in the history of the united states . to address our objectives , we interviewed officials from dod , the national guard , the military services , and defense agencies that participated in the response to hurricane katrina . as recovery operations continue , the nation is quickly approaching the 2006 hurricane season , and faces other natural and man - made threats that could result in a catastrophe at any instant . §12304 ( c ) ( 1 ) — that limits reserve component participation in catastrophic natural disasters . this report presents the results of our review of the military response to hurricane katrina , which examined ( 1 ) the extent to which pre - katrina plans and training exercises reflected the military assistance that might be required during a catastrophic , domestic , natural disaster , ( 2 ) the support that the military provided in responding to katrina and factors that affected that response , and ( 3 ) the actions the military is taking to address lessons learned from katrina and to prepare for the next catastrophic event . about 9 months prior to katrina's landfall , the national response plan ( nrp ) was issued to frame the federal response to domestic emergencies ranging from smaller , regional disasters to incidents of national significance . we currently have a large body of ongoing work to address preparation , response , recovery , and rebuilding efforts related to hurricanes katrina and rita . hurricane katrina response efforts were hampered by the federal government's failure to fully use its available assets to conduct timely , comprehensive damage assessments in louisiana and mississippi . as local , state , and federal governments responded in the days following katrina , confusion surfaced as to what responsibilities the military has and what capabilities it would provide in planning and responding to a catastrophic event . as a result , dod is taking some actions to address catastrophic disaster response problems . several additional examples of dod's planned efforts follow . it further recommended that dod seek ways to leverage reserve members' civilian skills in disaster relief efforts . while dod stated that the long - term focus of the u.s. government should be to develop more robust domestic disaster capabilities within the department of homeland security , it acknowledged that dod will need to assume a more robust response role in the interim period , and when other responders lack the resources and expertise to handle a particular disaster . since details about many of the department's actions were still emerging as we completed our review we were unable to fully assess the effectiveness of dod's actions . in addition , the plan's catastrophic incident supplement , which was supposed to have listed specific proactive actions agencies would take in response to a catastrophe , had not been approved during the 9 months between the plan's issuance and katrina's landfall .
in this report , we discuss ( 1 ) the current extent and potential for geothermal development ; ( 2 ) challenges faced by developers of geothermal resources ; ( 3 ) federal , state , and local government actions to address these challenges ; and ( 4 ) how provisions of the energy policy act of 2005 ( act ) are likely to affect federal geothermal royalty collections . this report formalizes the content of our briefings and our work since then , including: ( 1 ) the current extent of and potential for geothermal development ; ( 2 ) challenges faced by developers of geothermal resources ; ( 3 ) federal , state , and local government actions to address these challenges ; and ( 4 ) how provisions of the act are likely to affect federal geothermal royalty disbursements and collections . however , the act is new and insufficient time has passed to assess its effectiveness . increasing demand and rising prices for electricity and natural gas have increased interest in alternative forms of energy , including geothermal energy . to assist in these efforts , the congress has authorized the agencies to use the federal government's share of royalty collections to implement the geothermal program for 5 years . american families and businesses rely heavily on electricity and natural gas to heat and light homes and buildings , to power appliances , to manufacture goods , and to supply services . to assist in achieving the same level of geothermal royalties as would have been collected prior to the energy policy act of 2005 , we recommend that the secretary of the department of the interior instruct the appropriate managers within the minerals management service to take the following two actions: correct erroneous and missing royalty data , when necessary , so that it will have an accurate baseline of royalty collections for each payor ; and routinely collect from royalty payors the gross sales revenues for electricity sold in order to compare these revenues with past royalty collections and to verify compliance with the percentages prescribed within the act for leases to be issued in the future . without such knowledge , mms will have difficulty collecting the same level of royalties from lessees that elect to use the new royalty process . geothermal energy is a unique type of renewable resource in that it can provide power that is independent of weather and climate , thereby enabling a consistent and uninterrupted supply of heat and electricity . because many areas that have the potential to produce additional geothermal energy are located on federal lands , the federal government is a major participant in the future development of geothermal energy . although it is impossible to predict with reasonable assurance how these prices will change in the future , the federal agencies must make their best effort to mitigate the impact of changing prices if federal royalty revenue are to remain the same . blm's 5-year strategic plan for its geothermal program also attempts to address some challenges to federal leasing . geothermal energy also creates fewer environmental impacts than the production of natural gas and other conventional fossil fuels that are used to generate electricity . shortly thereafter , the congress passed the act , which contains provisions to simplify the federal royalties on electricity generation and reduce royalties on direct use .
and ( 4 ) how has the department of education ( education ) supported states in their efforts to assist schools in corrective action and restructuring status ? . over the past 40 years , the elementary and secondary education act of over the past 40 years , the elementary and secondary education act of 1965 ( esea ) has authorized billions of dollars in federal grants to states 1965 ( esea ) has authorized billions of dollars in federal grants to states and school districts to improve educational opportunities for economically and school districts to improve educational opportunities for economically disadvantaged students .  ( 3 ) what assistance have schools in corrective action and restructuring received from districts and states ? .  ( 2 ) to what extent have schools in corrective action and restructuring implemented corrective actions or restructuring options ? . take additional steps through education's monitoring process to ascertain whether states are ensuring that districts provide the assistance required by nclba . education agreed with our three recommendations to provide more guidance to states and districts , obtain more information on district implementation of corrective action and restructuring activities , and take additional steps to determine whether districts are providing assistance required by nclba . congress , with the enactment of the no child left behind act of 2001 ( nclba ) — the most recent reauthorization child left behind act of 2001 ( nclba ) however , many title i progress toward meeting state proficiency targets . while education noted that it is generally informed on the actions taken in schools in corrective action and restructuring , it agreed that more information is needed from states on district implementation of corrective action and restructuring activities and that it will consider options for gathering additional evidence on how states ensure that districts are complying with corrective action and restructuring requirements . finally , education agreed to consider ways for revising its monitoring procedures in order to obtain more information on how states determine whether districts are providing technical assistance to these schools , the types of assistance they provide , and the actions states take to address areas of noncompliance . obtain more specific information from states on district implementation , such as the primary activity that each school in corrective action and restructuring is implementing as well as more specific information on compliance issues states have identified as part of their monitoring activities . despite this investment , the academic performance of disadvantaged students is still substantially lower than performance of disadvantaged students is still substantially lower than that of more advantaged students . congress , with the enactment of the no that of more advantaged students . however , little is known about what specific corrective actions or restructuring options schools are currently implementing nationwide , the extent to which these actions are associated with making ayp , and the support that schools in corrective action and restructuring have received from school districts and states as they attempt to improve student performance . while education's state monitoring tool includes questions about how states monitor the implementation of school improvement plans , education officials acknowledged that the department may be able to strengthen its monitoring tool to determine whether state oversight of districts is adequate to ensure compliance .
the u.s. congress continues to be concerned about the the u.s. congress continues to be concerned about the underrepresentation of american professionals employed by some united underrepresentation of american professionals employed by some united nations ( un ) organizations and that insufficient progress has been made nations ( un ) organizations and that insufficient progress has been made to improve u.s. representation . in this report we reviewed ( 1 ) u.s. representation status and employment trends at five united nations ( un ) organizations , ( 2 ) factors affecting these organizations' ability to meet u.s. representation targets , and ( 3 ) the u.s. department of state's current efforts to improve u.s. representation and additional steps that could be taken . gao , united nations: targeted strategies could help boost u.s . in 2001 , we reported that several un to improve u.s. representation . representation , gao - 01-839 ( washington , d.c.: july 27 , 2001 ) . in 2001 , we reported and had not developed action plans or strategies for representation the equitable representation of americans at un organizations . we recommended that the secretary of state ( 1 ) develop a comprehensive strategy that specifies performance goals and time frames for achieving equitable representation of americans in the un system and include efforts to foster interagency coordination , ( 2 ) work with human resources directors of un organizations to develop plans and strategies for achieving equitable geographic representation within specified time frames , and ( 3 ) provide copies of state's annual report to congress on un progress to the heads of un organizations for appropriate attention and action . we reviewed five un organizations: the un secretariat ; international atomic energy agency ( iaea ) ; un educational , scientific , and cultural organization ( unesco ) ; office of the united nations high commissioner for refugees ( unhcr ) ; and un development program ( undp ) . state also has increased its efforts to improve overall u.s. representation , including adding staff to its un employment office and increasing coordination with other u.s. agencies ; however , despite these efforts , u.s. representation in entry - level positions has declined or did not reflect a trend in four of the five un agencies we reviewed . because equitable representation of americans employed at un organizations has been a high priority for u.s. interests , we recommend that the secretary of state take the following three actions: provide more consistent and comprehensive information about un employment on the state and u.s. mission web sites and work with u.s. agencies to expand the un employment information on their web sites . state has subsequently implemented these recommendations , including adding a performance indicator on the un's employment of americans to its performance and accountability documents . we also discussed u.s. strategies and efforts for increasing u.s. representation with un personnel officials and american employees of un organizations . while state increased its resources and activities in recent years to support increased u.s. representation overall , additional actions to facilitate the employment of americans in entry - and mid - level professional positions are needed to overcome declining u.s. employment in these positions and meet employment targets .
it is a pleasure to be back before this subcommittee to discuss the progress and challenges associated with the department of defense's ( dod ) efforts to transform its business operations . specifically , i will discuss dod's efforts to ( 1 ) develop a comprehensive , integrated , enterprisewide business transformation plan and its related leadership approach and ( 2 ) comply with legislation that addresses business systems modernization and improving financial management accountability . dod's current approach is clearly superior to its prior approach ; however , a number of formidable challenges remain . since the first financial statement audit of a major dod component was attempted almost 20 years ago , we have reported that weaknesses in business operations not only adversely affect the reliability of reported financial data , but also the economy , efficiency , and effectiveness of dod's operations . as a result , progress on the full range of dod's business transformation challenges has been inconsistent , focusing thus far on enterprisewide transformation , with many challenges remaining concerning the transformation of the various military services and defense agencies . among these difficult choices will be decisions about the affordability and sustainability of the continued growth in defense spending . eight of these are specific to dod and include dod's overall approach to business transformation , business systems modernization , financial management , the personnel security clearance process , supply chain management , support infrastructure management , weapon systems acquisition , and contract management . in fact , dod currently bears responsibility , in whole or in part , for 14 of our 26 high - risk areas . our nation is not only threatened by external security threats , but also from within by growing fiscal imbalances due primarily to our aging population and rising health care costs . congress , in part through the leadership of this subcommittee , passed legislation that codified many of our prior recommendations related to dod business systems modernization . however , dod's ability to focus on this priority was overshadowed by the events of september 11 , 2001 , and the ensuing global war on terrorism , including military operations in iraq and afghanistan . if left unchecked , these fiscal imbalances will ultimately impede economic growth , have an adverse effect on our future standard of living , and in due course affect our ability to address key national and homeland security needs . in fact , because of the impact of the department's business operations on its warfighters , dod recognizes now , more than ever , the need to transform its business operations and provide transparency in this process . in addition , dod shares responsibility for six governmentwide high - risk areas . these trends are compounded by the near - term deficits arising from new discretionary and mandatory spending as well as lower revenues as a share of the economy . dod's business area weaknesses result in reduced efficiencies , ineffective performance , and inadequate accountability to congress and the american people , wasting billions of dollars each year at a time when dod is competing for resources in an increasingly fiscally constrained environment . furthermore , irrespective of the size of the defense budget , the taxpayers and warfighters deserve more effective management of dod's overall resources .
our objectives were to ( 1 ) assess irs's 2006 filing season performance in processing paper and electronically filed tax returns and providing telephone , web site , and face - to - face assistance relative to 2006 goals and prior years' performance ; ( 2 ) identify potential cost savings or other improvements ; and ( 3 ) report on the status of irs's taxpayer assistance blueprint ( tab ) , which is intended to be the long - term strategy for cost effectively delivering services that meet taxpayer needs . another challenge is continuing progress on the business systems modernization ( bsm ) program , irs's ongoing effort to replace its aged computer systems . in past reports and testimonies we said that irs has made significant progress improving taxpayer service since passage of the irs restructuring and reform act of 1998 ( rra 98 ) . in fiscal year 2006 , the internal revenue service ( irs ) spent approximately $4.1 billion or 38 percent of its $10.8 billion budget on processing income tax returns and providing taxpayer assistance , with most of this occurring during the annual tax filing season . for example , the president's proposed fiscal year 2007 budget for irs would cut staffing by over 2 percent . we testified on irs's interim 2006 performance in a hearing held by your subcommittee on oversight , house committee on ways and means , on april 6 , 2006 . our assessment is based on the reported results and analysis of key irs performance measures , observations of irs's operations , interviews with irs officials , information from representatives of the paid tax preparer community , and analyses by the treasury inspector general for tax administration ( tigta ) . during the 2006 filing season , taxpayers filed an estimated 131 million individual income tax returns and received almost $218 billion in refunds . earlier this year we testified that proposed reduced funding levels could affect the pace of modernization and ultimately of improving service and enforcement . at the same time , irs has ambitious goals of maintaining or improving filing season services , while also maintaining or increasing enforcement activities in order to improve voluntary compliance by 2009 . irs's filing season performance is a key indicator of how well irs is serving taxpayers and helping them fulfill their tax responsibilities . however , we also described challenges to continued progress . in light of these challenges and the tax filing season's cost and importance to taxpayers , you asked us to assess irs's 2006 filing season performance . to assess irs's 2006 filing season performance in the key filing season activities — paper and electronic processing , plus telephone , web site , and face - to - face assistance — compared to goals and past performance , and report on the status of the tab , we reviewed and analyzed irs reports , testimonies , budget submissions , and other documents and data , including workload data and data related to irs's current suite of balanced performance measures and annual goals ; analyzed staffing data for paper and electronic processing , telephone assistance , and walk - in assistance ; tested for statistically significant differences between annual performance measures based on sample data ; observed operations at irs's atlanta and cincinnati paper processing centers , the atlanta call site and joint operations center , and 4 of irs's 400 walk - in locations ; reviewed legislation , policies , and procedures ; reviewed information from organizations that evaluate internet performance ; reviewed related tigta reports and interviewed tigta officials about irs's performance and initiatives ; reviewed prior gao reports and followed up on our recommendations made in prior filing season and related reports ; interviewed irs officials about current operations , performance relative to 2006 performance goals and prior filing season performance , trends , and significant factors and initiatives that affected or were intended to improve performance ; and interviewed representatives of the few larger private and nonprofit organizations that prepare tax returns including h&r block and trade organizations that represent both individual paid tax preparers and tax preparation companies including the american institute of certified public accountants .
the objectives of this report were to ( 1 ) describe trends in the financial condition of banks and thrifts and federal regulators' oversight of these institutions since the passage of the federal deposit insurance corporation improvement act of 1991 ( fdicia ) , ( 2 ) evaluate how federal regulators used the capital or prompt corrective action ( pca ) provisions of fdicia to resolve capital adequacy issues at the institutions they regulate , ( 3 ) evaluate the extent to which federal regulators use the noncapital provisions of fdicia to identify and address weaknesses at the institutions they regulate , and ( 4 ) describe the federal deposit insurance corporation's ( fdic ) deposit insurance system and how recent changes to the system affect the determination of depository institutions' risk and insurance premiums . in response to the federal banking regulators' failure to take appropriate action , congress passed the federal deposit insurance corporation improvement act of 1991 ( fdicia ) , implementing significant changes to the way banking regulators supervise the nation's depository institutions . specifically , this report ( 1 ) describes trends in the financial condition of banks and thrifts and federal regulators' oversight of these institutions since the passage of fdicia , ( 2 ) evaluates how federal regulators have used pca to resolve capital adequacy issues at the institutions they regulate , ( 3 ) evaluates the extent to which federal regulators have used the noncapital supervisory actions of sections 38 and 39 to address weaknesses at the institutions they regulate , and ( 4 ) describes fdic's deposit insurance system and how recent changes to the system affect the determination of institutions' risk and insurance premiums . with the failure of more than 2,900 federally insured banks and thrifts in the 1980s and early 1990s , federal regulators were criticized for failing to take timely and forceful action to address the causes of these failures and prevent losses to the deposit insurance fund and taxpayers . the federal reserve noted that pca has substantively enhanced the agency's authority to resolve serious problems expeditiously and that pca has generally worked effectively in the problem situations where its use became applicable . our review focused on fdic , the board of governors of the federal reserve system ( federal reserve ) , the office of the comptroller of the currency ( occ ) , and the office of thrift supervision ( ots ) and was limited to depository institutions . fdic issued its final rule implementing changes in november 2006 . to address these objectives , we reviewed relevant laws , regulations , and regulators' policies and procedures and interviewed officials from the four federal banking regulators — fdic , the board of governors of the federal reserve system ( federal reserve ) , the office of the comptroller of the currency ( occ ) , and the office of thrift supervision ( ots ) — as well as industry officials and academics . fdicia created two new sections in the federal deposit insurance act ( fdia ) — sections 38 and 39 — that required the federal banking regulators to create a two - part framework to supplement their existing supervisory authority to address capital deficiencies and unsafe or unsound conduct , practices , or conditions .
it ( 1 ) describes the policies , regulations , and guidelines that agencies have established to mark and publicize foreign assistance ; ( 2 ) describes how the department of state ( state ) , usaid , and other agencies mark and publicize foreign assistance ; and ( 3 ) identifies key challenges that agencies face in marking and publicizing foreign assistance . the negative perceptions of the united states , associated with u.s. foreign policy initiatives , have underscored the importance of the united states presenting a complete portrayal of the benefits that many countries in the world derive from u.s. foreign assistance efforts . congress has expressed concerns that the united states has frequently understated or not publicized information about its foreign assistance programs and , as a result , the generosity of the people of the united states has not been fully understood abroad . the united states is one of the largest donors of foreign assistance to countries around the world ; however , many of the recipients of this aid are unaware that it is provided by the united states . to help the united states ensure that recipients of its foreign assistance are aware that this assistance is provided by the united states and its taxpayers , we are making two recommendations . a recent worldwide survey by the pew research center and our reports have noted that negative perceptions of the united states increased in recent years in response to u.s. foreign policy initiatives , particularly in the middle east . to facilitate state's effort to implement its planned governmentwide guidance for marking and publicizing all u.s. foreign assistance programs and activities , we recommend that the secretary of state , in consultation with other u.s. executive agencies , establish interagency agreements for marking and publicizing all u.s. foreign assistance . to enhance u.s. marking and publicity efforts , and to improve the information used to measure the impact of u.s. marking and publicizing programs , we recommend that the secretary of state , in consultation with other u.s. executive agencies , develop a strategy , which appropriately utilizes techniques such as surveys and focus groups , to better assess the impact of u.s. marking and publicity programs and activities on public awareness . according to the united states agency for international development ( usaid ) , marking of foreign assistance refers to using methods such as applying graphic identities or logos to program materials or project signage to visibly acknowledge contributors and identify organizations supporting the work . usaid has begun to develop guidance on measuring the effectiveness of its publicity efforts . we conducted fieldwork in washington , d.c. ; new york city ; indonesia ; liberia ; montenegro ; peru ; serbia ; and south africa . in fiscal year 2005 , the united states provided about $20 billion in humanitarian and development assistance throughout the world to , among other things , relieve suffering , educate children , feed the hungry , promote economic opportunity , and support democracy and human rights . as requested , this report focuses on the efforts of key u.s. agencies to mark or publicize u.s. foreign assistance . usaid has only completed a limited number of surveys to measure public awareness of u.s. assistance , including a public opinion survey of u.s. post - tsunami efforts in indonesia .
the foundation laid by the chief financial officers ( cfo ) act of 1990 and other management reform legislation provides a basis to improve the accountability of government programs and operations as well as to routinely produce valuable cost and operating performance information . from a broad financial management perspective , the federal government's deteriorating long - range financial condition and long - term fiscal imbalance are matters of increasing concern . while certain material weaknesses in internal control and in selected accounting and financial reporting practices continue to prevent gao from being able to issue an opinion on the consolidated financial statements of the u.s. government , the federal government has come a long way since enactment of the cfo act . we face large and growing structural deficits due primarily to known demographic trends and rising health care costs . this will be important as the federal government faces difficult fiscal challenges that will require reliable cost and performance information to support timely decisions on spending and , at the same time , pressures to address fraud , waste , abuse , and mismanagement will only intensify . understanding and addressing the federal government's financial condition and long - term fiscal imbalance are critical to maintain fiscal flexibility so that we can respond to emerging social , economic , and security challenges . at the same time , there is a continuing need to address persistent , long - standing accountability problems and to take financial management to the next level . there is a need to engage in a fundamental review , reprioritization , and reengineering of the base of government . your decision to begin this congress with a hearing on these important issues demonstrates the seriousness with which this subcommittee views the financial management challenges facing the federal government and your commitment to address them . today i would like to: outline progress made to date and the key challenges in improving federal financial management practices , and highlight the challenges posed by the government's fiscal condition and my views on a possible way forward . i am pleased to be here today to testify on the progress made towards a results - oriented , accountable , and relevant government and the challenges that must be addressed to provide accountability and exercise stewardship . the federal government has made tremendous progress , and sustained congressional attention has been and will continue to be a critical factor to ensuring achievement of the goals and objectives of management reform legislation . these weaknesses adversely affect the department's and the federal government's ability to control costs ; ensure basic accountability ; anticipate future costs and claims on the budget ; measure performance ; maintain funds control ; prevent fraud , waste , and abuse ; and address pressing management problems . the principal challenges remaining are ( 1 ) transforming financial management and business practices at dod , ( 2 ) improving financial and performance reporting , ( 3 ) modernizing financial management systems , ( 4 ) tackling long - standing internal control weaknesses , ( 5 ) building a financial management workforce for the future , and ( 6 ) strengthening consolidated financial reporting . this legislation includes the ( 1 ) cfo act of 1990 , ( 2 ) government performance and results act of 1993 ( gpra ) , ( 3 ) government management reform act of 1994 ( gmra ) , ( 4 ) federal financial management improvement act of 1996 ( ffmia ) , ( 5 ) clinger - cohen act of 1996 , ( 6 ) accountability of tax dollars act of 2002 ( atda ) , and ( 7 ) improper payments information act of 2002 ( ipia ) .
since september 11 , 2001 , tsa has focused much of its efforts and resources on meeting legislative mandates to strengthen commercial aviation security . within the department of transportation ( dot ) , the federal transit administration ( fta ) and federal railroad administration ( fra ) have responsibilities for passenger and freight rail safety and security . regarding passenger rail security , key department of homeland security ( dhs ) stakeholders with critical roles include the transportation security administration ( tsa ) , which is responsible for securing all modes of transportation , and the office for grants and training ( ogt ) , which provides grant funds to rail operators and conducts risk assessments for passenger rail agencies . in particular , my testimony highlights three key areas: ( 1 ) the actions that dhs and its component agencies have taken to assess the risks posed by terrorism to the u.s. passenger rail system ; ( 2 ) the actions that tsa and other federal agencies have taken to enhance the security of the u.s. passenger rail system ; and ( 3 ) the security practices that domestic and selected foreign passenger rail operators have implemented to mitigate risks and enhance security . however , tsa has recently placed additional focus on securing surface modes of transportation , particularly in the area of passenger rail security . surface transportation , which includes passenger and freight rail , mass transit , highways , and pipelines , are inherently open and difficult to secure . one of the critical challenges facing these federal agencies , and rail system operators they oversee or support , is finding ways to protect rail systems from potential terrorist attacks without compromising the accessibility and efficiency of rail travel . in this regard , to help federal decision makers determine how to best allocate limited resources , we have advocated , the national commission on terrorist attacks upon the united states ( the 9 / 11 commission ) has recommended , and the intelligence reform and terrorism prevention act of 2004 provides that a risk management approach be employed to guide decision making related to homeland security resources . the madrid commuter rail attacks in march 2004 , london rail bombings in july 2005 , and mumbai , india train bombings just last year , highlight the vulnerabilities of passenger rail and other surface transportation systems and made clear that even when security precautions are put into place , these systems remain vulnerable to attack . while securing surface transportation systems is a daunting task — a shared responsibility requiring coordinated action on the part of federal , state , and local governments and the private sector — it is important nonetheless to take the necessary steps to identify and mitigate risks to these systems . as we have reported previously , the sheer number of stakeholders involved in securing surface transportation modes , including passenger rail , can sometimes lead to communication challenges , duplication of effort , and confusion about roles and responsibilities . until tsa completes this effort , the agency may be limited in its ability to prioritize passenger rail assets and help guide security investment decisions about protecting them . within and among all modes of transportation , there is competition for resources , as federal , state , and local agencies and transportation operators seek to identify and invest in appropriate security measures to safeguard these systems while also investing in other capital and operational improvements .
the department of housing and urban development's ( hud ) housing assistance programs in our scope include the three major rental assistance programs — housing choice voucher ( voucher ) , public housing , and project - based programs ( including the project - based section 8 , section 202 supportive housing for the elderly , and section 811 supportive housing for persons with disabilities programs ) . the department of housing and urban development ( hud ) is the primary federal provider of rental housing assistance through its housing choice voucher , public housing , and project - based programs . disproportionately large numbers of military veterans have appeared among the homeless population in recent years , raising concerns about the incomes and housing conditions of veterans who rent , rather than own , their homes . according to the department of veterans affairs ( va ) , on any given night at least 194,000 veterans were homeless in fiscal year 2005 — about one - third of the adult homeless population — and many veteran renters could be on the verge of homelessness if they have low incomes or precarious living conditions in overcrowded or substandard housing . the return of more veterans from service in iraq and afghanistan — some with significant physical and psychological challenges — could increase demand for affordable housing with supportive services such as mental health and substance abuse treatment . as our report states , our reporting objectives addressed both of these issues: ( 1 ) how hud's rental assistance programs treat veteran status ( that is , whether a person is a veteran or not ) and veteran - specific benefits in determining eligibility and subsidy amounts and ( 2 ) the extent to which phas and property owners participating in hud's rental assistance programs establish a veterans' preference in their administrative and tenant selection plans . specifically , this report discusses ( 1 ) the income status and demographic and housing characteristics of veteran renter households ; ( 2 ) how hud's rental assistance programs treat veteran status ( that is , whether a person is a veteran or not ) and veteran - specific benefits in determining eligibility and subsidy amounts ; ( 3 ) the extent to which phas and property owners participating in hud's rental assistance programs establish a veterans' preference in their administrative and tenant selection plans ; and ( 4 ) the extent to which hud's rental assistance programs served veteran households in fiscal year 2005 . however , neither the va nor other government agencies report information specifically on the housing conditions or housing costs of veterans who rent . furthermore , how veteran / nonveteran status affects eligibility for hud programs is distinct from whether or not a preference is extended once eligibility has been established . among veteran households with a disability , about 41,000 ( or 46 percent ) received assistance from vouchers . to determine the income status and demographic and housing characteristics of veteran households , we utilized the bureau of the census's ( census ) 2005 american community survey ( acs ) , which identified households' veteran status , income , and other demographic characteristics , in conjunction with hud's defined income categories — low ( 80 percent of ami or less ) , very low ( 50 percent of ami or less ) , and extremely low ( 30 percent of ami or less ) .
while the mma assigned the majority of the responsibilities for implementing medicare part d prescription drug program to the department of health and human services and its centers for medicare and medicaid services ( cms ) , it charged the social security administration ( ssa ) with administering the low - income subsidy . you asked us to review ( 1 ) the progress that ssa has made in identifying and soliciting applications from individuals potentially eligible for the low - income subsidy ; ( 2 ) the processes that ssa uses to make eligibility determinations , resolve appeals , and conduct redeterminations for the subsidy ; and ( 3 ) the impact that the subsidy had on ssa's workload and other operations . to help the elderly and disabled with these costs , the congress passed the medicare prescription drug , improvement , and modernization act ( mma ) of 2003 , which created a voluntary outpatient prescription drug benefit ( medicare part d ) . according to recent studies , such high costs may cause some elderly patients to forgo or restrict their use of prescription drugs . this effort could also aid in developing more precise estimates of the eligible population and help to better inform the congress on legislative proposals to allow irs to share tax data with ssa to assist the agency with its outreach efforts . high prescription drug costs can have a detrimental effect on low - income seniors and the disabled , who are more likely than others to suffer from chronic medical problems requiring prescription drugs . a key element of the prescription drug benefit is the low - income subsidy , or “extra help,” available to medicare beneficiaries with limited incomes and resources to assist them in paying their premiums and other out - of - pockets costs . in this capacity , ssa is responsible for conducting outreach efforts to identify and notify individuals of the availability of the subsidy , making subsidy eligibility determinations , resolving appeals , and conducting redeterminations of beneficiaries' continued subsidy eligibility . the benefit , which became available in january 2006 , enables medicare beneficiaries to enroll in drug plans sponsored by private companies . although no reliable data currently exist on the population of individuals who might qualify for the subsidy , ssa does not need such data to establish specific performance goals and measures to assess its outreach efforts . without such goals and measures , ssa will not have a means to assess the effectiveness of its efforts , or to identify areas that require improvement as it moves forward . ssa has made progress in approving individuals for the low - income subsidy , but has not established specific performance goals and measures for its outreach activities . the extent of additional outreach efforts will also depend on ssa's ability to more precisely identify remaining individuals eligible for the subsidy . having such goals and measures takes on heightened importance now since ssa is conducting outreach efforts on a more limited basis . ssa is also responsible for withholding part d premiums from monthly social security benefits for beneficiaries who select this option . to assess the social security administration's ( ssa ) implementation of the medicare part d low - income subsidy , we reviewed the medicare prescription drug , improvement , and modernization act of 2003 ( mma ) to understand ssa's responsibilities under the law .
our objectives for this report were to determine the extent to which ( 1 ) the air force's on - order and on - hand secondary inventory reflects the amount of inventory needed to support requirements from fiscal years 2002 through 2005 , and ( 2 ) the air force had shortages in its inventory needed to support requirements from fiscal years 2002 through 2005 . at a time when u.s. military forces and their equipment are in high demand , the effectiveness and efficiency of the department of defense's ( dod ) inventory management is critical to ensure that the warfighter is supplied with the right items at the right time . dod has reduced the overall value of its secondary inventory — from more than $100 billion in 1990 to about $67 billion as of september 30 , 2002 . each of the military services and the defense logistics agency ( dla ) maintain a supply of secondary inventory of spare parts to keep military equipment operating for its missions . since 1990 , we have identified the department's management of its secondary inventory as a high - risk area due to ineffective and inefficient inventory management systems and procedures and high levels of inventory not needed to support required inventory levels ( hereafter referred to as requirements ) . inventory that is not in dod's possession but for which contracts have been awarded or funds have been committed is considered to be on order . the air force represents an average of about 39 percent ( $28.9 billion ) of the value of dod's total on - hand inventory . to meet customer expectations while minimizing inventory and to reduce the air force's inventory not needed to support requirements , we are recommending that the secretary of defense direct the secretary of the air force to take the following four actions: modify its policies to provide incentives to reduce purchases of on - order inventory that are not needed to support requirements , such as requiring contract termination review for all unneeded on - order inventory or reducing the funding available for the air force materiel command by an amount up to the value of the air force's on - order inventory that is not needed to support requirements ; conduct a comprehensive assessment of the inventory items on hand that are not needed to support requirements and that have no recurring demands and revalidate the need to continue to retain these items , and , as part of this assessment , consider establishing ongoing requirements for items supporting weapon systems that have lengthy projected life spans ; evaluate the reasons why the air force continually experiences decreases in demands which have contributed to having more than half of its inventory on hand not needed to support requirements ; and after evaluating the reasons for the decreases in demand , determine what actions are needed to address these decreases and then take steps to implement these actions . however , in recent years the trend has been reversed due to increases in the value and quantity and changes in the mix of items in dod inventory , with inventory values increasing to about $80 billion as of september 30 , 2005 , which is a 19 percent increase from september 30 , 2002 , to september 30 , 2005 .
recently , however , nasa acknowledged that the program has experienced cost growth exceeding $1 billion — which increased its life - cycle cost estimate from $3.5 billion to $4.5 billion — and its schedule has slipped nearly 2 years . because of the restructuring and past cost and schedule problems , we reviewed the program to determine the extent to which the jwst program's acquisition strategy follows nasa acquisition policy and government accountability office ( gao ) best practices for ensuring that adequate product knowledge is used to make informed investments . to assess the extent to which the jwst acquisition strategy follows nasa policy and gao best practices for ensuring readiness to proceed into implementation , we reviewed nasa policy on program management and compared the jwst project office's management approach to nasa policy . to assess the extent to which the jwst acquisition strategy follows nasa policy and gao best practices for ensuring readiness to proceed into implementation , we reviewed nasa policy guidance and compared it with the jwst program's acquisition strategy . instruct the jwst program to continue to adhere to nasa acquisition policy and base the program's go / no - go review ( nar ) decision not only on adherence to that policy , but also on ( 1 ) the program's ability to demonstrate whether it is meeting the knowledge markers outlined earlier and ( 2 ) whether adequate funds are available to execute the program . as the expected follow - on to the tremendously successful hubble space telescope , the national aeronautics and space administration's ( nasa ) james webb space telescope ( jwst ) is being designed to explore the early universe and allow scientists to shed light on the origins and nature of the universe by allowing them to look deeper into space — and thus farther back in time — than ever before . the agency restructured the program and is now anticipating a launch no sooner than june 2013 . our nation faces large , growing , and structural long - term fiscal imbalances . the jwst program recently revised its acquisition strategy to conform to nasa's acquisition policies ; however , the program still faces considerable challenges . we also benchmarked the jwst acquisition strategy to best practices . using a knowledge - based approach for nasa's new development programs such as the jwst could help the agency make the difficult choices about how to allocate its limited budget resources among competing priorities by utilizing common and consistent criteria in program evaluations . the program needs to have sufficient knowledge at key junctures to successfully address its challenges and use incremental markers to make certain that resources in terms of knowledge , time , workforce , and money match the requirements . given the severity of the fiscal challenges our nation faces and the wide range of competing federal programs , hard choices need to be considered across the government , and nasa is no exception . we conducted our work under the comptroller general's authority and are addressing this report to you because of your committee's or subcommittee's interest in nasa activities . we interviewed nasa and contractor officials to clarify our understanding of the program's management approach and technology development plan .
the objectives of this report were to ( 1 ) identify the key practices that selected u.s. cities are using to increase recycling , ( 2 ) describe what the environmental protection agency ( epa ) and the department of commerce ( commerce ) are doing to encourage recycling nationwide , and ( 3 ) identify federal policy options that stakeholders with recycling expertise believe could help increase recycling . we also recommend that the secretary of commerce develop and implement a strategy to stimulate the development of markets for recycled materials in the united states to fully meet its responsibilities under rcra subtitle e . epa agreed with our recommendation to establish performance measures and gather comprehensive performance data to evaluate the impact of its recycling programs . we recommend that the administrator , epa , establish performance measures and gather comprehensive performance data to evaluate the impact of epa's recycling programs to ensure that the agency's available resources are utilized in the most effective and efficient manner . in 2005 , the united states generated about 246 million tons of municipal solid waste , or over 1,600 pounds per person , according to the most current environmental protection agency ( epa ) estimates . moreover , epa stated that during fiscal years 2007 and 2008 , the agency intends to develop performance measures for key aspects of its municipal waste reduction program . in 1976 , the congress sought to reduce solid waste and encourage recycling as part of the resource conservation and recovery act ( rcra ) . under its resource conservation challenge ( rcc ) , epa operates several national and regional programs to support public and private sector efforts to increase recycling and to help epa reach its goal of recycling 35 percent of national municipal solid waste by 2008 . in addition , manufacturing products from recycled material can provide economic benefits to the extent that it requires less electricity , fuel , and water , which can result in lower production costs . without performance information to guide its efforts , epa has no way of knowing the extent to which its resources are being directed toward activities that are of the greatest benefit in helping to achieve the national recycling goal . you asked us to ( 1 ) identify the key practices that selected u.s. cities are using to increase recycling , ( 2 ) describe what epa and commerce are doing to encourage recycling nationwide , and ( 3 ) identify federal policy options that stakeholders with recycling expertise believe could help increase recycling . although epa has implemented several programs at the national and regional levels to encourage recycling , their effectiveness is unknown . additionally , without a commitment by commerce to actively encourage recycling by stimulating the development of markets for recycled materials in the united states , municipalities may have little incentive to recycle certain materials . while epa receives information about the accomplishments of some of its recycling programs , the agency has not established performance measures to help determine the extent to which its programs are contributing to meeting the national recycling goal of 35 percent by 2008 . for example , some states require municipalities to offer recycling programs ; 11 states have laws requiring deposits on beverage cans and bottles known as “bottle bills” ; and several states have passed electronic waste legislation , such as “extended producer responsibility laws” that require manufacturers to offer “take back” programs under which consumers may return computers and other electronic equipment for recycling .
given your interest in gsa's use of real property delegations of authority , you asked us to determine ( 1 ) what real property authority gsa has delegated to its tenant agencies , ( 2 ) what policies and procedures gsa used to manage delegated real property authority , and ( 3 ) reasons the tenant agencies requested delegated authority . the general services administration ( gsa ) serves as the federal government's landlord and designs , builds , manages , and leases the facilities supporting the needs of other federal agencies throughout the government . these six agencies are the departments of commerce , defense , interior , and justice ; the social security administration , and the environmental protection agency ( epa ) . the program was an outgrowth of gsa's commitment to streamline its leasing operations , respond to the government's changing needs , and address recommendations from client agencies . although gsa is responsible for managing over 8,000 government - owned and leased buildings , gsa's customer agencies may request authority to perform for themselves certain real property activities , such as leasing and maintaining their own space . in the absence of ( 1 ) accurate program data on the numbers and types of key authorities delegated , ( 2 ) current policies and procedures to help guide decisions to delegate , and ( 3 ) complete cost - effectiveness analyses , gsa cannot ensure that delegations are an efficient use of federal dollars or in the best interests of the government . we limited our review to the types of delegations issued to and exercised by gsa's top 10 customers ( its tenant agencies ) between fiscal years 1996 to 2006 . to meet these objectives , we reviewed the law , federal management regulations , and gsa's existing policies and procedures for delegating real property authority . effective management of its delegations is critical for gsa to help ensure that federal dollars are well - spent and adequate workspace is provided for federal employees . under this program , called “can't beat gsa leasing,” federal agencies have the choice of using gsa as their leasing agent or assuming responsibility of their own leasing . given your interest in the general services administration's ( gsa ) use of real property delegations of authority , we determined ( 1 ) what real property authority gsa has delegated to its tenant agencies , ( 2 ) what policies and procedures gsa uses to manage delegated real property authority , and ( 3 ) reasons the tenant agencies requested delegated authority . in addition , we interviewed officials from gsa's office of governmentwide policy ( ogp ) , which provides oversight for delegations of real estate leasing authority . we also interviewed gsa officials from the public buildings service ( pbs ) , which is responsible for managing the delegations . when gsa delegates its real property authority , the delegations require the agencies to comply with the applicable laws , regulations , and terms of the delegations . under the delegations , gsa can review the agency's performance to determine whether the agency is meeting its responsibilities . if federal agencies do not perform their delegated responsibilities efficiently , they could , for example , pay more than gsa would charge for space , provide substandard space for their employees , or damage the quality or value of the space .
these explosives are used by both public sector entities ( such as state and local government agencies ) and private sector companies for a variety of purposes — including mining , construction , avalanche control , and law enforcement . more than 5.5 billion pounds of explosives are used each year in the united states . in reviewing the security of state and local government explosives storage facilities , we focused on the bureau of alcohol , tobacco , firearms and explosives' ( atf ) role in overseeing and regulating these facilities , including the extent to which atf's licensing operations address state and local government facilities and what authority atf has to enforce federal explosives law and regulations at state and local government facilities . under current federal explosives laws and regulations , the bureau of alcohol , tobacco , firearms and explosives ( atf ) is responsible for licensing and regulating explosives manufacturers , importers , dealers , and users . nevertheless , current federal explosives law as enacted by congress does not provide atf with specific authority to conduct regulatory oversight with respect to public sector facilities . what authority does atf have to regulate and oversee state and local government explosives storage facilities and how does this compare with its authority over private sector storage facilities ? . further , because atf does not oversee state and local government storage facilities as part of the federal licensing process and atf does not have any other statutory authority to conduct regulatory inspections of these facilities , atf's ability to monitor the potential vulnerability of these facilities to theft or assess the extent to which these facilities are in compliance with federal explosives storage regulations is limited . it is primarily through its licensing authority that atf oversees and inspects privately owned explosives facilities to ensure they comply with explosives storage laws and regulations . atf's authority to regulate explosives stems originally from the organized crime control act of 1970 and was expanded further by enactment of the safe explosives act in 2002 . most of these security measures are not currently required under federal storage regulations ( perimeter fencing , for example ) . under federal regulations , only explosives licensees are required to perform periodic inventories and are subject to periodic atf regulatory inspections of their storage facilities ; other persons who store explosives are not . however , if state and local government entities are unsure about whether they are required to report thefts and missing explosives , atf's ability to monitor these incidents and take appropriate investigative action may be compromised by a potential lack of information . what security oversight measures are in place at selected state and local government storage facilities to ensure the safe and secure storage of explosives ? . more specifically , to obtain the perspectives of u.s. government agencies on their efforts to regulate and oversee state and local government explosives storage facilities , and to obtain information on the numbers of explosives thefts and law enforcement bomb squads , we contacted officials from the department of justice ( doj ) , atf , and the federal bureau of investigation ( fbi ) . key contributors to this report were william crocker , assistant director ; david alexander ; amy bernstein ; philip caramia ; geoffrey hamilton ; and michael harmond .
in this report , we ( 1 ) determine whether the continued development of the cmp has been consistent with leading industry practices , ( 2 ) examine what factors contributed to the changes in the cost estimate from 2002 to 2005 and determine whether the cost estimate was updated using industry practices , ( 3 ) review the status of financing of the planned renovation , ( 4 ) identify decisions needed for the renovation to continue as planned , and ( 5 ) review the un's efforts to oversee and the u.s. department of state's ( state ) efforts to monitor the planned renovation . the united nations ( un ) headquarters complex in new york city neither conforms to current safety , fire , and building codes nor meets un technology or security requirements . to address these concerns , the un has developed the capital master plan ( cmp ) — a comprehensive renovation of the entire complex . permanent representative to the united nations work with other member states to ensure that the secretariat identifies a procurement strategy for the cmp to mitigate the impact of weaknesses in un procurement processes and ensure that oios receives sufficient funding for its oversight of the cmp . in june 2006 , we testified that effective implementation of the cmp is vulnerable due to weaknesses in existing un oversight and procurement practices . in addition , oios will need sufficient funds to oversee compliance with un financial rules and regulations , as applied to the cmp project . as the un's host country and largest contributor , the united states continues to have a significant interest in the success of the renovation . in november 2006 , the cmp office updated the cost estimate to $1.88 billion . oios has been conducting oversight of the cmp office since 2003 and has not found any material weaknesses in its work . we also recommended that the secretary of state encourage the un to provide its internal and external oversight offices with the resources needed to conduct effective oversight . for example , we found that the un has yet to incorporate guidance for construction procurement into its procurement manual . to determine whether the continued development of the un's renovation project was consistent with leading industry practices , we reviewed un records , including reports and designs developed by the architect - engineering firms . in june 2001 and may 2003 , we reported that un renovation planning efforts had been reasonable and conformed to leading industry practices . oios relies on funds from the cmp budget to conduct effective oversight of the cmp , which may impair its ability to secure sufficient funds . we previously reported that oios's reliance on extrabudgetary funds and limitations on how oios may spend its funds constrains its ability to conduct effective oversight . however , the extent to which oios must negotiate with the un office of program planning , budget , and accounts ( oppba ) for future funding could affect oios's ability to conduct effective oversight of the cmp . we have previously reviewed un efforts to develop the cmp and prepare a cost estimate . oios also agreed with our conclusions and recommendations and noted that oios's current resources do not allow it to provide adequate audit coverage .
for decades , the department of defense ( dod ) has been urged by commissions , panels , and legislation to make increased use of commercial acquisitions to take advantage of the efficiencies of the commercial marketplace . specifically , we determined ( 1 ) the extent to which the air force has increased its use of commercial acquisition to obtain expected benefits and ( 2 ) the risks associated with air force use of commercial acquisition . to help ensure the increased use of commercial acquisition , the office of the secretary of defense ( osd ) established and the air force implemented two commercial acquisition goals to be achieved by the end of fiscal year 2005 . these were to double the dollar value of commercial acquisition contract actions awarded in 1999 ( for the air force this meant going from about $3 billion to about $6 billion ) and strive to increase the number of commercial contract actions awarded to 50 percent of all air force contract actions . in setting these goals , osd expected that the increased use of commercial acquisition would provide dod with greater access to commercial markets ( products and service types ) with increased competition , better prices , and new market entrants and / or technologies . dod partially agreed with our recommendation to measure the benefits expected from commercial acquisition by collecting information to evaluate the extent of cost savings , increased access to commercial markets , and greater access to nontraditional contractors . we reviewed the files associated with these contracts at air force materiel command ( afmc ) locations including ( 1 ) wright - patterson air force base , ohio ; ( 2 ) tinker air force base , oklahoma ; ( 3 ) robins air force base , georgia ; and ( 4 ) hanscom air force base , massachusetts . we encourage such efforts , and would expect that if dod collects information on nontraditional contractors it reaches using commercial acquisition and it is still unable to evaluate whether significant benefits exist from using commercial acquisition , dod will recognize the need to collect additional information . as its overall spending has increased , the air force has increased spending using commercial acquisition , from $4.8 billion in fiscal year 2001 to over $8 billion in fiscal year 2005 ( see fig . we also reviewed all air force contracts awarded in fiscal year 2004 for products over $5 million using commercial acquisition . however , in the cases where it is necessary to award sole - source , the secretary should collect the information necessary to evaluate the benefit ( s ) of awarding commercial verses a noncommercial contract . you asked us to examine the air force's efforts to meet these goals and identify any associated risks in commercial acquisition practices . to conduct our work , we collected and reviewed information on air force use of commercial acquisition from fiscal year 2001 through fiscal year 2005 . we believe dod is taking the first step necessary to evaluate whether it has benefited from the increased use of commercial acquisition . to help ensure that the air force is able to measure the benefits expected from commercial acquisition , we recommend collecting information that would allow evaluating the extent of cost savings , increased access to commercial markets , and greater access to nontraditional contractors .
authorized in 2003 , jpdo is housed within the federal aviation administration ( faa ) , whose air traffic organization ( ato ) is responsible for modernizing and operating the nation's current atc system .  ( 1 ) what is the status of jpdo's efforts to plan for ngats ? .  ( 2 ) what key challenges does jpdo face in moving forward with its planning efforts ? .  ( 3 ) what key challenges does faa face in transitioning from the current atc system and in implementing ngats ? . we appreciate the opportunity to participate in today's hearing to discuss the status of efforts by the joint planning and development office ( jpdo ) to plan for and coordinate the transformation of the nation's current air traffic control ( atc ) system to the “next generation air transportation system” ( ngats ) — a system intended to safely accommodate an expected tripling of air traffic by 2025 . according to vision 100 , the legislation that authorized jpdo , the transformation to ngats will be completed by 2025 with the assistance of seven organizations that make up jpdo's senior policy committee: the departments of transportation , commerce , defense , and homeland security ; faa ; the national aeronautics and space administration ( nasa ) ; and the white house office of science and technology policy . as jpdo plans the transformation to ngats and coordinates the related efforts of its partner agencies , faa will be responsible for both implementing the transformation and safely operating the current atc system 24 hours a day , 7 days a week . my statement is based on our analysis of documents provided by jpdo and its partner agencies ; the perspectives of agency officials and stakeholders with whom we have spoken ; the results of a panel of experts that we convened ; and our review of relevant literature , including jpdo's december 2004 integrated plan and march 2006 progress report . first , the successful implementation of ngats will depend on faa's incorporating the improved processes into its organizational structure and culture . the statement also draws on our prior work on faa's program for modernizing the national airspace system , which we have listed as a high - risk program since 1995 . second , faa may not have the expertise needed to manage the ngats implementation effort . faa faces challenges in institutionalizing recent improvements in its management and acquisition processes , as well as in obtaining the expertise and resources needed to implement ngats . third , faa will need resources to implement ngats , some of which may have to come from savings in operating and maintaining the current atc system . jpdo also faces the challenge of convincing nonfederal stakeholders that the government is fully committed to ngats because , in the past , the government has discontinued work on new technologies for the national airspace system , including one technology in which a nonfederal stakeholder had already invested . currently , two leadership positions critical to jpdo's success are vacant: jpdo has not had a permanent director for over 6 months , and since the secretary of transportation resigned , the senior policy committee has been without a permanent chairperson .
in response , congress passed the railroad revitalization and regulatory reform act of 1976 and the staggers rail act of 1980 . as you know , over 25 years ago , congress transformed federal regulation of the railroad industry . my comments today are based on our most recent reports issued in august 2007 and october 2006 , and cover ( 1 ) the changes that have occurred in the railroad industry since the enactment of the staggers rail act , including changes in rail rates since 1985 , ( 2 ) the extent of captivity in the industry and stb's efforts to protect captive shippers , and ( 3 ) stb's actions to address our recent recommendations . after almost 100 years of economic regulation , the railroad industry was in serious economic trouble in the 1970s , with rising costs , losses , and bankruptcies . railroad officials express concern that any attempt to increase economic regulation will reduce carriers' ability to earn sufficient revenues and limit future infrastructure investment . in particular , the 1980 act encouraged greater reliance on competition to set rates and gave railroads increased freedom to price their services according to market conditions , including the freedom to use differential pricing — that is , to recover a greater proportion of their costs from rates charged to shippers with a greater dependency on rail transportation . policymakers continue to believe that the federal government should provide a viable process to protect shippers against unreasonably high rates , as well as address competition issues , while still balancing the interests of both railroads and shippers . at the same time , the 1980 act anticipated that some shippers might not have competitive alternatives — commonly referred to as “captive shippers” — and gave the interstate commerce commission ( icc ) , and later the surface transportation board ( stb ) , the authority to establish a process so that shippers could obtain relief from unreasonably high rates . over the past 10 years , significant consolidation has taken place in the freight railroad industry , while railroads — particularly class i railroads — have seen their productivity and financial health improve . we appreciate the opportunity to testify on the freight railroad industry . since the passage of the staggers rail act in 1980 , we have issued several reports on the freight railroad industry . together , these pieces of legislation substantially deregulated the railroad industry . however , only a rate that produces revenue equal to at least 180 percent of the variable cost of transporting the shipment can be challenged . it will be important that these analysts have the ability that stb has through its statutory authority to inquire into railroad practices as well as sufficient access to information to determine whether rail rates in selected markets reflect justified and reasonable pricing practices , or an abuse of market power by the railroads . freight railroads have also cut costs by streamlining their workforces ; right - sizing their rail networks ; and reducing track miles , equipment , and facilities to more closely match demand . in august 2007 , stb finalized rules that require railroads to report their fuel costs and revenue from fuel surcharges .
i am pleased to be here today to discuss the department of defense's ( dod ) efforts to resolve long - standing problems in supply chain management . dod maintains a military force with unparalleled logistics capabilities and can claim success in meeting the challenges to supplying the warfighter . as requested , my comments today will focus on dod's progress in ( 1 ) implementing the supply chain management improvement plan and ( 2 ) incorporating performance measures for tracking and demonstrating improvement . for example , by early 2005 , dod moved more than 2 million short tons of cargo , including equipment , spare parts , and supplies , several thousand miles to the persian gulf in support of operation iraqi freedom . the under secretary of defense for acquisition , technology , and logistics , as well as other senior dod officials , has shown a commitment to improving supply chain management . over the next 6 years , dod also plans to invest about $54 billion in aircraft , trucks , ships , and other mobility assets to deploy and supply its forces . at the same time , there are pervasive , decades - old problems in dod's supply chain management that need to be addressed and resolved . however , as dod moves forward , we believe that there are opportunities to further improve dod's ability to show progress toward resolving long - term supply chain problems . challenges may include fragmentation in the way supply chain management is understood and applied , failure to develop true integration of supply chain processes , organizational resistance , lack of buy - in from top managers , lack of or slow development of needed measurement systems , and lack of integrated information systems linking participants in the supply chain . the fundamental premise of supply chain management is the operation of a continuous , unbroken , comprehensive , and all - inclusive logistics process , from initial customer order for materiel or services to the ultimate satisfaction of the customer's requirements . the continued active involvement of this subcommittee is important to focusing attention on this issue and encouraging dod to demonstrate progress . finally , the materiel distribution initiatives were included to improve the timely and seamless flow of materiel in support of deployed forces . the plan's initiatives that affect asset visibility seek to improve dod's ability to provide timely and accurate information regarding the location , quantity , condition , movement , and status of materiel assets across the department .  ( attachment 1 provides a description of the initiatives and shows the focus area or areas that they are intended to address ) . since october , dod has regularly updated its supply chain management improvement plan , added more details , and has made progress implementing individual initiatives by generally meeting the milestones laid out in its plan . more specifically , with the plan's inception in july 2005 , dod hoped to produce significant improvements over the next 2 years . second , given the high demand for goods and services to support ongoing u.s. military operations , the investment of resources in the supply chain is substantial . last year , with the encouragement of the office of management and budget ( omb ) , dod developed a supply chain management improvement plan aimed at putting dod on a path toward resolving long - term supply chain problems and , eventually , removal from our list of high - risk programs .
in 1996 , the un and iraq began the oil for food program to address growing concerns about iraq's humanitarian situation after international sanctions were imposed in 1990 . today , i will discuss ( 1 ) the control environment established by the un for managing the sanctions and oil for food program ; ( 2 ) other key internal control elements addressed by the un , including lines of authority and responsibility , risk assessment , and monitoring and oversight ; and ( 3 ) our observations on the lessons learned from the oil for food program . iraq obtained more than $67 billion in oil revenues through the program ; as of november 2003 , about $31 billion in commodities and humanitarian assistance had been delivered to iraq . i am pleased to be here today to discuss the lessons learned from the united nations ( un ) oil for food program and the implications for future sanctions programs and ongoing un reform efforts . the intent of the program was to allow the iraq government to use the proceeds of its oil sales to pay for food , medicine , and infrastructure maintenance and , at the same time , prevent the regime from obtaining goods for military purposes . to address these objectives , we used the body of work that gao has completed on iraq sanctions , the oil for food program , and un oversight issues . four key entities were responsible for most of the program's operations — the security council's iraq sanctions committee , the un secretariat's office of the iraq program , nine un agencies with separate programs in northern iraq , and the iraqi government under saddam hussein . the 2005 defense authorization act mandated that gao review the oil for food program following allegations of corruption and misconduct . we have also testified numerous times on the oil for food program and issued a report in may 2002 on the implementation of sanctions against iraq . our april 2006 report used this internal control framework to identify the key weaknesses in enforcing sanctions against iraq and implementing the oil for food program . policymakers and program managers are continually seeking ways to better achieve agencies' missions and program results and improve accountability for results . internal controls also serve as the first line of defense in safeguarding assets and preventing fraud , waste , and abuse . in april 2006 , we issued a report on the results of our work and our recommendations for strengthened internal controls at the un . although the sanctions curbed the iraq regime's ability to advance its military and weapons of mass destruction programs , the un established a weak control environment for the oil for food program at its beginning due to compromises it made with the iraq government and neighboring states . a key factor in helping to achieve such outcomes is appropriate internal control , which , if properly designed and implemented , provide reasonable assurance that objectives are being met . the un did not adequately address other key internal control elements as it implemented the oil for food program: ( 1 ) establishing clear authorities , ( 2 ) identifying and addressing program risks , and ( 3 ) ensuring adequate monitoring and oversight .
tens of thousands of people served as responders in the aftermath of the wtc disaster , including new york city fire department ( fdny ) personnel , federal government personnel , and other government and private - sector workers and volunteers from new york and elsewhere . i am pleased to be here today to discuss our work on the implementation of federally funded health programs for individuals affected by the september 11 , 2001 , attack on the world trade center ( wtc ) . six years after the destruction of the wtc buildings , concerns remain about the physical and mental health effects of the disaster , the long - term nature of some of these health effects , and the availability of health care services for those affected . as you requested , i will discuss the status of ( 1 ) services provided by the wtc federal responder screening program , ( 2 ) niosh's efforts to provide services for nonfederal responders residing outside the nyc metropolitan area , and ( 3 ) niosh's awards to grantees for treatment services . following the wtc attack , federal funding was provided to government agencies and private organizations to establish programs for screening , monitoring , or treating responders for illnesses and conditions related to the wtc disaster ; these programs are referred to in this testimony as the wtc health programs . we also reported that the national institute for occupational safety and health ( niosh ) , the component of hhs's centers for disease control and prevention ( cdc ) responsible for administering most of the wtc health programs , had begun to take steps to provide access to screening , monitoring , and treatment services for nonfederal responders who resided outside the new york city ( nyc ) metropolitan area . the department of health and human services ( hhs ) funded the programs as separate efforts serving different categories of responders — for example , firefighters , other workers and volunteers , or federal responders — and has responsibility for coordinating program efforts . we reported that in august 2006 cdc had awarded $1.5 million from this appropriation to the fdny wtc medical monitoring and treatment program and almost $1.1 million to the new york / new jersey ( ny / nj ) wtc consortium for treatment - related activities . in september 2006 we also testified that cdc had begun , but not completed , the process of allocating funding from a $75 million appropriation made in fiscal year 2006 for wtc health programs for responders . hhs continues to fund and coordinate the wtc health programs and has key federal responsibility for ensuring the availability of services to responders . hhs established the program in june 2003 , suspended it in march 2004 , and resumed it in december 2005 . we interviewed officials from the hhs entities involved in administering and implementing the program: niosh and two hhs offices , the federal occupational health services ( foh ) and the office of the assistant secretary for preparedness and response ( aspr ) . to assess the status of services provided by the wtc federal responder screening program , we obtained and reviewed program data and documents from hhs , including applicable interagency agreements .
we identified weaknesses in four key areas: ( 1 ) field inspections , ( 2 ) data mining processes that exclude many large farming operations when farmers do not report their interest in them , ( 3 ) quality assurance reviews conducted by insurance companies , and ( 4 ) imposition of sanctions . my testimony today focuses on two primary issues discussed in the september 2005 report: ( 1 ) the effectiveness of usda's procedures and processes to prevent and detect fraud , waste , and abuse in selling and servicing crop insurance policies , and ( 2 ) the extent to which program design issues may make the program more vulnerable to fraud , waste , and abuse . in part , to improve the integrity of the crop insurance program , congress enacted the agricultural risk protection act of 2000 ( known as arpa ) . in 2005 , the crop insurance program provided $44 billion in insurance coverage for over 200 million acres of farmland at a cost of $2.7 billion to the federal government , including $117 million estimated by the u.s. department of agriculture's ( usda ) risk management agency ( rma ) to have resulted from fraud , waste , and abuse . as you know , federal crop insurance is part of the overall safety net of programs for american farmers . however , concerns have arisen that some farmers may have abused the crop insurance program by allowing crops to fail through neglect or deliberate actions in order to collect insurance and that some insurance companies have not exercised due diligence in investigating losses and paying claims . this act provided rma and usda's farm service agency ( fsa ) with new tools for monitoring and controlling program abuses . these cases , totaling $3.1 million in insurance claims , were investigated by usda's office of inspector general ( oig ) and resulted in criminal prosecutions between june 2003 and april 2005 . arpa required the secretary of agriculture to develop and implement a coordinated plan for fsa to assist rma in the ongoing monitoring of the crop insurance program and to use information technologies , such as data mining — the analysis of data to establish relationships and identify patterns — to administer and enforce the program . it provides protection against financial losses caused by droughts , floods , or other natural disasters . in summary , since the enactment of arpa , rma has taken a number of steps to improve its procedures and processes to prevent and detect fraud , waste , and abuse in the crop insurance program . i am pleased to be here today to discuss usda's efforts to address fraud , waste , and abuse in the federal crop insurance program . most notably , rma reports that data mining analyses and subsequent communication to farmers resulted in a decline of at least $300 million in questionable claims payments from 2001 to 2004 . rma , which supervises the federal crop insurance corporation's ( fcic ) operations , has overall responsibility for administering the crop insurance program , including protecting against fraud , waste , and abuse . however , we found that rma is not effectively using all of the tools it has available and that farmers and others can continue to take advantage of the program .
my testimony today will focus on three key issues: ( 1 ) trends in degree attainment in stem - and non - stem - related fields and factors that may influence these trends , ( 2 ) trends in the levels of employment in stem - and non - stem - related fields and factors that may influence these trends , and ( 3 ) federal education programs intended to support the study of and employment in stem - related fields . the health of the u.s. economy is directly tied to our science and technology industries , and the united states is a world leader in scientific and technological innovation . these factors , concurrent with the nation's large and growing long - term fiscal imbalance , present significant and difficult challenges for policymakers as they tackle how best to ensure that our nation can continue to compete in the global marketplace . concerns have been raised , however , about the nation's ability to maintain its technological competitive advantage , especially in light of other nations' investments in their own research infrastructures , the aging and changing u.s. workforce , and the fiscal challenges facing the nation . from 1990 to 2003 , research and development expenditures outside the united states have more than doubled , from about $225 billion to over $500 billion . since 1995 , for example , the united states has generated the largest share of high - technology manufacturing output of any country in the world . for that report we ( 1 ) analyzed survey responses from 13 federal departments and agencies with stem education programs ; ( 2 ) analyzed data on students and graduates from the department of education's ( education ) national center for education statistics ( nces ) and on employees from the department of labor's ( labor ) bureau of labor statistics ( bls ) ; ( 3 ) interviewed educators and administrators at eight colleges and universities , federal agency officials , and representatives from associations and education organizations ; ( 4 ) conducted interviews via e - mail with 31 students from five universities we visited ; and ( 5 ) reviewed reports on various topics related to stem education and occupations . further , as the united states becomes a more diverse society , minorities , in addition to women , will continue to represent a continuously increasing share of the workforce , yet women and minorities have tended to be underrepresented in stem education programs and career fields . according to the census bureau , the median age of the u.s. population in 2004 was the highest it had ever been , and the growth of the labor force is expected to slow considerably , becoming negligible by 2050 . thank you for inviting me here today to discuss u.s. trends in the fields of science , technology , engineering , and mathematics ( stem ) in relation to the changing domestic and global economies . for example , congress established national science and mathematics access to retain talent ( smart ) grants to encourage students from low - income families to enroll in stem fields and foreign languages critical to the national security of the united states .
 ( 2 ) what issues could affect the overall cost of nextgen ? . we appreciate the opportunity to participate in today's hearing on the future funding of the federal aviation administration ( faa ) . among these sources are the current excise taxes , including fuel taxes ; certification and registration fees ; and flight surcharges .  ( 3 ) what are the implications of selected provisions of proposals to fund aviation activities ? . the president's budget proposes to spend $4.6 billion over the next 5 years for nextgen , including both capital costs and research and development costs . the transformation to nextgen will involve the acquisition of numerous systems to support precision satellite navigation ; digital , networked communications ; integrated weather information ; and layered , adaptive security . in 2003 , recognizing the need for a new and different type of air traffic control system to deal with the expected growth , congress authorized the creation of jpdo to lead a collaborative effort of federal and nonfederal aviation stakeholders to conceptualize and plan the next generation air transportation system ( nextgen ) . as you know , the current authorization for faa , the airport and airway trust fund ( trust fund ) , and most of the excise taxes that provide revenue for the trust fund will expire at the end of this fiscal year . as requested , my statement today will address the following questions: ( 1 ) to what extent can the current funding structure support faa's activities , including nextgen ? . my remarks are based on recent gao reports and testimonies on faa's current funding structure , nextgen , and funding options that might address concerns about faa's current funding structure . according to an analysis of future demand and system capacity that was conducted by the joint planning and development office ( jpdo ) , the estimated cost to the u.s. economy of failing to meet future airspace demands could be $22 billion annually by 2023 . as you know , faa operates one of the safest air transportation systems in the world , but this system is under growing strain as the demand for air travel increases . several proposals , including two reauthorization bills — h.r . according to faa , over 740 million passengers flew in fiscal year 2006 , and 1 billion passengers per year are expected to fly in 2015 . 2881 and s. 1300 — specify various revenue sources to fund faa , including nextgen . the consensus is that the current air traffic control system cannot be expanded to meet this expected growth . to accommodate this increased traffic , instrument flight rule operations — the most significant source of demand on the air traffic control system — are projected to rise by 36 percent , from roughly 45,000 per day to 61,000 per day over the same decade . faa also predicts that 10,000 corporate aircraft , including traditional business jets , turboprops , and very light jets , will be added to the fleet between 2007 and 2017 . finally , the extent to which faa employs public - private partnerships or leasing arrangements as part of its acquisition strategy for nextgen could affect the system's overall cost .
the centers for medicare & medicaid services ( cms ) , a component within the centers for medicare & medicaid services ( cms ) , a component within the department of health and human services ( hhs ) , is responsible for the department of health and human services ( hhs ) , is responsible for overseeing the medicare and medicaid programs — the nation's largest overseeing the medicare and medicaid programs — the nation's largest health insurance programs — which benefit about one in every four health insurance programs — which benefit about one in every four americans . cms relies on a contractor - owned and operated network to facilitate cms relies on a contractor - owned and operated network to facilitate communication and data transmission among cms business - related communication and data transmission among cms business - related entities . the remaining six weaknesses are under review to determine what additional resources are needed and their financial impact . effective information security controls are essential to protecting entities . effective information security controls are essential to protecting the confidentiality , integrity , and availability of sensitive information the confidentiality , integrity , and availability of sensitive information transmitted over the network . an additional 19 weaknesses are scheduled for closure . a security breach in this communication network could lead to interruptions in the processing of medical claims or network could lead to interruptions in the processing of medical claims or to unauthorized access to personally identifiable medical data , seriously to unauthorized access to personally identifiable medical data , seriously diminishing the public's trust in cms's ability to protect the sensitive diminishing the public's trust in cms's ability to protect the sensitive beneficiary data it is entrusted with . establishing and implementing appropriate policies and related controls are key elements of an effective information security program . in addition , the administrator stated that cms has moved aggressively to implement corrective actions for the reported weaknesses and that corrective action or new compensating controls had already been completed for 22 of the 47 weaknesses . to help strengthen information security controls over the cms communication network , we recommend that the cms administrator direct the chief information officer to take steps to ensure that information security policies and standards are fully implemented . this report controls over the communication network used by cms . we also issued a separate report , for limited distribution , that contains sensitive separate report , for limited distribution , that contains sensitive information . until cms ensures that all information security policies are being fully implemented , there is limited assurance that its sensitive data will be adequately protected against unauthorized disclosure and that network services will not be interrupted . in order to ensure the implementation of effective information security controls , agencies need to develop comprehensive information security policies that fully address the inherent risks associated with today's highly distributed , interconnected , network - based computing environments . in addition , agencies need to take actions to ensure that the established policies and controls are fully implemented . we also issued a strengthen and improve the communication network . although cms has developed and documented information security policies , a key reason for the communication network weaknesses was that cms did not always ensure the effective implementation of its security policies and standards .
from 1987 through 2003 , the united states provided more than $2 billion in economic assistance to the federated states of micronesia ( fsm ) and the rmi under a compact of free association ; approximately $579 million of this economic assistance went to the rmi . the amended compact with the rmi identifies the additional 20 years of grant assistance as intended to assist the rmi government in its efforts to promote the economic advancement and budgetary self - reliance of its people . in 2003 , the u.s. government approved an amended compact with the rmi that provides an additional 20 years of assistance , totaling about $1.5 billion from 2004 through 2023 . i am pleased to be here today to discuss gao's recent work regarding the compact of free association between the united states and the republic of the marshall islands ( rmi ) . the department of the interior's office of insular affairs ( oia ) is responsible for administering and monitoring this u.s. assistance . these provisions include requiring the establishment of a joint economic management committee and a trust fund committee to , respectively , among other things , review the rmi's progress toward compact objectives and to assess the trust fund's effectiveness in contributing to the country's long - term economic advancement and budgetary self - reliance . the assistance is provided in the form of annually decreasing grants that prioritize health and education , paired with annually increasing contributions to trust funds intended as a source of revenue for the country after the grants end in 2023 . in 2003 , we testified that these provisions could improve accountability over assistance but that successful implementation will require appropriate resources and sustained commitment from both the united states and the rmi . today , drawing on several reports that we have published since 2005 , i will discuss the rmi's economic prospects , implementation of its amended compact to meet long - term goals , and potential trust fund earnings . the amended compact also contains several new funding and accountability provisions that strengthen reporting and bilateral interaction . the compact provided a framework for the united states to work toward achieving its three main goals: ( 1 ) to secure self - government for the fsm and the rmi , ( 2 ) to ensure certain national security rights for all of the parties , and ( 3 ) to assist the fsm and the rmi in their efforts to advance economic development and self - sufficiency . the rmi has taken steps to effectively implement compact assistance , but administrative challenges have hindered its ability to ensure use of the funds for its long - term development goals . further , despite actions taken to effectively implement compact grants , administrative challenges have limited its ability to ensure use of the grants for its long - term goals . largely dependent on government spending of foreign aid , the rmi has limited potential for private sector growth , and its government has made little progress in implementing reforms needed to increase investment opportunities and tax income . however , data deficiencies , report shortcomings , capacity constraints , and inadequate communication have limited the rmi and u.s. governments' ability to consistently ensure the effective use of grant funds to measure progress , and monitor day - to - day activities .
to support the education and training of health professionals , the health resources and services administration ( hrsa ) , an agency within the department of health and human services ( hhs ) , administers numerous health professions education and training programs authorized under title vii of the public health service act . as discussed with the appropriations subcommittees with responsibility for hhs programs , this report addresses , for fiscal years 2002 through 2005 , ( 1 ) hrsa's process for awarding hcop grants and ( 2 ) the number and characteristics of hcop applicants and grantees . an appropriate supply of health professionals is vital to ensuring that all americans have adequate access to health care . one such program , the health careers opportunity program ( hcop ) , provides grants to health professions schools — such as medical or dental schools — and other entities to help students from disadvantaged backgrounds prepare for , and succeed in , education and training for the health professions . it is also possible for the same entity to have had more than one hcop grant at the same time , provided that each grant had a distinct purpose and budget . to conduct our work , we analyzed hrsa's data on hcop applications , including the scores and funding preference determinations made during the application review process , and hcop grant award decisions for fiscal years 2002 through 2005 . a new fiscal year 2002 grantee would have had to apply for a competitive continuation grant for fiscal year 2005 after the end of its 3-year project period . as shown in figure 1 , the amounts distributed on a noncompetitive basis to continue funding existing grant projects varied , from a low of $18 million for fiscal year 2005 to a high of $30 million for fiscal year 2003 , and the remaining funds awarded as competitive grants ranged from a low of $4 million for fiscal year 2003 to a high of $15 million for fiscal year 2005 . as a result , hrsa cancelled the competition for grants and distributed all funds available for hcop for fiscal year 2006 — about $4 million — on a noncompetitive basis to continue funding 4 of 58 existing hcop grant projects within their approved project periods . in reports accompanying hhs appropriations bills for fiscal years 2002 through 2004 , congressional appropriations committees with responsibility for hhs programs noted with approval that hrsa had given “priority consideration for hcop grants to minority health professions institutions.” in the conference report accompanying the fiscal year 2005 appropriations act , however , the conference committee expressed concern that several applications for new or competitive continuation grants from historically minority health professions schools had not been funded for fiscal year 2004 . for the summary , we believe it is appropriate to use percentages to convey that applications from minority - serving institutions generally received grants in greater proportion than all applications . in response to guidance in an appropriations committee report , which strongly urged hrsa to give priority to those institutions with a historic mission of training minorities in the health professions , the agency distributed the $4 million for fiscal year 2006 to continue funding existing hcop grant projects at four institutions that met that criterion .
in addition to the december 6 testimony , in several prior hearings , we testified that significant control weaknesses in the federal emergency management agency's ( fema ) individuals and households program ( ihp ) and in the department of homeland security's ( dhs ) purchase card program left the government vulnerable to significant fraud , waste , and abuse . specifically , the testimony addressed our findings related to potentially improper and / or fraudulent ( 1 ) rental assistance payments fema made to registrants at the same time it was providing free housing via trailers and apartments ; ( 2 ) duplicate assistance payments to individuals who claimed damages to the same property for both hurricanes katrina and rita ; and ( 3 ) ihp payments to nonqualified aliens who did not qualify for ihp . in early october 2006 , fema reported to congress that it had delivered approximately $7 billion in ihp aid for hurricanes katrina and rita . the testimony also discussed ( 1 ) the importance of fraud prevention , and ( 2 ) the results of our investigation into property bought by fema using dhs purchase cards , which was subsequently lost or stolen . on december 6 , 2006 , we testified before the senate committee on homeland security and governmental affairs on the continued findings of fraud , waste , and abuse associated with disaster relief for hurricanes katrina and rita . the stafford act allowed registrants to receive financial assistance up to a cap of $26,200 for disasters occurring in 2005 . ihp is a major component of the federal disaster response efforts designed to provide financial assistance to individuals and households that have , as a direct result of a major disaster , necessary expenses and serious needs that cannot be met through other means . this ihp amount included expedited assistance , temporary housing assistance , repair and replacement of real and personal property , and other miscellaneous categories . as we previously reported , the robert t. stafford disaster relief and emergency assistance act ( stafford act ) provides the basis for ihp . for purposes of the testimony , potentially improper and / or fraudulent payments referred to payments made by fema based on potentially improper and / or fraudulent registration data submitted by ihp registrants . our december 6 , 2006 , testimony detailed our findings related to additional work we had performed since june 2006 . fema and dhs had fully concurred with 19 recommendations , and substantially or partially concurred with the remaining 6 recommendations . this report summarizes the findings detailed in our december 6 , 2006 , testimony and makes specific recommendations for corrective action . fema stated that in the 15 months since hurricane katrina , fema has made great strides in correcting its deficiencies . in contrast , as of november 2006 , fema had detected through its own processes about $290 million in overpayments . collection of only $7 million of an estimated $1 billion of fraudulent and improper payments clearly supports the basic point we have previously made that fraud prevention is far more efficient and effective than detection and collection . fema believes that the stringent controls it instituted this past year improve its safeguards and will help eliminate processing errors and fraudulent abuse .
specifically , this report describes selected countries' ( 1 ) laws and policies enacted to regulate foreign investment to protect their national security interests and ( 2 ) implementation of those laws and policies . the review of individual transactions has been delegated to an interagency committee , the committee on foreign investment in the united states ( cfius ) . however , foreign acquisitions of u.s. companies can pose a significant challenge for the u.s. government because of the need to balance the benefits of foreign investment with national security concerns . the united nations reported that between 2000 and 2006 , annual foreign direct investment in the united states averaged $144 billion , which is 16 percent of the world's total during that period . u.s. investment policy is anchored in the belief that global investment is beneficial and necessary to bring economic prosperity worldwide . in july 2007 , the foreign investment and national security act of 2007 amended exon - florio to , among other things , expand the factors to be considered in deciding what could affect national security and bring greater transparency to the cfius review process . the exon - florio amendment to the defense production act authorizes the president to suspend or prohibit transactions that could result in foreign control of u.s. companies if the transaction threatens to impair national security . in its letter , treasury reemphasized the commitment of the united states to an open investment policy and stated that countries' general investment policies and the relationship of foreign investment reviews to those policies are important in understanding investment review regimes . to better understand how other countries deal with similar challenges , you asked us to identify other countries' approaches for addressing the issues that exon - florio is intended to address . as is the case in the united states , each of the countries we reviewed has enacted laws and instituted policies regulating foreign investment — often to address national security concerns . this report updates the 1996 report and also expands it by describing foreign direct investment policies and processes in six additional countries: canada , china , india , the netherlands , russia , and the united arab emirates ( uae ) . treasury coordinated with other cfius agencies in providing comments . in addition , in 1996 we issued a report that describes how four major investors in the united states - - - france , germany , japan , and the united kingdom - - - - monitored foreign investment in their own countries to protect national security - related interests . our selection of the countries was based on a number of factors: we chose countries with which the united states has a large reciprocal investment relationship , countries with diverse investment controls , countries chosen for regional diversity , and those selected in prior gao work . many of the countries have concerns about national security - related issues . the deputy secretary of the treasury testified in 2005 that there is an inherent link between our national security interests and a strong u.s. economy that facilitates free and fair trade . however , changes to regulations affecting foreign investment have been discussed in these countries .
for this study , we were asked to analyze ( 1 ) the major factors that have been identified as influencing the proportion of african american children entering and remaining in foster care compared to children of other races and ethnicities ; ( 2 ) the extent that states and localities have implemented strategies that appear promising in addressing african american representation in foster care ; and ( 3 ) the ways in which key federal child welfare policies may have influenced african american representation in foster care . children of all races are equally as likely to suffer from abuse and neglect , according to the department of health and human services' ( hhs ) national incidence study of child abuse and neglect ( nis ) ; however , hhs data show that a significantly greater proportion of african american children enter and remain in foster care than children of other races and ethnicities . african - american children across the nation were more than twice as likely to enter foster care compared with white children in 2004 , and african american children remained in foster care about 9 months longer . concerned about why african american children are overrepresented in foster care , you asked us to analyze: ( 1 ) the major factors that have been identified as influencing the proportion of african american children entering and remaining in foster care compared to children of other races and ethnicities ; ( 2 ) the extent that states and localities have implemented strategies that appear promising in addressing african american representation in foster care ; and ( 3 ) the ways in which key federal child welfare policies may have influenced african american representation in foster care . the department of health and human services ( hhs ) is the principal federal agency that provides federal oversight of states' child welfare systems . although there is great variability among and within the states , data from nearly all states show some disproportionate representation of african american children in foster care . to address these three objectives , we used multiple methodologies , including administering a state survey ; conducting site visits ; interviewing researchers and federal agency officials ; conducting a literature review ; and analyzing federal legislation and policies . hhs should also encourage states to make increased use of hhs's national resource centers as a source of technical assistance on this issue . on the last day of fiscal year 2004 , african american children totaled 162,911 — or 34 percent — of the 482,541 children in foster care , according to hhs data — about twice their proportions in the general child population . hhs also administers social services block grant programs , such as temporary assistance for needy families ( tanf ) , and states generally spend about $12 billion of these funds to provide direct social services . states have the primary responsibility for establishing the legal and administrative structures and programs of their child welfare services ; however , federal legislation and regulations establish a framework within which states make their programmatic and fiscal decisions . hhs administers about $8 billion in funds each year that are dedicated to support states' child welfare systems . states use these block grant funds to benefit various populations , including child welfare families .
our objectives for this review were to ( 1 ) identify and evaluate the policies that guide the dissemination of federal research results at the national aeronautics and space administration ( nasa ) , the national institute of standards and technology ( nist ) , and the national oceanic and atmospheric administration ( noaa ) ; ( 2 ) determine how effectively the dissemination and dispute resolution policies of these agencies have been communicated to researchers ; ( 3 ) determine the extent to which researchers at these agencies have experienced restrictions on the dissemination of their research results , and ( 4 ) provide an overview of the role of the office of science and technology policy ( ostp ) in helping agencies develop and implement policies related to the dissemination of research results . in this context , we ( 1 ) identified and evaluated the policies that guide the dissemination of federal research results at nasa , nist , and noaa ; ( 2 ) determined how effectively the dissemination and dispute resolution policies of these agencies have been communicated to researchers ; and ( 3 ) determined the extent to which researchers at these agencies have experienced restrictions on the dissemination of their research results . to ensure that ( 1 ) researchers have a clear process to follow for appealing decisions regarding dissemination of research results and ( 2 ) all researchers are aware of and understand how to comply with their agencies' policies for disseminating research , we recommend that the secretary of commerce , the nasa administrator , the nist director , and the noaa administrator each take the following two actions: review their dissemination policies and ensure that they clearly identify a process by which researchers can appeal dissemination decisions . because progress in scientific is conducted by federal researchers . federal agencies strive to base science - related public policy on the best federal agencies strive to base science - related public policy on the best available information provided through objective research , some of which available information provided through objective research , some of which is conducted by federal researchers . in addition , we obtained information on the role that the office of science and technology policy ( ostp ) has identified for itself in helping agencies develop and implement policies related to the dissemination of research results . much scientific research is either conducted by federally employed researchers scientific research is either conducted by federally employed researchers or supported through grants and contracts awarded by over a dozen or supported through grants and contracts awarded by over a dozen federal departments and agencies , such as the national aeronautics and federal departments and agencies , such as the national aeronautics and space administration ( nasa ) , the national institute of standards and space administration ( nasa ) , the national institute of standards and technology ( nist ) , and the national oceanic and atmospheric technology ( nist ) , and the national oceanic and atmospheric administration ( noaa ) . to some extent , this situation may have been partly caused by a lack of formal training provided by the agencies on the dissemination and dispute resolution policies to their research staff . this report focuses on the dissemination of administration ( noaa ) .
according to the federal emergency management agency ( fema ) of the department of homeland security ( dhs ) , which administers nfip , claims from hurricane katrina alone have totaled in excess of $16.3 billion , as of october 2007 . following the signing of the bunning - bereuter - blumenauer flood insurance reform act of 2004 , which reauthorized the national flood insurance program ( nfip ) through september 30 , 2008 , the united states experienced back - to - back catastrophic hurricane seasons and experienced nearly $20 billion in flood - insurance losses . because nfip premium rates have been set to cover losses in an average year ( that is , based on “average historical losses” ) , the program has been unable to set aside sufficient funds to meet future expected losses . ensure implementation of written guidance for all nfip - related contracts on how to consistently handle the failure of a contractor to meet standards in performance areas and establish written policies and procedures about the coordination between fema officials and offices ( including the cotr , the program management office , and the contracting officer ) when addressing contractor deficiencies , including determining whether and under what circumstances to issue discrepancy reports , and ensuring that financial disincentives are appropriately and consistently applied . our objectives were to ( 1 ) describe trends for national flood insurance program ( nfip ) policies , insurance amounts , premiums , and losses from 1997 through 2006 and the extent to which nfip losses were attributable to hurricanes and repetitive loss properties ; ( 2 ) assess how the amounts available for the purchase of flood - damaged properties changed over time , and the extent to which the federal emergency management agency ( fema ) purchased flood - damaged properties ; and ( 3 ) evaluate the extent to which fema followed its procedures for monitoring selected nfip - related contracts . in response to the magnitude and severity of losses from the 2005 hurricanes , congress increased nfip's borrowing authority from the department of the treasury ( treasury ) to $20.8 billion . with its current system limitations , fema cannot accurately assess or report the extent to which its mitigation programs are reducing the number of flood - damaged and repetitive loss properties . the insufficient revenues highlight structural weaknesses in how the program is funded , and congress is considering a number of legislative changes to improve nfip's financial solvency . as of december 2007 , fema owed more than $17.3 billion to treasury , an amount the program is unlikely to be able to repay while paying future claims with its current premium income of about $2 billion annually . the katrina - related claims represent more than eight times the amount for claims in 2004 and surpass ( by more than $1 billion ) the aggregate amount of all claims previously paid in the nearly 40-year history of nfip . real - time data would improve fema headquarters' ability to produce , analyze , and report information on ongoing operations and thus improve its ability to assess the effectiveness of its mitigation programs . coupled with lack of a requirement for staff to consistently and promptly record acquisitions data , the lack of comprehensive data impedes fema's ability to account for the properties acquired through its mitigation programs and hinders its ability to provide congress with timely information with which to assess the impact of these programs on mitigating losses to nfip and ensure that limited resources are appropriately allocated .
with the federal land transaction facilitation act of 2000 ( fltfa ) set to expire in july 2010 , we were asked to ( 1 ) determine the extent to which the bureau of land management ( blm ) has generated revenue for the fltfa program , ( 2 ) identify challenges blm faces in conducting future sales , ( 3 ) determine the extent to which the agencies have spent funds under fltfa , and ( 4 ) identify challenges the agencies face in conducting future acquisitions . the four major federal land management agencies — the u.s. department of the interior's bureau of land management ( blm ) , fish and wildlife service , and national park service , and the u.s. department of agriculture's forest service — administer approximately 628 million acres , or about 28 percent of the land area in the united states . to improve the implementation of the fltfa mandate to raise funds to purchase inholdings , we recommend that the secretary of the interior direct the director of blm to develop goals for land sales , and develop a strategy for implementing these goals during the last 3 years of the program . these public lands are mostly in the 11 western states and alaska , where the four agencies manage lands that constitute significant portions of the states' acreage , ranging from about 28 percent in washington state to about 81 percent in nevada . blm , which manages approximately 256 million acres of federal land , is authorized to sell or exchange land identified in its land use plans ; 4 , the other three land management agencies have limited or no sales authority . historically , many controversies have arisen over the agencies' management of these lands , including the selling of federal land and the purchasing of private land . the other most commonly cited challenges were , in the order of frequency cited , ( 1 ) identifying a willing seller , ( 2 ) the availability of knowledgeable staff to conduct acquisitions , ( 3 ) the lack of funding to purchase land , ( 4 ) restrictions imposed by laws and regulations , and ( 5 ) public opposition to land acquisitions . congress enacted the federal land transaction facilitation act of 2000 ( fltfa ) , in part , to enhance the efficiency and effectiveness of federal land management by allowing the four land management agencies to acquire inholdings to promote the consolidation of ownership of public and private lands in a manner that would allow for better overall resource management . as with sales , progress in acquiring priority land has been hampered by weak agency performance in developing an effective mechanism to identify potential land acquisitions and set priorities for inholdings and adjacent land with exceptional resources , which fltfa requires . with fltfa expiring in july 2010 , you asked us to ( 1 ) determine the extent to which blm has generated revenue for the fltfa program , ( 2 ) identify challenges blm faces in conducting future sales , ( 3 ) determine the extent to which agencies have spent funds under fltfa , and ( 4 ) identify challenges the agencies face in conducting future acquisitions .
to address gaps identified by federal and state officials in the federal government's ability to help states respond to the psychological consequences of catastrophic disasters , we recommend that the secretary of homeland security direct the administrator of fema , in consultation with the administrator of samhsa , to expeditiously take the following two actions: determine what types of expanded crisis counseling services should be formally incorporated into ccp and make any necessary revisions to program policy , and revise ccp policy to allow states and service providers that receive ccp funds to use them for indirect costs . although state practices may contribute to delays , extended federal reviews also may contribute to delays in states' ability to implement their ccps .  ( 2 ) what have been the states' experiences in obtaining and using ccp grants to respond to the psychological consequences of catastrophic disasters ? . hhs also identified actions it had taken in response to gao's may 2005 report on the ccp , including improving the fiscal monitoring of grants . to do our work , we obtained program documents and interviewed officials from the department of health and human services ( hhs ) , including the administration for children and families , centers for disease control and prevention ( cdc ) , centers for medicare & medicaid services ( cms ) , health resources and services administration ( hrsa ) , national institutes of health , office of the assistant secretary for preparedness and response , and substance abuse and mental health services administration ( samhsa ) ; the department of education ; the department of homeland security ( dhs ) , including the federal emergency management agency ( fema ) ; the department of justice ; and the department of veterans affairs ( va ) , including the national center for posttraumatic stress disorder ( ncptsd ) . the primary long - standing federal postdisaster grant program for helping states respond to short - term crisis counseling needs following disasters is the crisis counseling assistance and training program ( ccp ) , which is administered by dhs's federal emergency management agency ( fema ) and its federal partner , samhsa . within hhs the substance abuse and mental health services administration ( samhsa ) helps integrate mental health and substance abuse services into these federal efforts . these services could include financial assistance to help state or local government agencies or qualified private organizations to provide case management services . dhs said that fema and samhsa did not rely primarily on damage assessments , as few had been completed . dhs stated that fema , in consultation with samhsa , took action to expedite the submission , review , and approval of isp applications submitted after hurricane katrina , including allowing the use of shorter applications by states hosting hurricane katrina evacuees . in addition , other federal agencies have reported on difficulties that states have experienced implementing their ccps . this could strengthen states' ability to assist disaster victims in coping with the psychological consequences of catastrophic disasters . gao , hurricane katrina: status of hospital inpatient and emergency departments in the greater new orleans area , gao - 06-1003 ( washington , d.c.: sept. 29 , 2006 ) , 13 .
our report objectives were to examine ( 1 ) what is known about the incidence and circumstances of breaches of sensitive personal information ; ( 2 ) what information exists on the extent to which breaches of sensitive personal information have resulted in identity theft ; and ( 3 ) the potential benefits , costs , and challenges associated with breach notification requirements . in recent years , a number of entities — including financial consumers . in recent years , a number of entities — including financial service firms , retailers , universities , and government agencies — have service firms , retailers , universities , and government agencies — have collectively reported the loss or theft of large amounts of sensitive collectively reported the loss or theft of large amounts of sensitive personal information . as agreed with your offices , this report examines ( 1 ) what is known about the incidence and circumstances of breaches of sensitive personal information ; ( 2 ) what information exists on the extent to which breaches of sensitive personal information have resulted in identity theft ; and ( 3 ) the potential benefits , costs , and challenges associated with breach notification requirements . as a result of advances in computer technology and electronic storage , as a result of advances in computer technology and electronic storage , many different sectors and entities now maintain electronic records many different sectors and entities now maintain electronic records containing vast amounts of personal information on virtually all american containing vast amounts of personal information on virtually all american consumers . data breaches have occurred across a range of entities , including federal , state , and local government agencies ; retailers ; financial institutions ; colleges and universities ; and medical facilities . some of these data breaches — such as those involving tjx companies and the department of veterans affairs ( va ) — involving tjx companies and the department of veterans affairs ( va ) — have received considerable publicity and have highlighted concerns about have received considerable publicity and have highlighted concerns about the protections afforded sensitive personal information . the federal trade commission ( ftc ) , which is responsible for taking complaints from victims and sharing them with law enforcement agencies , has noted that identity theft is a serious problem — millions of americans are affected each year , and victims may face substantial costs and time to repair the damage to their good name and credit record . we also collected information on breaches experienced by federal agencies compiled by the house government reform committee in 2006 and by the department of homeland security ( dhs ) . data breaches have been reported at a wide range of public and private institutions , including federal , state , and local government agencies ; public and private colleges and universities ; hospitals and other medical facilities ; retailers ; banks and other financial institutions ; information resellers ; and others . there is no federal statute that requires most companies or other entities to notify affected individuals of data breaches , although federal banking regulatory agencies have issued guidance on breach notification to the banks , thrifts , and credit unions they supervise . several other studies , while not focusing specifically on breaches of sensitive personal information , have found more generally that information security vulnerabilities are widespread among u.s. and global companies .
the department of defense ( dod ) , in its december 2001 nuclear posture review , provided a conceptual framework for transforming u.s. strategic capabilities to address the new security risks the united states faces . specifically , you asked us to determine ( 1 ) whether dod has clearly defined and instilled a common understanding and approach to its global strike concept throughout the department , ( 2 ) the extent to which dod has assessed and developed capabilities needed for global strike , and ( 3 ) the extent to which dod has identified the funding requirements and developed an investment strategy for acquiring new global strike capabilities . the review proposed a new triad that would bring together the capabilities of nuclear and conventional ( nonnuclear ) offensive strike forces , active and passive defenses , a revitalized defense infrastructure , and enhanced command and control , planning , and intelligence capabilities . dod is also undertaking or has completed several analytical efforts to assess mid - and long - term options for prompt , long - range global strike and examining other conventional strike capability options , such as a new long - range bomber that would be available for global strike missions in less time - sensitive situations . in a september 2007 classified report , we discussed dod efforts to develop a near - term solution to convert some of its trident submarine - launched missiles as a means to deliver an intercontinental prompt conventional strike capability . as dod seeks to transform its forces and organization to better meet the demands of the new security environment , we have reported that the department is faced with identifying new warfighting capabilities it needs , including critical technologies , while at the same time striking an affordable and sustainable balance in its spending for current and future investments . however , dod's 2006 quadrennial defense review highlighted the lack of a prompt , precise , long - range conventional strike capability for some time - critical situations as an important gap in u.s. global strike capabilities . the synergy realized with the integration of these capabilities , according to dod officials , would provide the president and other senior decision makers with a wider range of military options against emerging threats while reducing u.s. reliance on the use of nuclear weapons . several factors affect understanding and communication of the global strike concept among key stakeholders , including the extent to which dod has ( 1 ) defined global strike , ( 2 ) incorporated global strike into joint doctrine , ( 3 ) conducted outreach and communication activities with key stakeholders , and ( 4 ) involved stakeholders in joint exercises and other training involving global strike . to determine the extent to which dod has identified the funding requirements and developed an investment strategy for acquiring new global strike capabilities , we reviewed documentation and interviewed dod officials on the department's use of its future years defense program ( fydp ) database and related supporting documentation to identify and manage possible programs that may contribute to global strike capabilities . in transforming offensive strike capabilities for the new triad , dod plans to develop a portfolio of capabilities , referred to as global strike , that would provide the united states with an ability to rapidly plan and deliver limited duration and extended range precision strikes against highly valued assets , such as weapons of mass destruction production , storage , and delivery systems and adversary leadership power bases .
the department of defense ( dod ) uses contractors to meet many of its logistical and operational support needs during combat operations and peacekeeping and humanitarian assistance missions . according to dod , the scale and duration of global war on terrorism operations have required a significant increase in contractor support and in deployment of contractor personnel to areas such as iraq and afghanistan . our reporting objectives are to determine ( 1 ) the extent to which costs for selected contracts supporting contingency operations increased and the factors causing the increases , ( 2 ) the extent to which dod provided oversight for selected contracts that support contingency operations , and ( 3 ) the reasons for the department's use of contractors to support contingency operations for the contracts we reviewed , as well as other contracts . moreover , this reliance on contractors continues to grow , and dod has reported that future deployments of dod military forces are anticipated to require similar levels of support . in its fiscal year 2007 report accompanying the dod appropriations bill , the house appropriations committee directed gao to examine the link between the growth in dod's operation and maintenance costs and , among other things , dod's increased reliance on service contracts . in iraq , afghanistan , and throughout southwest asia , contractors provide deployed u.s. forces with communication services , interpreters who accompany military patrols , base operations support ( e.g. , food and housing ) , weapon systems maintenance , intelligence analysis , security services , and a variety of other support . dod reported that contingency contract obligations for fiscal years 2003 through 2006 totaled nearly $44 billion . to conduct our work , we selected and conducted a case study review of a nonprobability sample of 7 department of defense ( dod ) contracts for services that support deployed forces . this report examines issues related to cost , oversight , and use of contractors to support contingency operations . lack of effective oversight over the large number of contracts and contractors raises the potential for mismanagement of millions of dollars of these obligations . in august 2008 , the congressional budget office reported that dod's fiscal years 2003 through 2007 contingency contract obligations for the iraq theater were $76 billion . while these actions may enhance future contracting for expeditionary operations , they will not address potential problems with active contracts . in may 2007 we reported that dod and service officials attributed the increased use of contractors for support services to several factors , including ( 1 ) increased operations and maintenance requirements from the global war on terror and other contingencies , which dod has met without an increase in active duty and civilian personnel ; ( 2 ) federal government policy , which is to rely on the private sector for needed commercial services that are not inherently governmental in nature ; and ( 3 ) dod initiatives , such as its competitive sourcing and utility privatization programs . these criteria included: the contract supported deployed forces ; operations and maintenance ( o&m ) funds were used to pay for the contract services ; the principal place of performance was within central command's area of operation ; the contract was to maintain a weapons system ( s ) and / or provide support ; the contract was still in effect ; and the contractor was u.s. based .
we examined the relationship between the joint commission on accreditation of healthcare organizations ( joint commission ) and joint commission resources , inc. ( jcr ) as it relates to the independence of the joint commissions' hospital accreditation process from jcr's hospital consulting services . the centers for medicare & medicaid services ( cms ) , the federal agency within the department of health and human services ( hhs ) that administers medicare , has established conditions of participation that hospitals must meet to be eligible to participate in the medicare program . in addition , even with appropriate policies and procedures in place , it will take ongoing monitoring and a concerted effort on the part of the leadership of both organizations to ensure that these policies and procedures are appropriately implemented by both their board and staff members . in order to be eligible to receive payments from medicare — the federal program that provides health care benefits to over 42 million elderly and disabled beneficiaries — hospitals must meet certain criteria established by federal law . any threat to the independence of the accreditation process could undermine its ability to ensure the safety and quality of services provided to medicare beneficiaries and the general public . the joint commission on accreditation of healthcare organizations ( joint commission ) , a nonprofit corporation , has developed its own accreditation standards that are intended to meet or exceed medicare's conditions of participation . in this report , we describe ( 1 ) how the joint commission and jcr are related to one another through their governance structure and operations , and ( 2 ) the significant steps both organizations have taken to prevent the improper sharing of facility - specific information , obtained through their hospital accreditation and consulting activities , since the creation of jcr . to provide information on the governance structure and operations of the two organizations , we reviewed multiple documents , including organizational charts reflecting the organizations' structure as of 2006 , a service agreement signed in 2001 and still in effect as of 2006 , internal revenue service tax documents from calendar years 2001 through 2004 , and agendas and minutes from board meetings of both organizations from 2003 through september 2006 . however , the majority of these mechanisms , including the firewall and firewall - related policies , the compliance hotline , and the annual external review of the firewall , have either been developed or significantly revised within the past few years — primarily since 2003 . the joint commission and jcr have taken steps to protect the joint commission's accreditation process from influence by jcr's consulting services by developing mechanisms to protect against the improper sharing of facility - specific information . it indicated that the report accurately reflects its relationship with jcr , and emphasized that its highest priority is to preserve the integrity of the joint commission's accreditation process . when developing policies regarding its relationship with jcr , the joint commission has been affected by the increased focus in both the public and private sectors on governance issues . the next step is for management of both organizations to assure that these mechanisms are sufficient to protect the integrity of the accreditation process .
this report discusses the ( 1 ) potential benefits and concerns associated with joint ventures and the extent to which they are documented and measured , ( 2 ) lessons learned from existing and proposed department of veterans affairs ( va ) joint ventures with academic affiliates and the department of defense ( dod ) , and ( 3 ) steps va has taken to better evaluate proposed joint ventures . this report discusses the ( 1 ) potential benefits and concerns associated with joint ventures and the extent to which they are documented and measured , ( 2 ) lessons learned from existing and proposed va joint ventures with dod and academic affiliates , and ( 3 ) steps va has taken to evaluate proposed joint ventures . health care services shared under these agreements include inpatient and outpatient care ; ancillary services , such as diagnostic and therapeutic radiology ; dental care ; pharmacy services ; and specialty care services , such as treatment for spinal cord injuries . analyze the differences among types of joint venture partners to determine whether the evaluation criteria should be tailored to the type of partner ( e.g. , dod or academic affiliate ) and , if so , tailor the criteria accordingly . the sharing act has been amended several times since 1982 and is codified at 38 u.s.c . to develop a more comprehensive framework for evaluating existing and future joint ventures , we recommend that the secretary of veterans affairs take the following three actions: develop departmental performance measures to assess the outcomes of joint ventures and to determine the extent to which strategic goals are being achieved . congress has also recently encouraged va to explore opportunities for expanding its collaboration with academic affiliates as a potential cost - effective means of rebuilding and revitalizing va's aging infrastructure . for example , in 2003 , congress required the secretary of veterans affairs to study the feasibility of coordinating health care services with representatives of va's academic affiliate , the medical university of south carolina ( musc ) in charleston , and , in 2006 , congress authorized va to collaborate with its academic affiliate , louisiana state university ( lsu ) , on rebuilding the two new orleans medical centers destroyed during hurricane katrina . va and dod have taken steps to mitigate these access issues . va also has a long history of developing partnerships , or affiliations , with university medical schools to help va fulfill its mission of providing health care to the nation's veterans . va and dod have also taken steps to improve and expand their health care sharing activities . va's effort to develop criteria for evaluating joint venture proposals is a positive step in improving va's process for assessing joint venture proposals . the administration has also encouraged such collaboration between va and dod as a means to achieve more cost - effective use of health care resources . the 2003 presidential task force to improve health care delivery for our nation's veterans also found that none of va's and dod's performance metrics measured the depth and breadth of va - dod collaboration and sharing , or the impact of successful collaboration on various health care indicators , such as improved access or reductions in the overall cost of furnishing services .
in performing our work , we ( 1 ) evaluated lsc's internal controls related to its grants management and oversight organizations and ( 2 ) performed limited reviews at 14 grantees . in performing our work , we ( 1 ) evaluated lsc's control environment , information and communications , and risk assessment procedures related to its grants management and oversight organizations ; ( 2 ) reviewed lsc's control activities for monitoring grantee management and compliance , and ( 3 ) performed limited reviews at 14 grantees . the legal services corporation's ( lsc ) mission is to make federal funding available to support the provision of legal assistance in civil matters to low - income people throughout the united states on everyday legal problems . thus , lsc is accountable for the effectiveness of the internal controls over the grants process and for providing oversight and monitoring of grantees' internal controls , use of grant funds , and compliance with laws and regulations . lsc pursues this mission by making grants to legal service providers ( grant recipients or grantees ) who serve low - income members of the community who would otherwise not be able to afford legal assistance ( clients ) . this report contains the results of our review of internal controls over the legal services corporation's ( lsc ) grantee monitoring and oversight function and our limited visits to grantees . lsc received $348.6 million in appropriations for fiscal year 2007 and $326.6 million in fiscal year 2006 . you also asked us to conduct limited reviews of grantees' internal controls and fiscal practices . established by a federal charter in 1974 as a federally funded , private nonprofit corporation , lsc is highly dependent on federal appropriations for its operations . for fiscal year 2006 , lsc received 99 percent of its funding from federal appropriations and approximately 1 percent from grants through the department of veterans affairs . effective grants - oversight procedures and monitoring , including a structured , systematic approach based on risk , are necessary given lsc's limited resources and the scope of its responsibilities for many widely dispersed entities . absent timely communications about findings from its site visits , grantee management does not have information about deficiencies and corrective actions needed to address identified deficiencies in their use of funds and improve controls . to help lsc improve its internal control and oversight of grantees , we recommend that the lsc board of directors develop and implement policies that clearly delineate organizational roles and responsibilities for grantee oversight and monitoring , including grantee internal controls and compliance . in 2006 , lsc served clients through 138 grantees with more than 900 offices serving all 50 states , the district of columbia , and current and former u.s. territories . lsc is responsible for ensuring that grant funds are being used for their intended purposes and in accordance with laws and regulations . this report responds to your request that we review internal controls over lsc's grants management and oversight processes and assess whether those controls provide reasonable assurance that grant funds are being used for their intended purposes and in accordance with laws and regulations . while control deficiencies at the grantees were the immediate cause of improper and potentially improper expenditures , weaknesses in lsc's oversight controls discussed above negatively affected the effectiveness of its monitoring of grantees' controls and compliance .
the report identified these five general research categories as ( 1 ) instrumentation , metrology , and analytical methods ; ( 2 ) nanomaterials and human health ; ( 3 ) nanomaterials and the environment ; ( 4 ) health and environmental exposure assessment ; and ( 5 ) risk management methods . as a result , the inventory of projects designed to address these risks is inaccurate and cannot ensure that agencies direct their future research investments appropriately . we recommend that the director , ostp , in consultation with the director , nnco , and the director , omb , provide better guidance to agencies regarding how to report research that has a primary focus to understand or address environmental , health , and safety risks of nanotechnology . in addition to the agencies mentioned above , we also included in our review three regulatory agencies that do not have research budgets — the u.s. consumer product safety commission ( cpsc ) , the food and drug administration ( fda ) , and the occupational safety and health administration ( osha ) to determine whether these three agencies conducted any research on their own relative to ehs risks of nanotechnology . furthermore , agencies currently have limited guidance on how to report projects with more than one research focus across program component areas , when appropriate . despite the general effectiveness of its collaboration efforts , the nehi working group has not yet completed an overarching strategy to help align the agencies' ehs research efforts . however , for a technology that may become ubiquitous , it is essential to consider the potential risks of using nanotechnology in concert with its potential benefits . in 2006 , an estimated $50 billion in products health care and agriculture . the act establishes a national nanotechnology program to coordinate federal nanotechnology research and development . the nni , through its nehi working group , has begun a process to identify and prioritize both the research needed to better understand potential ehs risks and the gaps between what research is underway and the highest - priority needs . however , this information is not currently available because the totals reported by the nni include research that is more closely related to uses of nanotechnology , rather than the risks nanotechnology may pose . nanotechnology encompasses a wide range of innovations based on the nanotechnology encompasses a wide range of innovations based on the understanding and control of matter at the scale of nanometers — the understanding and control of matter at the scale of nanometers — the equivalent of one - billionth of a meter . in this context you asked us to report on ( 1 ) the extent to which selected research and regulatory agencies conducted research in fiscal year 2006 that primarily was focused on the potential ehs risks of nanotechnology ; ( 2 ) the reasonableness of the processes that agencies and the nni use to identify and prioritize federal research on the potential ehs risks of nanotechnology ; and ( 3 ) the effectiveness of the processes that agencies and the nni use to coordinate their research . the woodrow wilson international center for scholars' project on the woodrow wilson international center for scholars' project on emerging nanotechnologies has identified over 500 consumer products emerging nanotechnologies has identified over 500 consumer products that already are available to consumers that may contain nanoscale that already are available to consumers that may contain nanoscale materials .
to determine whether existing department of defense ( dod ) funds control systems , processes , and internal controls provide reasonable assurance that potential antideficiency act ( ada ) violations will be prevented and detected , we interviewed dod comptroller officials and reviewed gao and dod inspector general audit reports , including financial - related reports ; performance reports ; and reports specifically related to the ada , compliance with laws and regulations , or both . to comply with legal and regulatory requirements , dod must implement and maintain administrative controls that ensure the proper use of its appropriated funds , including the use of accounting and funds control systems that are able to accurately record obligations , collections , and disbursements against appropriations and the accounts established to track the status of appropriations . federal agencies , including the department of defense ( dod ) , are responsible for ensuring that appropriated funds are used only for purposes , and within the amount and time frames , prescribed by the congress . in fiscal year 2008 , dod had appropriations totaling more than $669 billion . dod financial management has been on our high - risk list since 1995 because of the department's continuing inability to provide accurate , timely , and complete financial and performance information for management use and reporting . the antideficiency act ( ada ) prohibits any dod officer or employee from incurring obligations or making expenditures in excess or in advance of appropriations or apportionments . under the ada , the office of management and budget ( omb ) apportions appropriated funds and other budgetary resources to dod . to improve management and oversight of preliminary reviews and formal investigations of potential ada violations , we recommend that the secretary of defense direct the under secretary of defense ( comptroller ) to take the following two actions to update the department's fmr to require that ( 1 ) ada case files document that the investigating officer ( s ) selected to conduct a preliminary review or formal investigation is ( are ) free of personal , external , and organizational impairments and ( 2 ) dod components maintain documentation of the date by which an investigating officer must receive refresher training in order to remain qualified to perform ada reviews and investigations . the act further requires dod to establish by regulation a system of administrative controls to restrict obligations and disbursements to the amounts of appropriations , apportionments , and dod's subdivisions of those apportionments . 110-77 , which accompanied the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2008 , directed gao to review the department's ada procedures for preventing , identifying , investigating , and reporting ada violations and the disciplinary actions taken when violations occur . although dod has taken steps to improve visibility over the investigation process , additional actions are needed to improve its ability to prevent , detect , investigate , and report on ada violations . dod has acknowledged the financial management weaknesses reported by gao and dod auditors and the impact these weaknesses have on the reliability of the department's financial information . additionally , we recommend that the secretary of defense direct the secretary of the army , the secretary of the navy , and the secretary of the air force to take the following four actions: ( 1 ) implement and document processes , procedures , and controls to identify and help ensure that key funds control personnel , including funds certifying officials , are properly trained so that they can fulfill their responsibilities to prevent , identify , and report potential ada violations ; ( 2 ) implement and document processes , procedures , and controls to oversee and monitor compliance with dod fmr provisions requiring the maintenance and use of a roster for selecting qualified ada investigating officers ; ( 3 ) develop , implement , and document policies and procedures to help ensure compliance with the dod fmr requirements for investigating officer training ; and ( 4 ) develop , implement , and document policies and procedures to help ensure compliance with the dod fmr requirements for investigating officer independence .
concerned by reports of significant weaknesses in federal computer systems , congress passed the federal information security management act ( fisma ) of 2002 , which permanently authorized and strengthened information security program , evaluation , and annual reporting requirements for federal agencies . in my testimony today , i will summarize ( 1 ) security incidents reported at federal agencies , ( 2 ) the effectiveness of information security at federal agencies , ( 3 ) agencies' reported progress in performing key control activities , and ( 4 ) opportunities to enhance fisma reporting and independent evaluations . we also analyzed agencies' inspectors general ( ig ) reports pertaining to information security ; congressional reports ; annual fisma reports for 24 major federal agencies ; the performance and accountability reports for those agencies ; and the office of management and budget ( omb ) fisma guidance and mandated annual reports to congress . the need for a vigilant approach to information security is demonstrated by the dramatic increase in reports of security incidents , the wide availability of hacking tools , and steady advances in the sophistication and effectiveness of attack technology . information security is a critical consideration for any organization that depends on information systems and computer networks to carry out its mission or business . proper safeguards are essential to protect systems from malicious insiders and external attackers attempting to gain unauthorized access and obtain sensitive information , commit fraud , disrupt operations , or launch attacks against other systems . in reports to congress since 1997 , we have identified information security as a governmentwide high - risk issue . over the past year , federal agencies have reported numerous security incidents . it is especially important for government agencies , where the public's trust is essential . for many years , we have reported that poor information security is a widespread problem with potentially devastating consequences . security plans ) . thank you for the opportunity to participate in today's joint hearing to discuss information security over federal systems . in preparing for this testimony , we relied on our previous reports and ongoing work on information security at federal agencies . despite these persistent weaknesses , agencies have continued to report steady progress in implementing certain information security requirements . periodic reporting of performance measures for fisma requirements and related analysis provides valuable information on the status and progress of agency efforts to implement effective security management programs ; however , opportunities exist to enhance reporting under fisma and the independent evaluations completed by igs . almost all major agencies exhibit weaknesses in one or more areas of information security controls . remedial actions to address deficiencies in information security policies , procedures , and practices igs reported weaknesses in their agency's remediation process . current performance measures offer limited assurance of the quality of agency processes that implement key security policies , controls , and practices . until agencies effectively and fully implement agencywide information security programs , federal data and systems will not be adequately safeguarded to prevent disruption , unauthorized use , disclosure , and modification . despite having persistent information security weaknesses , federal agencies have continued to report steady progress in implementing certain information security requirements .
as agreed with the subcommittee , i will discuss the preparations under way at the government accountability office ( gao ) to meet our responsibilities under the presidential transition act to assist the incoming administration as well as the 111th congress . in addition , this will be the first post - 9 / 11 transition , with a relatively new department of homeland security ( dhs ) grappling with the threats we face here at home while experiencing its first change in administration . the act specifically identifies gao as a source of briefings and other materials to help inform presidential appointees of the major management issues , risks , and challenges they will face . the 2009 presidential transition will be a unique and critical period for the united states . for example , we update our high - risk list with the start of each new congress to focus attention on areas in need of broad - based transformation or susceptible to waste , fraud , abuse , and mismanagement . while as a legislative branch agency gao has extensive experience helping each new congress , the presidential transition act points to gao as a resource for incoming administrations as well . during the last presidential transition , we identified for congress and the then new administration key program and management issues in the major departments and across government . the white house will need to fill thousands of appointments , some of which will be subject to senate confirmation , across the federal government . the act's 2000 amendments to clearly bring gao into the transition picture are consistent with the role we traditionally have played as an important resource for congress and new administrations during transitions . and on capitol hill , with 26 house members and 5 senators deciding not to seek reelection , there will also be congressional newcomers . help inform the management improvement agendas of congress and the new administration . highlight the growing need for innovative , integrated approaches to solve national and global challenges . monitor the implementation of the presidential transition act provisions and identify potential improvements for future transitions . our nation faces a wartime presidential transition for the first time in 40 years . objectives for gao's transition efforts provide insight into pressing national issues . to do this , we will use our institutional knowledge and broad - based work on matters across the spectrum of government activities . underscore critical capacity - building needs in individual agencies that will affect implementation of whatever new priorities are pursued . more recently , we assisted the 110th congress by suggesting 36 areas for oversight based on our work . we take our role under the presidential transition act very seriously ; our planning to effectively perform this role is well under way . my comments today center on the six objectives of our efforts to assist the upcoming transition as policy makers take on the serious challenges facing our country . the next congress and new administration will confront a set of pressing issues that will demand urgent attention and continuing oversight to ensure the nation's security and well - being . document targeted opportunities to conserve resources that can be applied to new initiatives .
to ensure that comparable screening and monitoring services are available to all responders , we are recommending that the secretary of hhs expeditiously take two actions: ( 1 ) ensure that screening and monitoring services are available for federal responders and ( 2 ) ensure that screening and monitoring services are available for nonfederal responders residing outside of the nyc metropolitan area . tens of thousands of people served as responders in the aftermath of the world trade center ( wtc ) disaster , including new york city fire department ( fdny ) personnel , federal government personnel , and other government and private - sector workers and volunteers from new york and elsewhere . more than 5 years after the destruction of the wtc buildings , concerns remain about the physical and mental health effects of the disaster , the long - term nature of some of these health effects , and the availability of health care services for those affected . specifically , in this report we assess the status of ( 1 ) services provided by the wtc federal responder screening program , ( 2 ) niosh's efforts to provide services for nonfederal responders residing outside the nyc metropolitan area , and ( 3 ) niosh's awards to grantees for treatment services , as well as efforts to estimate the cost of serving responders . hhs continues to fund and coordinate the wtc health programs and has key federal responsibility for ensuring the availability of services to responders . following the wtc attack , federal funding was provided to government agencies and private organizations to establish programs for screening , monitoring , or treating responders for illnesses and conditions related to the wtc disaster ; these programs are referred to in this report as the wtc health programs . the department of health and human services ( hhs ) funded the programs as separate efforts serving different categories of responders — for example , firefighters , other workers and volunteers , or federal responders — and has responsibility for coordinating program efforts . we also reported that the national institute for occupational safety and health ( niosh ) , a component of hhs's centers for disease control and prevention ( cdc ) responsible for administering most of the wtc health programs for responders , had begun to take steps to provide access to screening , monitoring , and treatment services for nonfederal responders who reside outside the new york city ( nyc ) metropolitan area . however , these efforts are not complete , and the stop - and - start history of the department's efforts to serve these groups does not provide assurance that the latest efforts to extend screening and monitoring services to these responders will be successful and will be sustained over time . hhs commented that overall , our report is an accurate and appropriate account of its activities and accomplishments concerning health services for responders to the wtc disaster . therefore , it is important for hhs to make a concerted effort , without further delay , to ensure that health screening and monitoring services are available to all people who responded to the attack on the world trade center , regardless of who their employer is or where they reside .
specifically , strategic human capital transformation and related management reforms ; dod's new pay - for - performance system , known as the national security personnel system ( nsps ) ; contractors in the workforce ; and personnel security clearances are among the serious challenges going forward . second , as requested , i will comment on the potential impact on gao's ability to perform audit work on personnel security clearances if the office of the director of national intelligence ( odni ) were to assume management of this issue from the office of management and budget ( omb ) . first , gao has assisted congress for decades in its oversight role and helped federal departments and agencies with disparate missions to improve the economy , efficiency , and effectiveness of their operations . finally , given historical challenges to gao's ability to audit the intelligence community's programs and activities , i would like to discuss gao's views on senate bill s. 82 , known as the intelligence community audit act of 2007 . specifically , we have performed in - depth reviews and issued reports on intelligence , surveillance , and reconnaissance ( isr ) systems requirements , operations , and acquisitions ; on space acquisitions ; and on the space acquisition workforce — issues that are current and critical within the intelligence community . my comments today are based primarily on gao's completed work and on our institutional knowledge , drawn from our prior reviews at the department of defense ( dod ) and other federal agencies of human capital management , personnel security clearances , and other areas that directly affect the intelligence community , as well as on publicly available reports . you asked that i discuss how gao's expertise and capacity to perform program reviews of key governmentwide issues , as well as some recent work we have done related to intelligence activities , could be useful in assisting congressional oversight of intelligence community management reforms under consideration . human capital transformation and personnel security clearances also have been repeatedly identified as areas of weakness within the intelligence community by others , including the subcommittee on oversight , house permanent select committee on intelligence ; the congressional research service ; and independent commissions .  ( see the list of related gao products at the end of this statement. ) . a number of the governmentwide management challenges we have addressed , such as human capital transformation , acquisition , information technology , strategic planning , organizational alignment , financial and knowledge management , and personnel security clearances , affect most federal agencies , including those within the intelligence community . in addition , gao's work also provides important insight and foresight to complement the work we have performed for congress for many years . we also have recently completed work on several management issues that are directly related to the intelligence community , and we have the capabilities to further support the intelligence and other appropriate congressional committees with their oversight needs . for the most part , dod has agreed with our findings and recommendations . moreover , we have designated some of these areas as high - risk for the federal government . s. 82 , if enacted , would amend title 31 of the united states code to reaffirm gao's authority to audit and evaluate financial transactions , programs , and activities of the intelligence community .
in addition , the next administration should focus its attention on: ( 1 ) adopting a more strategic and crosscutting approach to overseeing governmentwide performance ; ( 2 ) improving the relevance of performance information to congress ; and ( 3 ) building agency confidence in assessments for use in decision making . recent events , such as lead paint in imported children's products , tainted meat , predatory mortgage lending , contract fraud , and national disasters like hurricane katrina and the attacks of september 11 , 2001 , raise questions among the american people about the capacity of the federal government to meet their most pressing needs . congress enacted the government performance and results act of 1993 ( gpra ) to inform congressional and executive decision making by providing objective information on the relative effectiveness and efficiency of federal programs and spending . additionally , the nation's long - term fiscal imbalance drives the need for federal agencies to allocate increasingly scarce resources in the most efficient and effective way possible . you asked us to discuss: ( 1 ) the trends in federal managers' reported use of performance information governmentwide and at the agency level as identified through four surveys we conducted over the past 10 years ; ( 2 ) how agencies can encourage greater use of performance information to improve federal program management ; and ( 3 ) lessons learned to be considered by the next congress and administration for future performance improvement initiatives . the next administration can continue to bring a greater focus on improving the performance of federal programs and ensuring that federal funds are allocated effectively by building on the strengths of prior performance improvement initiatives . first , the next administration should promote three key practices that we have identified in our work over the last decade to ensure that the performance information gathered is used in making management decisions: ( 1 ) demonstrating leadership commitment to results - oriented management ; ( 2 ) developing a clear “line of sight” linking individual performance with organizational results ; and ( 3 ) building agency capacity to collect and use performance information . that same year , the clinton administration launched the national performance review ( npr ) , which was intended to make the government “work better and cost less.” the current administration has also attempted to resolve long - standing federal management weaknesses through its five governmentwide management priorities under the president's management agenda ( pma ) , which was first announced in 2001 . over the past 15 years , various reform efforts have attempted to shift the focus of federal government management from a preoccupation with activities to the results or outcomes of those activities . i am pleased to be here today to discuss the results of our 2007 survey on performance and management issues and lessons learned over the past 15 years through legislative and executive efforts to improve the management and performance of the federal government . however , we have found that progress is still needed to further integrate information about program performance into federal managers' decision making and ensure continued progress . beyond this , the next administration can better focus its efforts to improve performance by ( 1 ) adopting a more strategic and crosscutting approach to overseeing performance ; ( 2 ) improving the relevance of performance information to congress ; and ( 3 ) building agency confidence in assessments for use in decision making .
the smithsonian has been referred to as america's museum , as its museums hold and provide access to irreplaceable national collections in american and natural history , art , and other areas . my statement focuses on three topics: ( 1 ) the smithsonian's real property management efforts , including the condition of the smithsonian's facilities , costs of facilities' projects , and efforts to improve real property security and portfolio management ; ( 2 ) the extent to which the smithsonian has developed and implemented strategies to fund its revitalization , construction , and maintenance projects as we recommended in 2005 ; and ( 3 ) some preliminary results of our ongoing work on governance changes being made by the smithsonian's board of regents to address recent governance problems . since its beginning , the smithsonian has evolved into the world's largest museum complex and research organization ; two of its museums on the national mall in washington , d.c. , are the most visited in the world . in response to concerns about the smithsonian's governance raised by the former secretary's compensation and expenses , as well as other issues , two studies were conducted , one by the board of regents' governance committee and the other by an independent review committee ( irc ) created at the request of the board of regents . in recent years , the national academy of public administration ( napa ) , the smithsonian , and we have reported on the deterioration of the smithsonian's facilities and the threat posed by this deterioration to the smithsonian's collections . in april 2005 , we reported that the smithsonian's current funding would not be sufficient to cover its estimated $2.3 billion in facilities projects through 2013 and recommended that the smithsonian board of regents develop and implement a funding plan to address the smithsonian's facilities projects . the board of regents adopted all 25 of the governance committee's recommendations and stated that the irc recommendations were for the most part encompassed by the governance committee recommendations . recently , it has come to light that in addition to the challenge of addressing the smithsonian's facilities needs , the board of regents faces other governance challenges . in the past year , following a report from the smithsonian's inspector general to the board of regents on the smithsonian's former secretary's compensation package and expenses , the former secretary resigned . the smithsonian's annual operating and capital program revenues come from its own private trust fund assets and federal appropriations ; however , the majority of funds for facilities come from the smithsonian's federal appropriations . as the smithsonian's chief decision - making body , the smithsonian board of regents is responsible for the long - term stewardship of the smithsonian's mission , which includes maintaining the smithsonian's facilities and collections , as well as ensuring that the smithsonian has a funding strategy that provides sufficient funds to support these activities . among the findings of these studies were that the roles and responsibilities of regents were not clearly defined ; under the former secretary of the smithsonian , key senior officials such as the general counsel , inspector general , and chief financial officer were isolated from the board ; and the regents did not routinely receive or request information necessary to support vigorous deliberation , well - reasoned decision making , and adequate oversight .
although social security is important because of its size , the real driver of the long - term fiscal outlook is health care spending . long - term fiscal simulations by gao , the congressional budget office ( cbo ) , and others all show that despite a 3- year decline in the federal government's unified budget deficit , we still face large and growing structural deficits driven primarily by rising health care costs and known demographic trends . medicare and medicaid are both large and projected to continue growing rapidly in the future . our long - term fiscal challenge is primarily a health - care challenge . i appreciate this invitation to talk with you about our nation's long - term fiscal outlook as we enter 2008 — and the challenge it continues to present for the future of america and americans . your decision to dedicate a hearing to this important issue again demonstrates the seriousness with which you and this committee view our nation's large and growing fiscal challenge . already the first members of the baby boom generation have filed for early social security retirement benefits — and will be eligible for medicare in only 3 years . the passage of time only serves to worsen this situation: the size of the challenge has grown and the time to address it has shrunk . my remarks are based on gao's previous work , including various reports and testimonies on our nation's long - term fiscal challenges , health care , and the need for budget process reform . everyone on this committee is well aware of the nature and importance of the challenge we face . today , therefore , i will emphasize a few key points: although recent declines in the annual budget deficit are good news , our longer - term fiscal outlook is worse — and absent meaningful action we will face spiraling levels of debt . the goal of these reports is to increase public awareness and understanding of the long - term fiscal outlook in light of escalating health care cost growth and population aging , to stimulate public and policy debates , and to help policymakers make more informed decisions . we face an increasing need and yet a shrinking window of opportunity for action . it provides 13 potential tools for congress and the administration to use to begin to confront our long - term fiscal and other challenges . these countries used a variety of measures , including projections of future revenue and spending and summary measures of fiscal imbalance and fiscal gaps , to assess fiscal sustainability . under any plausible scenario , the federal budget is on an imprudent and unsustainable path . i wish i could say the long - term outlook is different than when i last appeared before you on halloween — but as all of you know , it is not . first , even this short - term deficit is understated: it masks the fact that the federal government has been using the social security surplus to offset spending in the rest of government for many years . for example , the department of the treasury ( treasury ) reported a unified deficit of $163 billion and an on - budget deficit of $344 billion in fiscal year 2007 .
given a large - scale organizational change initiative , such as the national given a large - scale organizational change initiative , such as the national security personnel system ( nsps ) , is a substantial commitment that will security personnel system ( nsps ) , is a substantial commitment that will take years to complete , it is important that the department of defense take years to complete , it is important that the department of defense ( dod ) and congress be kept informed of the full cost of implementing ( dod ) and congress be kept informed of the full cost of implementing nsps . these categories are ( 1 ) design and implementation , ( 2 ) training , ( 3 ) evaluation , ( 4 ) human resources automated systems , and ( 5 ) program office operations . to determine the extent to which the department of defense ( dod ) has estimated the current and future total costs associated with the implementation of the national security personnel system ( nsps ) , we reviewed the estimate that was published in the nsps final regulations . our prior work on dod's financial and related business management and systems has revealed pervasive deficiencies that affect its ability to control costs ; ensure basic accountability ; anticipate future costs and claims on the budget ; measure performance ; maintain funds control ; prevent and detect fraud , waste , and abuse ; and address pressing management issues . on november 1 , 2005 , dod and the office of personnel management ( opm ) november 1 , 2005 , dod and the office of personnel management ( opm ) jointly released the final regulations on nsps . however , in the absence of more specific details on its planned actions to leverage existing policies and procedures to ensure oversight of nsps costs , we continue to emphasize the department's need for a comprehensive oversight framework because without it dod and congress do not have adequate visibility over the actual cost to design and implement nsps . gao , human capital: observations on final regulations for dod's national security personnel system , gao - 06-227t ( washington , d.c.: nov. 17 , 2006 ) ; human capital: dod's national security personnel system faces implementation challenges , gao - 05-730 ( washington , d.c.: july 14 , 2005 ) ; human capital: preliminary observations on proposed dod national security personnel system regulations , gao - 05-432t ( washington , d.c.: mar . in november 2003 , congress authorized the secretary of defense to nsps . in november 2003 , congress authorized the secretary of defense to establish nsps , a new human resources management system . without an effective oversight mechanism , dod and congress do not have adequate visibility over the actual cost to design and implement nsps . the components estimated costs of about $23 million in fiscal year 2005 , about $27 million in fiscal year 2006 , about $35 million in fiscal year 2007 , and $22 million in fiscal year 2008 , as shown in table 1 . without a full cost estimate , decision makers within dod and congress will not have the complete cost information they need to make decisions about whether adequate resources are being provided for implementing nsps .
my testimony today will focus on: ( 1 ) the progress tsa and other dhs components have made in securing the nation's commercial aviation system and ( 2 ) challenges that have impeded dhs's ( and , as they relate to transportation security , tsa ) efforts to implement its mission and management functions . the transportation security administration ( tsa ) , originally established as an agency within the department of transportation in 2001 but now a component within dhs , is charged with securing the transportation network while also ensuring the free movement of people and commerce . i appreciate the opportunity to participate in today's hearing to discuss the department of homeland security's ( dhs ) progress and challenges in securing our nation's aviation system . tsa has primary responsibility for security in all modes of transportation and since its inception has developed and implemented a variety of programs and procedures to secure the commercial aviation system . my comments are based on issued gao reports and testimonies addressing the security of the nation's aviation system , including an august 2007 report that highlights the progress dhs has made in implementing its mission and management functions . other dhs components , federal agencies , state and local governments , and the private sector also play a role in aviation security . these issues include: ( 1 ) transforming and integrating dhs's management functions ; ( 2 ) establishing baseline performance goals and measures and engaging in effective strategic planning efforts ; ( 3 ) applying and strengthening a risk management approach for implementing missions and making resource allocation decisions ; ( 4 ) sharing information with key stakeholders ; and ( 5 ) coordinating and partnering with federal , state and local , and private sector agencies . for example , the u.s. customs and border protection ( cbp ) has responsibility for conducting passenger prescreening — in general , the matching of passenger information against terrorist watch lists prior to an aircraft's departure — for international flights operating to or from the united states , as well as inspecting inbound air cargo upon its arrival in the united states . in this report , we reviewed the extent to which dhs has taken actions to achieve performance expectations in each of its mission and management areas that we identified from legislation , homeland security presidential directives , and dhs strategic planning documents . in determining the department's overall level of progress in achieving performance expectations in each of its mission and management areas , we concluded whether the department had made limited , modest , moderate , or substantial progress . in accordance with tsa requirements , airport authorities are responsible for implementing measures to secure access to restricted airport areas as well as airport perimeters , while air carriers are responsible for inspecting air cargo , among other things . these assessments of progress do not reflect , nor are they intended to reflect , the extent to which actions by dhs and its components have made the nation more secure . based primarily on our past work , we made a determination regarding whether dhs generally achieved or generally did not achieve the key elements of each performance expectation .
social security covers about 96 percent of all u.s. workers ; the vast majority of the remaining 4 percent who are not covered are public employees . to address concerns with how noncovered workers are treated compared with covered workers , social security has provisions in place to take noncovered employment into account when calculating social security benefits for public employees , but the provisions have been difficult to administer . it has also been a source of confusion and frustration for the workers these provisions affect . currently , social security has two provisions in place that attempt to ensure these workers' noncovered employment is taken into consideration when calculating their social security benefits: ( 1 ) the government pension offset ( gpo ) , which affects spouse and survivor benefits , and ( 2 ) the windfall elimination provision ( wep ) , which affects retired worker benefits . alternatively , as part of social security reform , others have proposed extending mandatory coverage to all state and local government employees who are not currently covered ; under mandatory coverage , the need for these provisions would be phased out over time . moreover , 9 in 10 of the public employees not covered by social security are state and local government workers . although these noncovered workers do not pay social security taxes on their government earnings , they may still be eligible for social security benefits through their spouses' or their own earnings from other covered employment . however , the social security administration ( ssa ) cannot effectively and fairly apply these provisions because it does not have access to complete and accurate information on noncovered earnings and receipt of noncovered pensions . thus , some have proposed eliminating these provisions . today , i will discuss social security's coverage of public employees , social security's current provisions affecting noncovered public employees , and proposals to modify those provisions or make coverage mandatory for all public employees . i am pleased to be here today to discuss the issues regarding social security coverage of public employees and the possible effects of reform . however , congressional action is still needed to improve access to information on state and local government pensions . in recent years , various social security reforms that would affect public employees have been proposed . this situation poses difficult issues of fairness . implementation of some of our recommendations has improved the availability and tracking of key information for federal retirees , and we have estimated that this tracking will save hundreds of millions of dollars . both provisions reduce social security benefits for those who receive noncovered pension benefits . some proposals specifically address the gpo and the wep and would either revise or eliminate them . i hope i can help clarify and provide some perspective on the complex relationship between social security and public employees . nevertheless , these employees can still be eligible for social security benefits based on their spouses' or their own earnings from covered employment . to address the fairness issues that arise with noncovered public employees , the congress has enacted two provisions: ( 1 ) the government pension offset ( gpo ) regarding spouse and survivor benefits , and ( 2 ) the windfall elimination provision ( wep ) regarding retired worker benefits .
the nation's more than 17,000 school districts are responsible for maintaining the safety and security of approximately 49 million public school students . events such as the recent shootings by armed intruders in schools across the nation , natural disasters such as hurricanes katrina and rita in 2005 , the terrorist attacks of september 11 , 2001 , and potential pandemics have heightened awareness of the need for school districts to be prepared to address a range of emergencies within and outside of school buildings . when discussing the federal government , i am primarily referring to the three agencies included in our report — the departments of homeland security ( dhs ) , education ( education ) , and health and human services ( hhs ) . my testimony today will focus on ( 1 ) the role of the federal and state governments in establishing requirements and providing resources to school districts for emergency management planning , ( 2 ) what school districts have done to plan and prepare for emergencies , and , briefly , ( 3 ) the challenges school districts have experienced in planning for emergencies and communicating and coordinating with first responders , parents , and students . the federal government's role in emergency management is principally to support state and local activities and develop the federal capabilities to respond effectively when state and local governments require federal assistance . “emergency management” refers to the range of efforts involved in building the capacity to prevent , protect against , respond to , and recover from an incident . some federal support comes in the form of guidance and recommendations . because the federal government serves as a partner to all states , it is uniquely positioned to observe and evaluate the range of emergency management activities across states and local governments , including school districts , and disseminate information on recommended practices and successful strategies . we also administered two surveys , one to state education agencies and one to state administering agencies ( the state agencies to which dhs disburses emergency management funding ) in all 50 states and the district of columbia . additionally , school districts are generally not training with their first responders ( i.e. , law enforcement , fire , and emergency medical services ) and community partners ( such as the local head of government and local public health agency ) , which are both federally recommended practices . to determine the role of the federal and state governments , planning requirements for school districts and schools , and the types of resources provided to districts , we conducted interviews with officials representing dhs , education , and hhs and reviewed relevant federal laws . my testimony today is drawn from ongoing work we have conducted for this committee and other congressional requesters on emergency management in school districts . therefore , some states receiving this funding may be uncertain as to whether such funding can be allocated to school districts or schools ; and as a result , school districts may not have the opportunity to benefit from this funding . in summary , federal and state governments support emergency management in school districts with a range of resources and most school districts have developed emergency management plans despite facing challenges ; however not all of these plans incorporate recommended practices .
on behalf of the federal government , the department of the treasury ( treasury ) , in coordination with the office of management and budget ( omb ) , prepares the cfs . the purpose of this report is to ( 1 ) discuss the details of the weaknesses we identified during our audit of the fiscal year 2006 cfs regarding financial reporting procedures and internal control over the process for preparing the cfs , ( 2 ) recommend improvements to address those weaknesses , and ( 3 ) provide the status of corrective actions on the recommendations detailed in our prior reports and listed in appendix i . in our report dated december 1 , 2006 , we disclaimed an opinion on the consolidated financial statements of the u.s. government ( cfs ) for the fiscal years ended september 30 , 2006 and 2005 . for the past 10 years , certain material weaknesses in internal control and in selected accounting and financial reporting practices have resulted in conditions that prevented us from expressing an opinion on the cfs . we have reported that the federal government did not have adequate systems , controls , and procedures for preparing the cfs . other internal control weaknesses were identified during our tests of the federal government's process for preparing the cfs . many of the weaknesses in internal control that have contributed to our continuing disclaimers of opinion were identified by auditors during their audits of federal agencies' financial statements and were reported in detail with recommendations to the agencies in separate reports . we have discussed each of the new weaknesses identified during our fiscal year 2006 audit with your staff and have incorporated their comments as appropriate . this appendix includes open recommendations from four of our prior reports: financial audit: process for preparing the consolidated financial statements of the u.s. government needs improvement , gao - 04-45 ( washington , d.c.: oct. 30 , 2003 ) ; financial audit: process for preparing the consolidated financial statements of the u.s. government needs further improvement , gao - 04-866 ( washington , d.c.: sept. 10 , 2004 ) ; financial audit: process for preparing the consolidated financial statements of the u.s. government continues to need improvement , gao - 05-407 ( washington , d.c.: may 4 , 2005 ) ; and financial audit: significant internal control weaknesses remain in preparing the consolidated financial statements of the u.s. government , gao - 06- 415 ( washington , d.c.: apr . in our disclaimer of opinion on the fiscal year 2006 cfs , which is included in the fiscal year 2006 financial report of the united states government , we discussed material deficiencies related to the federal government's process for preparing the cfs . as part of our audit of the fiscal years 2006 and 2005 cfs , we evaluated the federal government's financial reporting procedures and related internal control , and we followed up on the status of treasury and omb corrective actions to address open recommendations regarding the process for preparing the cfs that were in our prior years' reports . specifically , for fiscal year 2006 , we found that federal agencies did not provide treasury and omb with ( 1 ) detailed information regarding the nature and description of the differences that exist between trading partners' records of intragovernmental activity and balances , ( 2 ) detailed reasons why such differences exist , ( 3 ) steps being taken to work with the agencies' trading partners to resolve the differences , and ( 4 ) the potential outcome of such steps .
we recently issued a report , entitled medicare: focus on physician practice patterns can lead to greater program efficiency , which discusses an approach to analyzing physicians' practice patterns in medicare and ways the centers for medicare & medicaid services ( cms ) could use the results of such an analysis to modify inefficient physician behavior . one such strategy entails providing feedback to physicians on how their use of health care resources compares with that of their peers . this topic has been of significant interest to the congress , as medicare's current system of spending targets used to moderate physician spending growth and annually update physician fees has been problematic . the report fulfilled a 2003 mandate that we examine aspects of physician compensation in medicare , pertaining only to physicians serving beneficiaries in traditional fee - for - service ( ffs ) medicare . this spending target system — called the sustainable growth rate ( sgr ) system — adjusts medicare's physician fees based on the extent to which actual spending aligns with specified targets . against this backdrop , my remarks today will focus on ( 1 ) the results of our analysis estimating the prevalence of inefficient physicians in medicare and ( 2 ) the potential for cms to profile physicians in traditional ffs medicare for efficiency and use the results in ways that are similar to other purchasers' efforts to encourage efficiency . in the report , we used the term efficiency to mean providing and ordering a level of services that is sufficient to meet a patient's health care needs but not excessive , given a patient's health status . medicare physician payment policy does little to change this situation ; payments under the medicare program are not designed to foster individual physician responsibility for the most effective medical practices . policymakers are therefore concerned about the appropriateness of the sgr system for updating physician fees and about physicians' continued participation in the medicare program . although these cuts have been overridden by legislative or administrative action , a sustained period of declining fees under the sgr system is projected . in recent years , the sgr system has called for cuts in physician fees to offset volume and intensity increases that have exceeded spending targets . as for implementing other strategies to encourage efficiency , such as the use of certain financial incentives , cms would likely need additional legislative authority . in contrast , some public and private health care purchasers have initiated programs to identify efficient physicians and encourage patients to obtain care from them . having considered the efforts of 10 private and public health care purchasers that routinely evaluate physicians for efficiency and other factors , we conducted our own analysis of physician practices in medicare . experts agree that physicians play a central role in the generation of health care expenditures in total . for example , the wide geographic variation in medicare spending per beneficiary — unrelated to beneficiary health status or outcomes — provides evidence that health needs alone do not determine spending . i am pleased to be here today as you discuss the importance of physician - focused strategies to improve efficiency in medicare . the problem , in part , is that the sgr system acts as a blunt instrument in that all physicians are subject to the consequences of excess spending — namely , downward fee adjustments — that may stem from the excessive use of resources by only some physicians .
my comments today will focus on ( 1 ) va's policies , procedures , and guidelines for evaluating and awarding ses member bonuses , including the composition and responsibility of va's performance review boards ( prb ) , which recommend ses bonuses ; ( 2 ) the number and amount of bonuses awarded for fiscal years 2004 through 2006 by va headquarters and field locations and compared to the amount of bonuses given to ses members at other major cabinet - level departments ; and ( 3 ) the office of personnel management's ( opm ) and the office of management and budget's ( omb ) roles in certifying va's and other agencies' ses performance appraisal system . through its three primary components , in fiscal year 2006 , va operated one of the largest health care systems that provided services to about 5 million patients , paid cash disability benefits to more than 3.5 million veterans and their survivors , and operated 125 national cemeteries in the united states . i am pleased to be here today to provide the subcommittee with information on the department of veterans affairs' ( va ) process for providing senior executive service ( ses ) performance awards ( bonuses ) . va's mission is to serve america's veterans and their families . we have also identified key practices of effective performance management for the ses , which include the linkage or “line of sight” between individual performance and organizational success , the importance of linking pay to individual and organizational performance , and the need to make meaningful distinctions in performance . we analyzed va's policies and procedures related to the awarding of ses member bonuses for 2005 through 2007 that were included in va's 2005 and 2006 submissions and 2007 draft submission to opm concerning va's ses and senior - level employee performance appraisal system . va has achieved provisional certification of its ses performance management system for 2004 through 2006 . in 2006 , we identified certain principles for executive pay plans that should be considered to attract and retain the quality and quantity of executive leadership necessary to address 21st century challenges , including that they be sensitive to hiring and retention trends ; reflect responsibilities , knowledge , skills , and contributions ; and be competitive . our review of va's requirements for ses performance plans as represented in both its 2006 submission and 2007 draft submission to opm shows that va made changes to the requirements for its performance plans to reflect greater emphasis on measurable results . in our body of work on senior executive performance management , we have discussed how high - performing organizations understand that they need senior leaders who are accountable for results , drive continuous improvement , and stimulate and support efforts to integrate human capital approaches with organizational goals and related transformation issues . information on opm's and omb's roles is based on our review of va's senior performance appraisal system certification submissions and related correspondence and our prior work reviewing opm's capacity to lead and implement reform . we analyzed data provided to us by va on the amount and number of ses member bonuses for fiscal years 2004 through 2006 and comparable data from other cabinet - level departments as reported by opm for fiscal years 2004 and 2005 .
combating nuclear smuggling is one of our nation's key national security objectives and the deployment of radiation detection equipment including portal monitors at u.s. ports of entry , including border crossings and domestic seaports , is an integral part of this system . dhs , through its domestic nuclear detection office ( dndo ) , is responsible for acquiring and supporting the deployment of radiation detection equipment , including portal monitors , within the united states . i am pleased to appear here today to discuss our assessment of the department of homeland security's ( dhs ) may 2006 cost - benefit analysis used to support the purchase and deployment of next generation radiation portal monitors . the pacific northwest national laboratory ( pnnl ) , one of the department of energy's ( doe ) national laboratories , is under contract to manage the deployment of radiation detection equipment for dhs . in response to our recommendation , dndo issued its cost - benefit analysis in may 2006 , and an updated , revised version in june 2006 . for these reasons , dhs's cost - benefit analysis does not meet the intent of our march 2006 report recommendation to fully assess the costs and benefits before purchasing any new equipment . in july 2006 , dhs awarded contracts to three vendors for developing the advanced spectroscopic portals' capabilities . to ensure that dhs's substantial investment in radiation detection technology yields the greatest possible level of detection capability at the lowest possible cost , in a march 2006 gao report , we recommended that once the costs and capabilities of asps were well understood , and before any of the new equipment was purchased for deployment , the secretary of dhs work with the director of dndo to analyze the costs and benefits of deploying asps . u.s. customs and border protection ( cbp ) is responsible for screening cargo as it enters the nation at our borders , which includes operating radiation detection equipment to interdict dangerous nuclear and radiological materials . this is an important decision because , if procured , these new portal monitors will be considerably more expensive than the portal monitors in use today . specifically , i will discuss whether dndo's june 2006 cost - benefit analysis provides an adequate basis for the substantial investment that acquiring and deploying asps will necessitate . these new , advanced portals are known as advanced spectroscopic portals ( asps ) . the cost - benefit analysis shows the total cost for deploying both current and new portal monitors to be about $1 billion . in comparing the costs of the new and current technologies , the procurement costs of the current generation portal monitors were highly inflated because dndo assumed a unit cost of about $131,000 , while the contract price at the time of the analysis was about $55,000 . further , we recommended that this analysis focus on determining whether any additional detection capability provided by the asps was worth the considerable additional costs . regarding the performance of the portal monitors: instead of using the results of its performance tests conducted in 2005 , dndo's analysis simply assumed that asps could detect highly enriched uranium 95 percent of the time , a performance level far exceeding the capabilities of the new technology's current demonstrated capabilities .
for example , ( 1 ) its risk assessment was not comprehensive , ( 2 ) specific guidance was missing from policies and procedures , ( 3 ) the network security plan was incomplete , ( 4 ) system testing had shortcomings , ( 5 ) remedial action plans were incomplete and corrective actions were not always timely , and ( 6 ) the network contingency plan was incomplete and inadequately tested . however , lanl has vulnerabilities in several critical areas , including ( 1 ) identifying and authenticating users of the network , ( 2 ) encrypting sensitive information , ( 3 ) monitoring and auditing compliance with security policies , ( 4 ) controlling and documenting changes to a computer system's hardware and software , and ( 5 ) restricting physical access to computing resources . lanl , located in los alamos , new mexico , has a multibillion dollar annual budget and is one of three national nuclear security administration ( nnsa ) laboratories responsible for designing and developing a safe , secure , and reliable nuclear weapons deterrent . our testimony today discusses ( 1 ) physical security at lanl , ( 2 ) preliminary observations from ongoing work on physical security at livermore , and ( 3 ) cyber security at lanl . to help strengthen information security controls over lanl's unclassified network , we made a series of recommendations to the secretary of energy and the administrator of nnsa , 11 of which focus on improving lanl's information security program and determining resource requirements for the unclassified network . for example , we recommended that the secretary of energy and the nnsa administrator require the director of lanl to , among other things , ( 1 ) ensure that the risk assessment for the unclassified network evaluates all known vulnerabilities and is revised periodically and ( 2 ) strengthen policies with a view toward further reducing , as appropriate , foreign nationals' access to the unclassified network , particularly those from countries identified as sensitive by doe . in addition , external security evaluations had repeatedly identified concerns about the adequacy of lanl's assessments of its own security performance . a successful physical or cyber attack on nnsa sites containing nuclear weapons , the material used in nuclear weapons , or information pertaining to the people who design and maintain the u.s. nuclear deterrent could have devastating consequences for the site , its surrounding communities , and the nation's security . in fiscal year 2007 , lanl budgeted nearly $200 million to provide the laboratory with physical and cyber security to protect the sensitive and classified assets on which laboratory employees rely to conduct their work . furthermore , nnsa does not consistently document resource allocation decisions and identify how funding shortfalls affect critical cyber security issues . strong federal oversight will help ensure that these improvements are sustained . although lanl cyber security officials told us that funding has been inadequate to address some of their security concerns , nnsa officials raised questions about the basis for lanl's funding request for cyber security . lanl has implemented measures to enhance its cyber security , but weaknesses remain in protecting the confidentiality , integrity , and availability of information on its unclassified network .
tens of thousands of people served as responders in the aftermath of the wtc disaster , including new york city fire department ( fdny ) personnel , federal government personnel , and thousands who came to new york city ( nyc ) from around the country . i am pleased to be here today to discuss our work on the implementation of federally funded health programs for individuals affected by the september 11 , 2001 , attack on the world trade center ( wtc ) . six years after the destruction of the wtc buildings , concerns remain about the physical and mental health effects of the disaster , the long - term nature of some of these health effects , and the availability of health care services for those affected . hhs continues to fund and coordinate the wtc health programs and has key federal responsibility for ensuring the availability of services to responders . we also reported that the national institute for occupational safety and health ( niosh ) , the component of hhs's centers for disease control and prevention responsible for administering most of the wtc health programs , had begun to take steps to provide access to screening , monitoring , and treatment services for nonfederal responders who resided outside the nyc metropolitan area . following the wtc attack , federal funding was provided to government agencies and private organizations to establish programs for screening , monitoring , or treating responders for illnesses and conditions related to the wtc disaster ; these programs are referred to in this testimony as the wtc health programs . the department of health and human services ( hhs ) funded the programs as separate efforts serving different categories of responders — for example , firefighters , other workers and volunteers , or federal responders — and has responsibility for coordinating program efforts . however , these efforts are not complete , and the stop - and - start history of the department's efforts to serve these responders does not provide assurance that the latest efforts to extend screening and monitoring services to them will be successful and will be sustained over time . we also interviewed officials of organizations that worked with niosh to provide or facilitate services for nonfederal responders residing outside the nyc metropolitan area , including the mount sinai school of medicine in nyc and the association of occupational and environmental clinics ( aoec ) — a network of university - affiliated and other private occupational health clinics across the united states and in canada . hhs established the program in june 2003 , suspended it in march 2004 , resumed it in december 2005 , suspended it again in january 2007 , and resumed it in may 2007 . as of january 2008 , the department has not responded to this recommendation . we also previously reported that one of the wtc health programs , hhs's wtc federal responder screening program , which was established to provide onetime screening examinations for responders who were federal employees when they responded to the wtc attack , has had difficulties ensuring the uninterrupted availability of services . therefore we recommended in july 2007 that the secretary of hhs take expeditious action to ensure that health screening and monitoring services are available to all people who responded to the attack on the wtc , regardless of where they reside .
wildland fire appropriations to prepare for and respond to wildland fires , including appropriations for reducing fuels , have increased from an average of $1.1 billion annually from fiscal years 1996 through 2000 to an average of more than $2.9 billion annually from fiscal years 2001 through 2005 ; adjusted for inflation , these appropriations increased from $1.3 billion to $3.1 billion . accumulations of fuels , due in part to past suppression policies ; severe drought and weather in some areas of the country ; and continued development in or near wildlands — an area commonly known as the wildland - urban interface — have contributed to increased costs . my testimony is based on our report , released today , that discusses steps the forest service and interior agencies have taken to ( 1 ) address key operational areas that could help contain the costs of preparing for and responding to wildland fires and ( 2 ) improve their management of their cost - containment efforts . thus , to help the agencies manage their ongoing efforts to contain wildland fire costs effectively and efficiently , and to assist congress in its oversight role , we recommended in our report that the secretaries of agriculture and the interior work together to direct their respective agencies to ( 1 ) establish clearly defined goals and measurable objectives for containing wildland fire costs , ( 2 ) develop a strategy to achieve these goals and objectives , ( 3 ) establish performance measures that are aligned with these goals and objectives , and ( 4 ) establish a framework to ensure that officials are held accountable for achieving the goals and objectives . these concerns have led federal agencies ( including the forest service , interior , the agriculture office of inspector general , and gao ) and others to conduct numerous reviews of the federal wildland fire program . five federal land management agencies — the forest service within the department of agriculture ( agriculture ) and the bureau of land management , bureau of indian affairs , national park service , and fish and wildlife service within the department of the interior ( interior ) — are responsible for managing wildland fires on federal lands . congress , the office of management and budget , federal agency officials , and others have expressed concerns about the mounting federal wildland fire expenditures . i am pleased to be here today to discuss federal firefighting agencies' efforts to contain the costs of preparing for and responding to wildland fires — costs that have increased substantially over the past decade . to manage their cost - containment efforts effectively , the forest service and interior agencies should , at a minimum , have ( 1 ) clearly defined goals and measurable objectives , ( 2 ) a strategy to achieve the goals and objectives , ( 3 ) performance measures to track their progress , and ( 4 ) a framework for holding appropriate agency officials accountable for achieving the goals . because of the importance of these actions and continuing concerns about the agencies' response to the increasing cost of wildland fires — and so that the agencies can use the results of these actions to prepare for the 2008 fire season — the agencies should provide congress with this information no later than november 2007 .
federal , state , and local decision makers have had a renewed interest in looking at how high speed rail might fit into our national transportation system and address increasing mobility constraints on the nation's highways and at airports due to congestion . although the current economic downturn has recently reduced the level of highway and air travel , projections show that intercity travel will grow again and that existing transportation capacity limitations will constrain mobility . to better understand the role that high speed rail service could play in the u.s. transportation system , we were asked to assess ( 1 ) the factors affecting the economic viability of high speed rail projects — that is , whether a project's total social benefits offset or justify the total social costs — and difficulties in determining the economic viability of proposed projects ; ( 2 ) the challenges that u.s. project sponsors experience in developing and financing high speed rail projects ; and ( 3 ) the federal role in the potential development of high speed rail systems . the department of transportation ( dot ) estimates that several intercity highways linking major urban markets will experience significant congestion by 2035 . to better understand the potential viability of high speed rail service in the united states , we reviewed ( 1 ) the factors affecting the economic viability of high speed rail projects — that is , whether a project's total social benefits offset or justify the total social costs — and difficulties in determining the economic viability of proposed projects ; ( 2 ) the challenges that u.s. project sponsors experience in developing and financing high speed rail projects ; and ( 3 ) the federal role in the potential development of high speed rail systems . the recently enacted american recovery and reinvestment of act of 2009 ( arra ) appropriated $8 billion for high speed rail and intercity passenger rail congestion and capital grants ( the latter of which were authorized by the priia ) , with priority given to projects that support the development of high speed rail service . ensure fiscal sustainability . in addition , the dependence of growing highway and air travel on fossil fuels raises significant environmental concerns regarding greenhouse gas emissions . as a result , transportation decision makers are exploring options that not only expand transportation capacity and relieve increasing congestion but also minimize the deleterious environmental impacts of increasing highway and air travel . moreover , in october 2008 , congress enacted the passenger rail investment and improvement act of 2008 ( priia ) , which establishes a program to develop high speed rail corridors — authorizing $1.5 billion in funding for project development . the failure to incorporate such measures is a common drawback of federal transportation programs . develop guidance and methods for ensuring reliability of ridership and other forecasts used to determine the viability of high speed rail projects and support the need for federal grant assistance . this would include consideration of such things as whether funding is affordable and stable over the short - and long - term ; the extent to which costs and revenues are shared among federal , state , and local participants ; and whether any project fees and taxes are aligned with use and benefits .
this report examines the factors that will affect the impact of recent legislation applying u.s. immigration law to the commonwealth of the northern mariana islands ( cnmi ) on the cnmi economy , in particular the cnmi's ( 1 ) labor market , including foreign workers ; ( 2 ) tourism sector ; and ( 3 ) foreign investment . the united states recently enacted legislation applying u.s. immigration law to the commonwealth of the northern mariana islands ( cnmi ) , ending decades of the cnmi's control over its own immigration system . because current data gaps limit federal agencies' ability to make key implementation decisions to best meet the goals of the legislation , we recommend that the secretary of homeland security and the secretary of labor take the following two actions: develop a strategy for obtaining critical data on the cnmi labor market that are not currently available on an ongoing basis , such as data on the wages , occupations , and employment status of cnmi residents and foreign workers ; and develop a strategy for obtaining critical data on cnmi foreign investment , such as overall levels of foreign investment and the investment amounts associated with various types of foreign investor entry permits . in preparing this report , we reviewed relevant cnmi immigration and labor laws ; current u.s. immigration law , including the u.s. immigration and nationality act ( ina ) and related regulations ; and the recent legislation applying u.s. immigration law to the cnmi , including earlier versions of the legislation . the cnmi is subject to most u.s. laws , and the united states has complete responsibility and authority for cnmi defense and foreign affairs . in addition , developing strategies for obtaining critical data that are currently unavailable on the cnmi labor market and foreign investment is essential to federal agencies' ability to make appropriate and effective decisions in implementing the legislation and fulfilling its goals . we were asked to examine factors that will affect the impact of the recent legislation's implementation on the cnmi economy , in particular the cnmi's ( 1 ) labor market , including foreign workers ; ( 2 ) tourism sector ; and ( 3 ) foreign investment . however , since 1978 , the cnmi has administered its own immigration system under the terms of its 1976 covenant with the united states . because the interaction of key federal decisions involving different departments will have a significant impact on the cnmi economy , coordination of these decisions is critical and necessitates an established interagency process , which currently does not exist . because of the importance of key implementation decisions by different federal agencies and the interaction of those decisions , we recommend that the secretary of homeland security lead other relevant federal agencies , including the departments of the interior , labor , and state , in identifying the interagency process that will be used to collaborate with one another — and consult with the cnmi government , as required — to jointly implement the legislation . the legislation's stated intent is to ensure effective border control procedures and protect national and homeland security while minimizing the potential adverse economic and fiscal effects of phasing out the cnmi's own foreign worker permit program and maximizing the cnmi's potential for economic and business growth .
the objectives of this study were to ( 1 ) describe changing factors that the national wildlife refuge system experienced from fiscal years 2002 through 2007 , including funding and staffing changes , and ( 2 ) examine how habitat management and visitor services changed during this period . fws's efforts to prioritize its use of funding and staff through workforce planning have restored some balance between refuge budgets and their associated staff costs . if threats and problems afflicting refuges continue to grow as expected , it will be important for the refuge system to monitor how these shifts in resources are affecting refuge conditions . fish and wildlife service ( fws ) , comprises about 585 refuges on more than 96 million acres of land and water that provide habitat for millions of waterfowl and other migratory birds , threatened and endangered species , and other plants and wildlife . you asked us to ( 1 ) describe changing factors that the refuge system experienced from fiscal years 2002 through 2007 , including funding and staffing changes , and ( 2 ) examine how habitat management and visitor services changed during this period . while some refuges have high - quality habitat and visitor service programs and others have seen improvements since 2002 , refuge managers are concerned about their ability to sustain high - quality refuge conditions and continue to improve conditions where needed because of expected continuing increases in external threats and habitat problems affecting refuges . already , fws has had to make trade - offs among refuges with regard to which habitat will be monitored and maintained , which visitor services will be offered , and which refuges will receive adequate law enforcement coverage . in addition , the act generally requires refuges to complete comprehensive conservation plans — long - range plans for managing , among other things , habitats and providing visitor services — by 2012 . in light of continuing federal fiscal constraints and an ever - expanding list of challenges facing refuges , maintaining the refuge system as envisioned in law — where the biological integrity , diversity , and environmental health of the refuge system are maintained ; priority visitor services are provided ; and the strategic growth of the system is continued — may be difficult . the refuge system spans all 50 states , american samoa , guam , puerto rico , the u.s. virgin islands , and other u.s. territories . some have noted concerns with refuges reducing hours or closing refuges to the public because of staff constraints . this is most likely due to staffing changes resulting from workforce planning , which were targeted at targeted - reduction refuges . while some refuges have visitor services staff and sufficient infrastructure , refuge managers indicated that staffing changes , partially resulting from workforce planning , and a lack of resources for increasing and maintaining infrastructure , raise concerns about their ability to provide quality visitor services into the future . these activities also are important , according to refuge managers , because the refuge system increasingly is turning toward partnerships with private landowners in an effort to maintain and improve ecosystems both on and around refuges ; public education about the refuge system can increase the viability of important refuge partnerships with nonprofit environmental and land management organizations who work with adjacent landowners , other federal and state land management agencies , and others on conservation efforts .
our review was limited to relevant provisions of the controlled substances act and implementing regulations , including department of justice , drug enforcement administration ( dea ) , and substance abuse and mental health services administration ( samhsa ) regulations . specifically , we examined ( 1 ) the regulation of methadone for pain management and addiction treatment , ( 2 ) the factors contributing to the increase in methadone - associated overdose deaths , and ( 3 ) the steps taken to prevent methadone - associated overdose deaths . to examine the regulation of methadone for pain management and addiction treatment , we reviewed relevant codified federal statutes and regulations pertaining to the prescribing , administering , or dispensing of methadone for pain management and addiction treatment . prescription drug abuse is a serious and growing public health problem . drug overdoses , including those from prescription drugs , are the second leading cause of unintentional injury deaths in the united states , exceeded only by motor vehicle fatalities , according to the centers for disease control and prevention ( cdc ) . methadone has been approved by the food and drug administration ( fda ) for the treatment of opioid addiction and pain , and it is relatively inexpensive compared to other opioids . we interviewed officials from the drug enforcement administration ( dea ) and the substance abuse and mental health services administration ( samhsa ) , and we reviewed relevant agency policies . cdc has also reported that it has been difficult to determine the extent to which increases in methadone - associated overdose deaths have resulted from specific prescribing practices , misuse by patients , diversion of the drug such as by illegal sale , or other means . hhs also reiterated that fda recently sent letters to the manufacturers of certain opioid drug products , including methadone , indicating that these drugs will be required to have a risk evaluation and mitigation strategy to ensure that the benefits of the drug continue to outweigh the risks . however , prescription drug monitoring programs have limitations . of particular concern is the sharp rise in methadone - associated overdose deaths — in which methadone may have caused or contributed to the death . to examine the regulation of methadone for pain management and addiction treatment , we reviewed relevant provisions of the controlled substances act , implementing regulations , and federal case law . we reviewed relevant studies and reports about efforts to prevent methadone and other prescription drug overdose deaths . because many efforts under way to prevent methadone - associated overdose deaths are new , their effectiveness has not yet been evaluated . states may also regulate the use of methadone for opioid addiction treatment under state laws and regulations , which may be equal to or stricter than federal standards . such deaths can occur in a number of ways , including intentional overdoses , or suicide , and accidental overdoses due to improper dosing levels , abuse , or patient misuse , such as by combining methadone with other drugs . until recently , methadone was primarily used in opioid treatment programs ( otp ) to treat and rehabilitate people addicted to such opioids as heroin or certain prescription drugs . federal agencies have also begun educating the public about prescription drug abuse .
across the federal government , agencies have financial management system modernization efforts under way and the success of these efforts will depend on omb's and agencies' efforts to ensure that disciplined processes are effectively used to help reduce the risk of system implementation failures . the federal government's ability to efficiently and effectively manage and oversee its day - to - day operations and programs relies heavily on the ability of agency financial management systems to produce complete , reliable , timely , and consistent financial information for use by executive branch agencies and congress . although modernization of these systems is expensive , these efforts represent a critical element in facilitating agencies' ability to institute strong financial management as called for by the chief financial officers ( cfo ) act of 1990 , federal financial management improvement act of 1996 ( ffmia ) , and other financial management reform legislation . in addition , despite its critical role in overseeing agency financial management systems modernization efforts , omb has not yet fully addressed our oversight - related recommendations , including assessing whether agencies have incorporated disciplined processes into their modernization efforts , fully using its management watch list and high risk list to more effectively oversee projects , and reporting to congress . consistent and diligent omb commitment toward oversight , including efforts to incorporate appropriate spending data , will be critical to the overall success of efforts to modernize federal financial management systems . as agreed to with your office , this report provides the results of the first phase of our work , including our efforts to determine ( 1 ) omb's progress toward addressing our prior recommendations related to the fmlob initiative and other challenges that impede its implementation and ( 2 ) the effectiveness of omb's monitoring of fmlob and financial management system modernization projects , including their costs . agencies continue to spend billions of dollars on maintaining , developing , and implementing financial management systems throughout the federal government . over a number of years , we have reported that modernizing federal financial management systems has been a challenge at many federal agencies due , in part , to the past practices of each federal agency attempting to implement its own systems which have all too often resulted in failure , have been delayed , and cost too much . specifically , we recommended that omb place a high priority on fully integrating into its approach four key concepts: ( 1 ) developing a concept of operations that articulates the interrelationships among financial management systems and how the shared service provider concept fits into the overall federal financial management framework , ( 2 ) defining standard business processes to promote consistency within and across agencies , ( 3 ) developing a strategy for ensuring that agencies' financial management systems are migrated to a limited number of service providers , and ( 4 ) defining and effectively implementing applicable disciplined processes necessary to properly manage financial management system implementation projects . to assist oversight efforts specifically related to federal financial management systems , we recommend that the director of omb take actions to facilitate complete and accurate reporting of actual and planned spending related to financial management system modernization projects , including the financial portion of mixed systems that significantly support financial management functions , and make necessary changes in existing guidance to meet these needs .
in response , this report examines ( 1 ) ocb's approach for broadcasting in response , this report examines ( 1 ) ocb's approach for broadcasting and what is known about the size of its audience in cuba ; ( 2 ) how bbg — and what is known about the size of its audience in cuba ; ( 2 ) how bbg — which oversees ocb — and ocb ensure compliance with journalistic which oversees ocb — and ocb ensure compliance with journalistic principles ; ( 3 ) steps taken to ensure that u.s. broadcasting to cuba principles ; ( 3 ) steps taken to ensure that u.s. broadcasting to cuba adheres to domestic and international broadcasting laws , agreements , and adheres to domestic and international broadcasting laws , agreements , and standards ; and ( 4 ) management and oversight challenges , and the steps standards ; and ( 4 ) management and oversight challenges , and the steps that bbg and ocb have taken to address those challenges . to examine the office of cuba broadcasting's ( ocb ) approach for broadcasting to cuba and what is known about the size of its audience , we reviewed and analyzed strategic , programmatic , budget , and audience research documents from the broadcasting board of governors ( bbg ) , international broadcasting bureau ( ibb ) , ocb , and department of state ( state ) . u.s. broadcasting to cuba is performed by the office of cuba broadcasting broadcasting to cuba is performed by the office of cuba broadcasting ( ocb ) , which is a u.s. government entity overseen by the broadcasting ( ocb ) , which is a u.s. government entity overseen by the broadcasting board of governors ( bbg ) . the united states has been broadcasting to cuba for more than two the united states has been broadcasting to cuba for more than two decades via radio martí ( and subsequently tv martí ) to “break the decades via radio martí ( and subsequently tv martí ) to “break the information blockade” and promote freedom and democracy in cuba . u.s. information blockade” and promote freedom and democracy in cuba . in light of the more than $500 million that has been spent effectiveness . to analyze ocb's approach to and the department of state ( state ) . in light of the more than $500 million that has been spent over the years on broadcasting to cuba and ocb's $34 million annual over the years on broadcasting to cuba and ocb's $34 million annual budget , you asked us to review a variety of issues related to the budget , you asked us to review a variety of issues related to the effectiveness of ocb management and broadcasts . in response to a recommendation by the state oig regarding the lack of implementation of some program review recommendations , bbg agreed to develop a process to help ensure additional oversight of the implementation of such recommendations . while the report acknowledges coordination has occurred on some strategic issues , ocb's draft strategic plan ( which was first presented in july 2007 ) has yet to be approved . direct ocb to establish formal mechanisms for disseminating information to and obtaining views from employees to help improve communication and morale .
in fiscal year 2008 , the department of defense ( dod ) granted eligibility for initial or renewal security clearances to more than 630,000 applicants who were military , dod civilian , or private industry personnel working on dod contracts . long - standing delays in the clearance process led us to designate dod's personnel security clearance process as a high - risk area in 2005 .  ( 3 ) to what extent did executive branch reporting to congress from 2006 through 2009 on dod and other federal agencies include information on quality in the security clearance process ? . that designation continued in 2007 and 2009 , when we identified continued delays in the clearance process and additional concerns with clearance documentation .  ( 2 ) how complete is the documentation of investigations and adjudications for initial top secret security clearances favorably adjudicated within dod ? . the intelligence reform and terrorism prevention act of 2004 ( irtpa ) established , among other things , milestones for reducing the time to complete initial clearances . moreover , because the executive branch has not fully addressed quality in its irtpa - required reports to congress , it has missed opportunities to provide congressional decision makers with full transparency over the clearance process . finally , the executive branch has not been reporting on quality in the clearance process , further impeding the ability of decision makers to carry out effective oversight . we are making five recommendations to omb , opm , and dod . with respect to dod's personnel security clearance process , dod is responsible for determining which military , dod civilian , and private industry personnel working on dod contracts require access to classified information and must apply for a security clearance and undergo an investigation . specifically , we addressed the following questions regarding security clearances for military , dod civilian personnel , and private industry personnel working on dod contracts: ( 1 ) how complete are the timeliness data that the executive branch reported for clearances granted in fiscal year 2008 ? . clearances potentially give these applicants access to information that , if improperly disclosed , could , in some cases , cause exceptionally grave damage to national security . we limited our focus to initial top secret clearances because ( 1 ) we have identified documentation problems with this clearance level in previous work ; ( 2 ) investigators gather the most information for investigations for top secret clearances ; and ( 3 ) individuals granted top secret clearances have access to information that , if improperly disclosed , could cause exceptionally grave damage to national security . to determine the completeness of the timeliness data that the executive branch reported for clearances granted in fiscal year 2008 for the department of defense ( dod ) , we reviewed title iii of the intelligence reform and terrorism prevention act of 2004 ( irtpa ) , measured the timeliness of nearly 630,000 clearances completed in fiscal year 2008 for military , dod civilian , and industry personnel , and analyzed the executive branch 2009 annual report to congress required by irtpa . to provide more transparency in future versions of the irtpa - required annual report to congress on personnel security clearances , we recommend that omb's deputy director for management , in the capacity as the chair of the performance accountability council , include metrics on quality .
our objectives were to describe the ( 1 ) age and retirement eligibility trends of the current federal workforce and the extent to which agencies hire and retain older workers ; ( 2 ) workforce challenges that federal agencies face and the strategies they use to recruit and retain older workers to help meet these challenges ; and ( 3 ) actions the office of personnel management ( opm ) , as the federal government's human capital manager , has taken to help agencies hire and retain an experienced , skilled workforce . our report builds on our earlier testimony before your committee and addresses the following: ( 1 ) the age and retirement eligibility trends of the current federal workforce and the extent to which federal agencies are hiring and retaining older workers ; ( 2 ) the workforce challenges that federal agencies face , and the strategies they use to recruit and retain older workers to help meet these challenges ; and ( 3 ) the actions that the office of personnel management ( opm ) is taking to help agencies hire and retain an experienced skilled workforce in its role as the federal government's human capital manager . to report on how some federal agencies are addressing their workforce challenges , we conducted in - depth reviews of three agencies — the department of housing and urban development ( hud ) , the social security administration ( ssa ) , and the united states agency for international development ( usaid ) . like the nation's workforce as a whole , the proportion of older workers in the federal workforce is growing , and more and more workers are becoming eligible to retire . to better assist agencies in attracting and retaining a highly skilled workforce , we recommend that the director of opm develop a systematic approach , which may include communicating through the chco council , to share information broadly across the federal government about agency - developed promising practices in recruitment and retention of older , experienced workers to meet their workforce needs . over the past several years , many have projected a huge retirement wave as the baby boom generation ages . current employment conditions aside , hiring and retaining older , experienced workers could be part of a longer - term national strategy to ensure an adequate workforce as an aging population , coupled with slow labor growth , poses economic challenges to the nation . it remains unclear when the expected retirement wave will peak , but over time , more and more of the baby boom generation will eventually retire . 5 ) ; the current economic situation may result in even higher retention rates . as a result , the federal government and other employers may face increased competition in hiring skilled workers , and unless they develop effective retention strategies , employers will need to look more aggressively for workers with the right skills to meet their needs . although opm has taken steps to address areas of concern , it could do more to disseminate information across the federal government on agency - developed promising practices to recruit and retain older workers to meet workforce needs . despite their differences , hud , ssa , and usaid share common workforce challenges .
develop appropriate mechanisms to collect and use feedback from grantees . disseminate information to grantees about common implementation challenges and successful projects to leverage the investment that has been made across the programs . beginning in 1965 , congress enacted several grant programs under the higher education act ( hea ) to strengthen and support developing postsecondary institutions . with more than two - thirds of 2008 high school graduates estimated to enroll in college soon after graduating , higher education has become more accessible than ever before . in this requested report , we address the following questions: ( 1 ) what are the characteristics of institutions eligible to receive grants under titles iii and v , including the characteristics of students served ; ( 2 ) what challenges do grantees face , and how have they spent title iii and v funds to address these challenges ; and ( 3 ) to what extent does the department of education monitor the financial and programmatic performance of title iii and v grantees , and use this information to target its technical assistance ? . education has made progress in developing tools , such as an electronic monitoring system and risk - based criteria , to assess potential risks associated with title iii and v grants , but it lacks a comprehensive risk - based monitoring and technical assistance approach to target its efforts . in an environment where education is called on to administer additional programs with limited resources , a coordinated approach to guide its efforts is critical to ensuring that grant funds are appropriately spent and the needs of grantees are met . we reviewed title iii and v grants programs to determine ( 1 ) what are the characteristics of institutions eligible to receive grants under titles iii and v , including the characteristics of students served , ( 2 ) what challenges do grantees face , and how have they spent title iii and v funds to address these challenges , and ( 3 ) to what extent does the department of education ( education ) monitor the financial and programmatic performance of title iii and v grantees , and use this information to target its technical assistance . in 2004 and 2007 , we reported on education's administration of title iii and v programs and found that it had made limited progress in implementing initiatives to enhance monitoring of and technical assistance for grantees . because these institutions have limited resources , they may need additional assistance to successfully implement their grant projects . education's role in monitoring and providing assistance to title iii and v grantees is critical to ensuring that the substantial investment the federal government makes in these programs leads to improvements in institutional capacity and student outcomes . however , unless education develops an approach to systematically collect and use the feedback , it may miss opportunities to further improve its oversight efforts . education has not fully implemented its planned monitoring initiatives and lacks assurance that grantees appropriately manage federal funds , increasing the potential for fraud , waste , or abuse . such an approach would also ensure that more information is shared among grantees about common implementation challenges and successful projects to better leverage the considerable federal investment , and ensure that grantees have an opportunity to provide feedback on areas for program improvement .
i am pleased to be here today to discuss the status of the department of defense's ( dod ) efforts to transform dod's business operations and the actions that dod needs to take to maintain continuity of effort , change the status quo , and achieve sustainable success , both at the enterprisewide level and within dod's many components . in particular , i will focus on the progress dod has made in developing its business enterprise architecture ( bea ) , enterprise transition plan ( etp ) , and financial improvement and audit readiness ( fiar ) plan ; dod's investment controls for new business systems ; the extent to which dod is complying with applicable legislation ; and the degree to which the department has integrated the roles of the military services in these efforts . since the first financial statement audit of a major dod component was attempted almost 20 years ago , we have reported that weaknesses in business operations not only adversely affect the reliability of reported financial data , but also the economy , efficiency , and effectiveness of these operations . dod continues to dominate our list of high - risk programs designated as vulnerable to waste , fraud , abuse , and mismanagement , bearing responsibility , in whole or in part , for 15 of 27 high - risk areas . eight of these areas are specific to dod and include dod's overall approach to business transformation , as well as business systems modernization and financial management , which are the focus of this hearing . however , our nation is threatened not only by external security threats , but also from within by large and growing fiscal imbalances , due primarily to our aging population and rising health care costs . before i go further , i also want to commend the subcommittee for its continued focus , oversight , and legislative initiatives to address these critical issues . given the current security environment and growing long - range fiscal imbalance facing our nation , dod , like other federal agencies , will need to ensure prudent and proper stewardship of the resources it is provided to perform its mission . congress , under the leadership of this subcommittee and others , has been instrumental in transforming dod through oversight and through legislation that has codified many of our prior recommendations , particularly with respect to the modernization of dod's business systems . absent policy changes to cope with rising health care costs and known demographic trends , a growing imbalance between expected federal spending and revenues will mean escalating and ultimately unsustainable federal deficits and debt levels . my testimony today will provide perspectives on the progress dod has made and the challenges it faces in its approaches to overall business transformation , business systems modernization , and financial management capabilities improvements . with about $546 billion in discretionary budget authority provided thus far in fiscal year 2008 , along with total reported obligations of about $492 billion to support ongoing operations and activities related to the global war on terrorism since the september 11 , 2001 , attacks through september 2007 , the department has been given stewardship of unprecedented amounts of taxpayer money .
our data sources included the federal procurement data system — next generation ( fpds - ng ) , federal awards and assistance data system ( faads ) , several systems at the centers for medicare & medicaid services , the department of the treasury's ( treasury ) estimates of the revenue loss of tax expenditures , and the office of management and budget's ( omb ) collection of information on federal credit programs . increasingly , the federal government relies on networks and partnerships to achieve its goals , and many of these involve nonprofit organizations . therefore , our objectives in this report are to provide information on ( 1 ) the mechanisms through which federal dollars flow to nonprofit organizations ( which we define as those entities that are federally tax - exempt ) , and how federal involvement varies across them , and ( 2 ) what is known about federal dollars flowing through these mechanisms to nonprofit organizations in fiscal year 2006 ( the most recent year for which we could obtain data from all sources ) . these organizations are involved in a wide array of missions including healthcare , education , poverty alleviation , and economic development , and their missions can align with or complement the objectives of federal programs . to identify the direct and indirect mechanisms through which nonprofit organizations receive federal funds , we reviewed academic and professional literature , met with experts on the nonprofit sector , reviewed previous gao reports on federal programs that involve nonprofit organizations , reviewed 19 different programs ( see table 3 ) , and met with agency officials . these tools dictate how the relationships between federal agencies and nonprofit organizations operate , the roles that these entities and others ( including other levels of government ) play , and the degree of control , oversight , and influence that exists between the federal government and nonprofit organizations . we judgmentally selected these programs using three criteria: they ( 1 ) utilized a variety of direct and indirect mechanisms , ( 2 ) provided services across a variety of policy areas and sectors , and ( 3 ) represented programs among the higher dollar values of all federal programs that involve nonprofit organizations . to better understand how funds to nonprofit organizations are tracked and how mechanisms operate , we reviewed 19 federal programs selected to provide information on a variety of direct and indirect mechanisms and services across a variety of policy areas and sectors , and to include some of the more highly funded programs involving nonprofit organizations . federal and nonprofit entities often partner with one another as they work toward the same or similar goals . our steps included reviewing previous related gao reports and meeting with program officials . to examine the extent and structure of the partnering between the federal government and the nonprofit sector , you asked us to focus on the funding relationships between the two sectors . for each program , we analyzed the roles of nonprofit organizations and how federal involvement with and influence on these organizations varied across funding mechanisms . the information obtained from this review is not generalizable to all programs involving nonprofit organizations . we believe that this is the appropriate time — as omb is continuing to develop its approach to implementing ffata's subaward data requirements — to identify approaches that could be effective in improving the reliability of this information .
to gather relevant federal - level information , we interviewed officials from the department of health and human service's ( hhs ) administration for children and families ( acf ) and centers for medicare and medicaid services ( cms ) , which , respectively , oversee tanf and medicaid ; the department of agriculture's ( usda ) food and nutrition service , which oversees snap ; the social security administration ( ssa ) , which oversees ssi ; and the department of homeland security ( dhs ) , which oversees immigration and provides noncitizen information to benefit administering agencies through its systematic alien verification for entitlements ( save ) system . key federal means - tested public benefits involved are: temporary assistance for needy families ( tanf ) , medicaid , the supplemental nutrition assistance program ( snap ) , and supplemental security income ( ssi ) .  ( 3 ) to what extent are agencies implementing sponsor repayment , and what factors may hinder them ? . to ensure that the availability of public benefits does not provide an incentive for immigration and that noncitizens residing in this country are self - reliant , congress significantly limited noncitizens' access to public benefits through the personal responsibility and work opportunity reconciliation act of 1996 ( prwora ) and the illegal immigration reform and immigrant responsibility act of 1996 ( iirira ) . to obtain information on agency implementation of sponsor deeming and repayment , as well as the population affected , we reviewed available federal data on noncitizens , as well as available federal and state data on benefit applicants and recipients , to develop estimates of the sponsored noncitizen population and noncitizen applicants and recipients ; conducted a nationwide survey of states regarding temporary assistance for needy families ( tanf ) , medicaid , and the supplemental nutritional assistance program ( snap ) ; visited five states and selected localities within each state and interviewed officials administering tanf , medicaid , and snap ; interviewed officials from all 10 regional offices of the social security administration ( ssa ) regarding relevant supplemental security income ( ssi ) policies , implementation processes and challenges , and the frequency that officials had encountered related cases ; interviewed officials from relevant federal agencies and reviewed pertinent federal laws , regulations , and agency guidance ; and interviewed researchers knowledgeable in immigrant and public benefit issues .  ( 2 ) to what extent are agencies implementing sponsor deeming , and what factors may hinder them ? . based on your request , this report provides information on the following questions: ( 1 ) what is known about the size of the noncitizen population potentially affected by the sponsor deeming requirements for tanf , medicaid , snap , and ssi ? . provide guidance to save users that improves their understanding of how to request sponsor information through the automated save system rather than through manual submission of paper request forms . to help benefit administering agencies access information on sponsored noncitizens , we recommend that the secretary of homeland security take the following two actions: improve information on sponsorship status of noncitizens provided through the automated save system . in light of the current economic downturn , this information may be of growing importance , as increased numbers of sponsored noncitizens and others may seek assistance from these benefits .
our objectives were to ( 1 ) seek to determine how many a - 3 and g - 5 visa holders have alleged abuse by foreign diplomats with immunity since 2000 , ( 2 ) review the u.s. government's process for investigating abuse allegations involving foreign diplomats with immunity , and ( 3 ) describe and assess how state ensures correct and consistent implementation of a - 3 and g - 5 visa polices and procedures . in june 2007 , the department of state ( state ) noted in its annual trafficking in persons report that some foreign diplomats may have abused individuals they had brought to the united states to work in their households . this spot - check system would allow headquarters to assess compliance without dedicating the resources needed to review all a - 3 and g - 5 visas issued in a given year and could be targeted at posts that issue high numbers of a - 3 or g - 5 visas or that have identified difficulties interpreting guidance on these visas classes . the department of homeland security ( homeland security ) investigates trafficking allegations and grants t visas to some trafficking victims . the department of justice ( justice ) investigates trafficking allegations and prosecutes violations of criminal statutes . state will also upgrade consular officers' access to tomis to provide improved information regarding a - 3 and g - 5 cases . in response to your request , we ( 1 ) sought to determine how many a - 3 and g - 5 visa holders have alleged abuse by foreign diplomats with immunity since 2000 , ( 2 ) reviewed the u.s. government's process for investigating abuse allegations involving foreign diplomats with immunity , and ( 3 ) described and assessed how state ensures correct and consistent implementation of a - 3 and g - 5 visa policies and procedures . we also analyzed various federal agencies' role in investigating and prosecuting federal law violations related to abuse of household workers by foreign diplomats with some level of immunity . the department of labor ( labor ) investigates allegations of wage and hour violations . to better ensure correct and consistent implementation of a - 3 and g - 5 visa policies and procedures , particularly those that outline requirements for employment contracts , we recommend that the secretary of state enhance oversight by establishing a system to spot - check compliance with these policies and procedures . we analyzed state's roles and responsibilities related to a - 3 and g - 5 visa holders , as well as foreign diplomats , and identified key state offices and bureaus involved in these matters . state grants a - 3 and g - 5 visas , issues guidance on diplomatic law , and maintains official records regarding the status and immunity level of foreign diplomats in the united states , among other things . state again highlighted this problem in a july 2007 note to all chiefs of diplomatic missions in the united states , stating that it had recently learned of a number of allegations of trafficking in persons with respect to household workers , including allegations of involuntary servitude and physical abuse . several u.s. government agencies are involved in efforts to respond to alleged abuse of these visa holders .
congress included a provision in the john warner national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2007 requiring us to report on the recent employment of former department of defense ( dod ) officials by major defense contractors . each year , civilian and military personnel leave the department of defense ( dod ) and go to work for contractors that do business with dod — sometimes the same contractors they were working with before leaving dod . in response , this report ( 1 ) provides information on how many former dod military and civilian personnel worked for major defense contractors in 2006 and an estimate of how many of these were former dod senior or acquisition officials who worked on defense contracts for these employers that were the responsibility of their former agency or their direct responsibility at dod and ( 2 ) identifies the practices used to monitor compliance with post - government employment restrictions and the information challenges that contractors and dod face in monitoring the movement of former dod employees to defense contractors . several of our reports on these past strategies to make post - dod employment with defense contractors more transparent to dod , the most recent in 1990 , found problems with the implementation and enforcement of those reporting requirements , and questioned the extent to which former dod officials or defense contractors complied with them and the effectiveness of dod's monitoring . for example , dod could consider requiring defense contractors who are awarded a contract , within a set number of days after contract award , to ( 1 ) disclose to the contracting officer the names of employees who are certain former dod officials ( e.g. , civilian senior executives , high - level military officers , or acquisition officials ) who worked on the response to the solicitation and ( 2 ) certify that these employees are in compliance with the applicable post - government employment restrictions . congress included a provision in the john warner national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2007 requiring us to report on recent employment of former dod officials by major defense contractors . officials who serve in senior or acquisition positions and then leave dod for jobs with defense contractors are subject to laws restricting their new employment activities . beginning as early as 1969 , efforts to maintain public trust and monitor compliance with post - government employment restrictions have included laws requiring certain former dod officials to self - report their employment with defense contractors for up to 2 years after leaving dod and requiring contractors to report annually on the employment of these former officials to various dod ethics offices . more recently , our work and the work of others have raised concerns that the monitoring of former dod officials' compliance with post - government employment restrictions may be inadequate . in response , our report objectives were to ( 1 ) develop information on how many former dod military and civilian personnel recently worked for major defense contractors and develop an estimate of how many of these were former dod senior or acquisition officials who worked on defense contracts for these employers that were related to their former positions at dod and ( 2 ) identify the practices used to monitor compliance with post - government employment restrictions and the information challenges that contractors and dod face in monitoring the movement of former dod employees to defense contractors .
the tragic events of september 11 , 2001 , and hurricane katrina have highlighted the critical importance of having effective radio communications systems for law enforcement and public safety agencies including federal agencies with such responsibilities . the integrated wireless network ( iwn ) was intended to be a collaborative effort among the departments of justice ( doj ) , homeland security ( dhs ) , and the treasury to provide secure , seamless , interoperable , and reliable nationwide wireless communications in support of federal agents and officers engaged in law enforcement , protective services , homeland defense , and disaster response missions . in order to effectively respond to events such as natural disasters , criminal activities , and domestic terrorism , law enforcement and public safety agencies need reliable systems that enable communication with their counterparts in other disciplines and jurisdictions . this initiative , begun in 2001 , was originally estimated to cost approximately $5 billion . specifically , congress should consider requiring the departments to establish an effective governance structure that includes a formal process for making decisions and resolving disputes , define and articulate a common outcome for this joint effort , and develop a joint strategy for improving radio communications . further , since the 1990s , increasing demand for radio communications capabilities in both the private and public sectors has created a need to use radio communications capacity more efficiently . specifically , congress should consider requiring the departments to: establish an effective governance structure that includes a formal process for making decisions and resolving disputes ; define and articulate a common outcome for this joint effort ; and develop a joint strategy for improving radio communications . at your request , we determined the extent to which doj , dhs , and the treasury are developing a joint radio communications solution to improve communications among federal agencies . to address this objective , we reviewed and analyzed documentation from doj , dhs , and the treasury to determine the status of iwn , interviewed officials from each department about the extent to which they are collaborating with the other departments on iwn or on an alternative joint radio communications solution , reviewed and analyzed documentation for independent radio communications projects at doj and dhs to identify actions the departments are taking to improve their radio communications systems , reviewed and analyzed past and present agreements among the departments to determine the extent to which a governance structure is in place that enables effective collaboration , and compared collaboration activities performed by the departments to selected practices previously identified by gao as helpful to sustaining collaboration among federal agencies . congress should consider requiring the departments of justice , homeland security , and treasury to collaborate on the development and implementation of a joint radio communications solution . objective , scope , and methodology doj , dhs , and treasury are no longer pursuing a joint solution agency comments and our evaluation the tragic events of 9 / 11 and hurricane katrina have highlighted the critical importance of having effective radio communications systems for law enforcement and public safety agencies including federal agencies with such responsibilities . we performed our audit work in the washington , d.c. , metropolitan area at doj , the federal bureau of investigation , the drug enforcement administration , dhs , immigration and customs enforcement , customs and border protection , the treasury , the national institute of standards and technology , the national telecommunications and information administration , and the office of management and budget .
the part d program , which began in january 2006 , is administered by the department of health and human services' ( hhs ) centers for medicare & medicaid services ( cms ) . lack of cms oversight of medicare part d sponsors' implementation of programs to prevent fraud , waste , and abuse risks significant misuse of funds in this $39 billion program . all part d sponsors had the required elements and recommended measures for written policies , procedures , and standards of conduct ( element 1 ) ; effective lines of communication ( element 4 ) ; and enforcement of standards through disciplinary guidelines ( element 5 ) . to help safeguard the medicare part d program from fraud , waste , and abuse , we recommend the administrator of cms ensure that cms conducts timely audits of part d fraud and abuse programs to monitor sponsors' implementation of these programs . we believe that cms oversight of medicare part d sponsors' programs could increase the completeness of sponsors' implementation of required compliance plan elements and selected recommended measures and , as a result , reduce the risk to medicare . cms noted that congress did not respond to its request for additional program integrity funds in fiscal year 2006 through fiscal year 2008 . in addition , cms stated that insufficient resources have been one of the primary impediments to its implementation of a robust oversight strategy . while medicare part d is now in its third year of operation , little is known about the extent to which part d sponsors have implemented their fraud and abuse programs or the extent of cms's oversight of part d sponsors' programs . specifically , this report examines ( 1 ) the extent to which certain part d sponsors implemented programs to control fraud , waste , and abuse and ( 2 ) the extent of cms's oversight of part d sponsors' programs to control fraud , waste , and abuse . medicare part d provides voluntary , outpatient prescription drug coverage for eligible individuals 65 years and older and eligible individuals with disabilities . to protect beneficiaries and the fiscal integrity of the medicare program , the medicare prescription drug , improvement , and modernization act of 2003 ( mma ) , which established the part d program , requires all part d sponsors to have programs to safeguard part d from fraud , waste , and abuse . however , we believe that program integrity will remain at risk until cms conducts timely audits to monitor part d sponsors' implementation of fraud and abuse programs . the oig limited its assessment to a document review of the compliance plans submitted to cms and did not assess the extent to which the compliance plans had been implemented . we found that none of these five sponsors , which cover more than a third of part d enrollees , completely implemented all of the required compliance plan elements and selected recommended measures for their fraud and abuse programs . cms has acknowledged that program compliance and integrity audits conducted by cms are necessary to ensure compliance and document cms's program oversight responsibilities . due in part to this vulnerability , we have designated medicare as a high risk program since 1990 .
direct the secretaries of the air force and the navy to ensure that their respective lead project officers have the technical and managerial expertise and resources to review nnsa's progress and technical challenges throughout the life extension program . nuclear weapons are an essential part of the nation's defense strategy . nuclear weapons are an essential part of the nation's defense strategy . to implement this strategy , in january 1996 , the department of energy ( doe ) initiated the strategy , in january 1996 , the department of energy ( doe ) initiated the stockpile life extension program ( life extension program ) . dod partially agreed with our recommendations . however , it is too early to assess the impact these actions have had on the air force's oversight of the life extension program . now stockpile life extension program ( life extension program ) . dod agreed with our two recommendations directed at the department , but asked us to make modifications to the language of the recommendations to better target the responsible service or agency that has authority to implement them . to improve dod's oversight over nnsa's life extension activities and ensure that refurbished weapons meet all military requirements , we recommend that the secretary of defense take the following three actions: direct stratcom and the secretary of the responsible service to comprehensively review military requirements for a weapons system prior to entering phase 6.2a of a life extension program . to improve the management of the stockpile life extension program , we recommend that the administrator of nnsa direct the deputy administrator for defense programs to take the following six actions: develop a realistic schedule for the w76 warhead and future life extension programs that allows nnsa to ( 1 ) address technical challenges while meeting all military requirements and ( 2 ) build in time for unexpected technical challenges that may delay the program . nnsa also coordinates its life extension activities with the department of defense ( dod ) to ensure that refurbished weapons meet all military performance requirements . all of these management issues raise significant questions about nnsa's ability not only to complete life extension programs on time and on budget that meet all refurbishment objectives , but also its ability to manage the design and production of new weapons , such as the proposed reliable replacement warhead . in addition , nnsa's failure to implement its risk mitigation strategy for the highest risk to the program and implement lessons learned from prior life extensions , like the w87 warhead , does not inspire confidence in its ability to achieve the program's goals on time and on budget . to address dod concerns , in december 2007 , nnsa agreed to conduct additional tests . second , nnsa will include funding needs for risk mitigation activities that address the highest risks to future life extension programs in budget reports to congress . to implement this the existing nuclear weapons stockpile indefinitely . we modified our recommendations by ( 1 ) including the department of the navy because it is responsible for reviewing nnsa's refurbishment activities for certain nuclear weapons , such as the w76 , and ( 2 ) specifying during which phase of the phase 6.x process dod should comprehensively review its military requirements and assess the cost and schedule implications for meeting each military requirement .
my statement today is based on our report , which ( 1 ) describes how regulation has evolved in banking , securities , thrifts , credit unions , futures , insurance , secondary mortgage markets and other important areas ; ( 2 ) describes several key changes in financial markets and products in recent decades that have highlighted significant limitations and gaps in the existing regulatory system ; and ( 3 ) presents an evaluation framework that can be used by congress and others to shape potential regulatory reform efforts . we prepared this work under the authority of the comptroller general to help policymakers weigh various regulatory reform proposals and consider ways in which the current regulatory system could be made more effective and efficient . i am pleased to be here today to discuss our january 8 , 2009 , report that provides a framework for modernizing the outdated u.s. financial regulatory system . to do this work , we synthesized existing gao work and other studies and met with representatives of financial regulatory agencies , industry associations , consumer advocacy organizations , and others . the report was enhanced by input from representatives of 29 agencies and other organizations , including federal and state financial regulatory agencies , consumer advocacy groups , and financial service industry trade associations , who reviewed and commented on a draft of the report prior to its release . this work was conducted between april 2008 and december 2008 . the work upon which the report is based was conducted in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . as a result of significant market developments in recent decades that have outpaced a fragmented and outdated regulatory structure , significant reforms to the u.s. regulatory system are critically and urgently needed . the current system has important weaknesses that , if not addressed , will continue to expose the nation's financial system to serious risks . a critical first step to modernizing the regulatory system and enhancing its ability to meet the challenges of a dynamic financial services industry is to clearly define regulatory goals and objectives . finally , with the increasingly global aspects of financial markets , the current fragmented u.s. regulatory structure has complicated some efforts to coordinate internationally with other regulators . in general , reviewers commented that the report represented an important and thorough review of the issues related to regulatory reform . our report offers a framework for crafting and evaluating regulatory reform proposals ; it consists of the following nine characteristics that should be reflected in any new regulatory system . as early as 1994 , we identified the need to examine the federal financial regulatory structure , including the need to address the risks from new unregulated products . regulators failed to adequately oversee the sale of mortgage products that posed risks to consumers and the stability of the financial system . in particular , the increasing prevalence of new and more complex investment products has challenged regulators and investors , and consumers have faced difficulty understanding new and increasingly complex retail mortgage and credit products . since then , we have described various options for congress to consider , each of which provides potential improvements , as well as some risks and potential costs .
in my statement today , i will discuss ( 1 ) factors contributing to poor contracting outcomes and accountability , ( 2 ) long - standing issues in the department of defense's ( dod ) management and oversight of contractors supporting deployed forces , and ( 3 ) efforts to improve the capacity of the iraqi government . about $45 billion was provided for reconstruction efforts , including rebuilding iraq's oil and electricity sectors , improving its security forces , and enhancing iraq's capacity to govern . between fiscal years 2001 to 2008 , congress appropriated nearly $700 billion for the global war on terrorism . i am pleased to be here today to discuss the challenges the united states must address to successfully improve performance and ensure accountability over u.s. efforts to stabilize and reconstruct iraq . prudence with taxpayer funds and growing long - range fiscal challenges demand that the united states maximize its return on the billions of dollars invested in iraq . the majority of this amount has been provided to dod for military operations in support of operation iraqi freedom , including the cost of equipping , maintaining , and supporting our deployed forces . further , strengthening iraq's fragile government institutions , which have thus far failed to adequately deter corruption , stimulate employment , or deliver essential services , is critical to establishing a peaceful , stable , and secure iraq . the abilities of the inspectors general to provide in - country oversight of specific projects and reconstruction challenges have enabled gao to focus on national , sector , and interagency issues . in prior reports , gao recommended that , to improve accountability and minimize opportunities for fraud , waste , and abuse of u.s. funds , ( 1 ) dod adopt sound business processes in its acquisition strategies , such as definitizing contracts in a timely fashion and strengthening accountability procedures ; ( 2 ) dod leadership ensure implementation of and compliance with existing guidance to improve its management and oversight of contractors supporting deployed forces ; and ( 3 ) u.s. agencies work with iraq to develop strategic plans for key sectors . since 2003 , we have issued nearly 130 iraq - related reports and testimonies . gao's broad audit authority allows it to support congress through strategic analyses of issues that cut across multiple federal agencies and sources of funding , while the inspectors general focus primarily on preventing and exposing fraud , waste , and abuse in individual federal agency programs . most waste does not involve a violation of law , but it does involve mismanagement resulting from poor leadership or guidance ; inappropriate actions or omissions , including the use of poor business arrangements ; or inadequate oversight , often caused by having too - few skilled people . our work in iraq largely has been performed under my authority as comptroller general to conduct evaluations on my own initiative since it is a matter of broad interest to the entire congress . however , the inability to do so should not detract from the need to improve management and accountability over our efforts in iraq . as we see it , waste occurs when taxpayers do not receive reasonable value for their money in connection with any government - funded activity due to inappropriate acts or omissions by officials with control over or access to government resources .
congress has enacted specific post - government employment restrictions designed to protect the u.s. government from the improper use of government information or other undue influence by former government employees . this report discusses ( 1 ) the extent to which these agencies collect and maintain information on the post - government employment activities of these officials and ( 2 ) the key challenges the agencies face in enforcing post - government employment restrictions and fara requirements . to enhance justice's ability to ensure that the american people know the identity of persons trying to influence u.s. government policy in the united states on behalf of foreign entities , congress may wish to consider ( 1 ) granting the department of justice civil investigative demand authority to inspect records of persons justice believes should be registered as foreign agents and ( 2 ) requiring persons claiming certain exemptions to provide advance written notification to justice before engaging in the exempt activities . our past work has found problems with the u.s. government's implementation of these laws . we maintain that congress consider the proposed legislative changes to enhance justice's ability to ensure that the american people know the identity of persons trying to influence u.s. government policy . the office of government ethics ( oge ) and executive branch agencies have implemented regulations and procedures to inform employees about the restrictions . in addition to these laws and other lobbying disclosure requirements , such as the lobbying disclosure act of 1995 as amended , congress has enacted the foreign agents registration act ( fara ) to ensure that the u.s. government and the american people are informed of the source and identity of persons engaging in representational activities or otherwise trying to influence u.s. government policy on behalf of foreign entities . we also interviewed officials at selected executive branch agencies that work on issues directly related to bilateral relations , including the departments of state ( state ) and the treasury ( treasury ) , the u.s. agency for international development ( usaid ) , and the office of united states trade representative ( ustr ) , and analyzed documents at those agencies to understand how the agencies notify employees of post - government employment restrictions . in addition , justice officials have cited a lack of clear legal authority and a lack of resources as barriers to monitoring compliance with fara registration requirements . for example , the restrictions include a ban , for 1 year , on all senior and very senior employees of federal agencies , members of congress , and congressional staff from performing certain representational or advocacy activities on behalf of a foreign government , before any u.s. government official , with the intent to influence a decision of the government official . the restrictions prohibit federal employees from engaging in certain activities , such as lobbying or other advocacy communications , for a specified period of time after leaving federal service . in 1990 , we reported that justice had not implemented a 1980 gao recommendation to seek authority to ( 1 ) give the justice department additional enforcement measures , including administrative subpoena powers , and ( 2 ) require individuals to submit written notification of all exemption claims prior to engaging in the representation of a foreign principal .
medicare advantage ( ma ) plans are an alternative to original medicare fee - for - service ( ffs ) in which private plans provide medicare benefits to enrolled beneficiaries . enrollment in ma plans has grown substantially in recent years from about 4.7 million beneficiaries in june 2004 to 9.6 million — about 1 out of every 5 medicare beneficiaries — as of june 2008 . this increase in enrollment followed the enactment of the medicare prescription drug , improvement , and modernization act of 2003 , which among other things , resulted in increased payments to ma plans . this appendix explains the scope and methodology that we used to address our reporting objectives that ( 1 ) compare the characteristics of beneficiaries in private fee - for - service ( pffs ) plans to the characteristics of beneficiaries in other ma plans and medicare ffs ; ( 2 ) describe the financial risks that beneficiaries in pffs plans face , compared to beneficiaries in other medicare advantage ( ma ) plans and medicare fee - for - service ( ffs ) , if they do not contact their plan prior to receiving services ; and ( 3 ) compare the rates at which beneficiaries in pffs plans disenroll to the rates for other ma plans and evaluate whether the centers for medicare & medicaid services ( cms ) met statutory requirements to mail disenrollment rates to beneficiaries . we recommend that the acting administrator of cms take the following three actions: investigate the extent to which beneficiaries in pffs plans are faced with unexpected out - of - pocket costs due to the denial of coverage when they did not obtain an advance coverage determination from their plan ; ensure that cms guidance on prior authorization accurately reflects cms policy and that pffs plan materials conform to cms requirements ; and mail to medicare beneficiaries ma plan disenrollment rates for the previous 2 years for ma plans that are or will be available in their areas , as required by statute , and update disenrollment rates provided to medicare beneficiaries through moc . ma plans are able to use the increased payments to offer more benefits and reduce beneficiary cost sharing relative to medicare ffs . our report addresses the following objectives: ( 1 ) compare the characteristics of beneficiaries in pffs plans to the characteristics of beneficiaries in other ma plans and medicare ffs ; ( 2 ) describe the financial risks that beneficiaries in pffs plans face , compared to beneficiaries in other ma plans and medicare ffs , if they do not contact their plan prior to receiving services ; and ( 3 ) compare the rates at which beneficiaries in pffs plans disenroll to the rates for other ma plans and evaluate whether cms met statutory requirements to mail disenrollment rates to beneficiaries . in addition , the increased payments allowed ma plans to expand into geographic areas where previously plan options had been very limited , resulting in more plan choices for beneficiaries . nearly half of the recent growth in ma enrollment , about 45 percent , occurred in one type of plan — private fee - for - service ( pffs ) plans . enrollment in these plans increased from about 35,000 beneficiaries in june 2004 to about 2.3 million beneficiaries in june 2008 .
since the september 11 , 2001 , terrorist attacks , the department of defense ( dod ) has been engaged in domestic and overseas military operations in support of the global war on terrorism ( gwot ) around the world . congress has provided about $808 billion in supplemental and annual appropriations for gwot since 2001 , and dod has reported total gwot costs of about $654.7 billion as of september 2008 . in order to improve the transparency and reliability of dod's reported obligations for gwot by contingency operation , we recommend that the secretary of defense direct the under secretary of defense ( comptroller ) to ( 1 ) ensure dod components establish an auditable and documented methodology for determining what portion of gwot costs is attributable to operation iraqi freedom versus operation enduring freedom when actual costs are not available , and ( 2 ) develop a plan and timetable for evaluating whether expenses not directly attributable to specific gwot contingency operations are incremental costs and should continue to be funded outside of dod's base budget . for fiscal year 2009 , congress has provided dod with about $65.9 billion for gwot as of march 2009 , and dod plans on requesting an additional $75.5 billion for gwot for the remainder of the fiscal year . obtaining an accurate picture of dod costs is of critical importance given the need to evaluate trade - offs and make more effective use of defense dollars in light of the nation's long - term fiscal challenge and the current financial crisis . these operations include operation noble eagle aimed at defending the united states homeland against terrorist attacks ; operation enduring freedom that takes place principally in and around afghanistan , but also covers additional operations in the horn of africa , the philippines , and elsewhere ; and operation iraqi freedom that focuses principally on iraq . to assist congress in its oversight role , we assessed ( 1 ) dod's progress in improving the accuracy and reliability of its gwot cost reporting , and ( 2 ) dod's methodology for reporting gwot costs by contingency operation , including the types of costs reported for those operations . congress uses dod's historical cost data to monitor costs , evaluate funding needs , and to make gwot - related funding decisions . in the past , we have reported on the need for dod to become more disciplined in its approach to developing plans and budgets , including building more gwot costs into the base defense budget . this is in addition to about $512.7 billion already provided in dod's base budget for other functions . in addition , dod has acknowledged that systemic weaknesses with its financial management systems and business operations continue to impair its financial information . dod's efforts are ongoing and we have continued to monitor its progress as gwot cost reporting has evolved . dod uses these cost data , along with other information , internally to evaluate cost trends and formulate gwot funding requests , and externally to inform congress on the costs of the war . to assess dod's progress in improving the accuracy and reliability of its gwot cost reporting , we analyzed information reported in dod's monthly supplemental and cost of war execution report ( cost - of - war report ) and cost data in the military services' individual accounting systems .
our specific objectives were to assess ( 1 ) the status of the commission's actions to correct or mitigate previously reported information security weaknesses and ( 2 ) the effectiveness of its controls for ensuring the confidentiality , integrity , and availability of its financial information systems and information . the objectives of our review were ( 1 ) to determine the status of the securities and exchange commission's ( sec ) actions to correct or mitigate previously reported information security weaknesses and ( 2 ) to determine whether controls over key financial systems were effective in ensuring the confidentiality , integrity , and availability of financial and sensitive information . to support its demanding financial and mission - related responsibilities , the commission relies extensively on computerized systems . in order to protect financial and sensitive information — including personnel and regulatory information maintained by sec — from inadvertent or deliberate misuse , fraudulent use , improper disclosure or manipulation , or destruction , it is essential that sec have effective information security controls in place . as part of our audit of sec's fiscal year 2008 financial statements , we assessed the effectiveness of the commission's information security controls over key financial systems , data , and networks . as you are aware , the securities and exchange commission ( sec ) is responsible for enforcing securities laws , issuing rules and regulations that provide protection for investors , and helping to ensure that the securities markets are fair and honest . in our report on sec's financial statements for fiscal years 2008 and 2007 , we concluded that weaknesses in information security controls constitute a significant deficiency in internal controls over the information systems and data used for financial reporting . until sec ( 1 ) mitigates known information security weaknesses in access controls and other information system controls and ( 2 ) fully implements a comprehensive agencywide information security program that includes filling the security officer position , adequately reporting risks , conducting effective system security tests , and certifying and accrediting an intermediary subsystem , its financial information will remain at increased risk of unauthorized disclosure , modification , or destruction , and its management decisions may be based on unreliable or inaccurate information . in a separate report with limited distribution , we are also making 32 recommendations to enhance sec's access controls and configuration management practices . sec has made important progress in implementing its information security program . however , information security weaknesses — both old and new — continue to impair the agency's ability to ensure the confidentiality , integrity , and availability of financial and sensitive information . in this report , we provide additional details on sec's information security controls . sec has made progress in correcting or mitigating previously reported weaknesses . while sec has made important progress in strengthening its information security controls , it has not completed actions to correct or mitigate 16 of the previously reported weaknesses . to determine the status of sec's actions to correct or mitigate previously reported information security weaknesses , we identified and reviewed its information security policies , procedures , practices , and guidance . we are sending copies of this report to the chairmen and ranking members of the senate committee on banking , housing , and urban affairs ; the senate committee on homeland security and governmental affairs ; the house committee on financial services ; and the house committee on oversight and government reform .
based on your request , our objectives were to ( 1 ) assess how the president's budget request for irs for fy 2009 allocates resources for enforcement , service , research , and systems modernization primarily compared to fy 2008 enacted levels ; ( 2 ) assess the rationales for differences between the 2 years , including the rationales for initiatives and the extent to which those rationales have been justified ; ( 3 ) determine the status of irs's efforts to develop and implement its bsm program ; and ( 4 ) determine the total cost of administering the economic stimulus program . the president has requested $11.4 billion in program dollars to fund irs's fy 2009 operations , including $11.1 billion for service to taxpayers and tax law enforcement , plus $223 million for the business systems modernization ( bsm ) program , irs's ongoing effort to improve the agency's business and tax processing systems . financing of the federal government depends largely on irs's ability to effectively administer the tax laws . we appreciate this opportunity to comment on the president's fiscal year ( fy ) 2009 budget request for the internal revenue service ( irs ) . for the first report , we compared enacted and requested budgets for irs ; reviewed documents , including estimates of revenues and costs from initiatives ; and interviewed irs officials . passage of this act required irs to act quickly to deal with taxpayers' questions and begin issuing payments . one complicating factor for carrying out irs's ambitious plans in the immediate future is the recent passage of the economic stimulus act of 2008 , which creates additional , unanticipated workload for irs this year . the budget request and strategies aim to build on recent irs accomplishments such as annually bringing in more revenue through enforcement and making progress on modernizing irs's business and tax processing systems . the fy 2009 budget request is a road map for how irs intends to allocate resources in order to carry out ambitious plans of improving enforcement , improving taxpayer service , increasing research , and continuing to invest in modernized information systems . future releases of the customer account data engine ( cade ) and account management services ( ams ) continue to face risks and challenges , which irs is working to mitigate . to meet these objectives , we drew upon and updated a recently issued report on the budget request and irs's 2008 tax filing season , and for our bsm work , we relied primarily on our review of the fy 2008 bsm expenditure plan . together with the budget request , irs's recently published strategies spell out its intentions for improving taxpayer service and reducing the net tax gap — the difference between the taxes owed and eventually paid , most recently estimated at $290 billion for tax year 2001 . irs has also taken steps to address our prior recommendations ; however , work remains to fully implement them , including developing long - term plans for completing the bsm program . of particular note , irs included return on investment ( roi ) information for all nonlegislative initiatives . in assessing the cost of the economic stimulus package , we obtained performance and production data , looking for factors that significantly affected performance , and we interviewed irs officials .
in fiscal year 2005 the veterans benefits administration ( vba ) completed about 17,700 disability reevaluations . specifically , we assessed ( 1 ) the operational controls va uses to ensure the effectiveness of the disability reevaluation process and ( 2 ) the management information va collects and uses to manage the disability reevaluation process . in fiscal year 2006 , the department of veterans affairs ( va ) paid about $26.5 billion in cash benefits to approximately 2.7 million veterans to compensate them for disabling medical conditions connected to injuries or illnesses incurred or aggravated during active military service . to help ensure that veterans are properly compensated for these service - connected disabilities , va is required to perform disability reevaluations for specific disabilities . va also performs disability reevaluations whenever it determines there is a need to verify either the continued existence or current severity of veterans' disabilities . to develop the information for this report , we analyzed veterans benefits administration ( vba ) workload and timeliness data on disability reevaluations . vba should develop a plan to collect and analyze data on the results of disability reevaluations . vba plans on improving some of its control mechanisms through its new claims management system , vetsnet . to the extent necessary , this information could be used to refine guidance on the selection and timing of future disability reevaluations . ii ) , va generally agreed with our conclusions and concurred with our recommendations . vba maintains a quality assurance review program known as the systematic technical accuracy review ( star ) program . during this same time period , vba completed about 629,000 disability compensation claims . va should modify its electronic claims processing system to ensure that a diary date is automatically generated by the system for all disabilities where a reevaluation is required by va's schedule for rating disabilities . for example , reevaluations represented about 2 percent of the total number of disability claims decisions completed in fiscal year 2005 . vba plans on improving its ability to track cancellations using vetsnet . vba is improving some of its operational controls over reevaluations . for example , in january 2002 , as a temporary effort to free up staff for processing its backlog of disability compensation and pension claims , vba postponed most of their currently scheduled reevaluations for 2 years . vba should include cancelled reevaluations in its quality assurance reviews and should evaluate the feasibility of periodically sampling a larger number of completed disability reevaluations for quality assurance review . by not tracking this information , va does not have a clear sense of the extent to which reevaluations are being cancelled ( as noted ) or whether some reevaluations are simply never started . in addition , without data on the results of reevaluations , vba cannot ensure that it is prioritizing its resources to reevaluate those veterans whose disabilities are likely to change , and that it is reevaluating those disabilities at the appropriate point in time . according to vba officials , when vetsnet is fully implemented for disability compensation claims in may 2008 , vba will be able to track the number and reasons for cancelled disability reevaluations . inadequate management controls could result in some veterans being under - compensated for conditions that have worsened or over - compensated for conditions that have improved .
the federal government continues to face new and more complex challenges in the 21st century resulting from long - term fiscal constraints , changing demographics , and other factors . leadership in agencies across the federal government , especially at senior executive levels , is essential to providing accountable , committed , consistent , and sustained attention to human capital and related organizational transformation issues . as requested , this report updates our january 2003 report and provides information ( 1 ) on the representation of women and minorities in the ses and the ses developmental pool ( i.e. , gs - 15 and gs - 14 positions ) for the executive branch as of fiscal year 2007 and compares this representation to fiscal year 2000 levels and to levels we projected for the end of fiscal year 2007 in our 2003 report ; ( 2 ) for fiscal years 2000 and 2007 , the average age at which women and minorities were appointed to and retired from the ses , the average length of service among those appointed to the ses in fiscal year 1990 , as well as information for 2000 and 2007 on the representation of individuals with targeted disabilities among the ses ; and ( 3 ) on the overall processes used in executive branch agencies for selecting and certifying members into the ses . the information provided for objectives ( 1 ) and ( 3 ) was reported earlier this year in testimony . over the past several years , we have reported on the diversity of the senior executive service ( ses ) . this report goes beyond the representation of the ses in 2007 to include other characteristics of the diversity of the ses , specifically age of ses members and disability status . the federal government's senior corps generally represents the most experienced segment of the federal career workforce . for this report , we extracted representation data for the ses and the ses developmental pool governmentwide and by chief financial officers act ( cfo ) agencies for october 2000 and september 2007 from the office of personnel management's ( opm ) central personnel data file ( cpdf ) . opm and the equal employment opportunity commission ( eeoc ) each play important roles in ensuring equal employment opportunity ( eeo ) in the federal workplace through their leadership and oversight of federal agencies . for example , we issued a january 2003 report that included both a comprehensive review of career ses by race , ethnicity , and gender governmentwide as of october 2000 and a statistically estimated projection of what the profile of the ses would be in october 2007 if appointment and separation trends did not change . in june 2008 , opm re - advertised the second opm - sponsored federal candidate development program , and 18 candidates were selected for the program and have started their 12-month training and development program . having a diverse senior corps can be an organizational strength that can bring a wider variety of perspectives and approaches to bear on policy development and implementation , strategic planning , problem solving , and decision making . in both 2000 and 2007 , half of the cfo act agencies ( 12 ) did not employ any ses members with targeted disabilities .
specifically , i will ( 1 ) identify workforce challenges that va medical facilities experience related to va crnas , and ( 2 ) identify a key mechanism that va medical facilities have to help make va crna salaries competitive for recruitment and retention purposes and the extent to which va facilities use this mechanism . given the increased demand for crnas and the important role they play in providing anesthesia services in va medical facilities , concerns have been raised about the challenges va may face in making va crna salaries competitive in order to maintain its va crna workforce , particularly in some local markets where the labor market for crnas can be highly competitive . one such issue va faces is an increased demand for the services provided by certified registered nurse anesthetists ( crna ) , who provide the majority of anesthesia care veterans receive in medical facilities operated by va. crnas are registered nurses who have completed a 2- to 3-year master's degree program in nurse anesthesia and who typically provide anesthesia care in health care settings with anesthesiologists and surgeons . there are approximately 500 va - employed crnas ( va crna ) who provide anesthesia care to veterans in va medical facilities . in december 2007 we issued a report that examined the challenges va faces recruiting and retaining va crnas . to do the work for our december 2007 report , we analyzed web - based surveys we sent to all va chief anesthesiologists , va human resources ( hr ) officers , and va crnas , with survey response rates of 92 , 85 , and 76 percent , respectively . while the demand for crnas has continued to increase , many va crnas are nearing retirement eligibility age . according to va officials , more than half of va crnas are over the age of 51 , and the average va crna is 7 years closer to retirement eligibility than the average crna nationally . to improve va's ability to recruit and retain va crnas , we recommended that the secretary of veterans affairs direct the assistant secretary for human resources and administration to expedite development and implementation of a training course on va's lps policy for va medical facility officials responsible for compliance with the policy . we also interviewed a representative from kaiser permanente , a large health care plan that primarily uses crnas to deliver anesthesia services , to identify what steps this plan takes to ensure it has a sufficient number of crnas and to determine the indicators this plan uses to identify a crna shortage or potential future crna shortage . the demand for these practitioners in va medical facilities has continued to increase because crnas are no longer used only in the operating room , but are used in other areas of a medical facility , such as administering anesthesia to patients who are undergoing cardiac catheterization and providing airway management to patients during cardiac emergencies . in december 2007 we also reported that va's locality pay system ( lps ) is a key mechanism that va medical facilities can use to determine whether to adjust va crna salaries to help the facilities remain competitive with crna salaries in local market areas .
my statement today will focus on ( 1 ) the extent to which dhs has used its other transaction authority , ( 2 ) the status of dhs's implementation of gao's previous recommendations , and ( 3 ) the accountability challenges associated with the use of these agreements . we have previously reviewed dhs's use of this authority and ethics related management controls and made recommendations for improvements . according to dhs officials , this authority , which is set to expire in september 2008 , is a critical tool because it has given the department the flexibility to attract new contractors to help develop and manage the mission of an integrated program of science and technology from basic research to production . for this reason , it is important to monitor the use of this authority to help ensure that the benefits outweigh the risks to the government . however , the flexibility afforded by other transaction authority also carries the risk of reduced accountability and transparency . thank you for inviting me here today to discuss the department of homeland security's ( dhs ) use of its other transaction authority . operational challenges to successfully making use of other transaction authority include: attracting and ensuring the use of non - traditional contractors ; acquiring intellectual property rights ; financial control ; and maintaining a skilled acquisition workforce . in preparation for this hearing , we obtained recent data on other transaction agreements from dhs and looked at several of these agreements , interviewed dhs representatives from the science and technology directorate , reviewed related reports and studies , and identified the efforts dhs has made to address our previous recommendations . dhs has implemented some measures to address many of these recommendations ; however , it has not addressed all of them . about 77 percent of the $443 million spent on dhs's agreements has been on 7 of the 37 agreements . we plan to conduct additional audit work on dhs's use of other transaction authority as required by the homeland security act of 2002 . in addition , dhs has stated that its two cost - sharing agreements for development of its counter - manpads technology have resulted in savings of over $27 million and possibly more . most of the department's use of other transaction authority to date occurred between fiscal years 2004 and 2005 . beyond these efforts , gao found some areas for improvement and recommended that: dhs provide guidance on when to include audit provisions in agreements ; provide more training on creating and managing agreements ; capture knowledge gained from current agreements for future use ; and take measures to help rotational staff avoid conflicts of interest . in fiscal year 2006 , other transactions accounted for almost $153 million of dhs's reported $15.9 billion in procurement obligations , approximately 1 percent ( see fig . retaining a skilled acquisition workforce has been a continual challenge at dhs , and we have ongoing work in this area for this committee . for example , the department estimates that from fiscal years 2004 through 2007 , s&t spent 13 percent of its total obligations on its other transaction agreements .
to meet its expansive homeland security mission , dhs spends billions of dollars on service acquisitions for critical trade , transportation , and border security investments . to help improve service acquisition outcomes , federal procurement policy calls for agencies to use a performance - based approach to the maximum extent practicable . this report focused on contracts for major investments with complex service acquisitions at the coast guard , customs and border protection ( cbp ) , and the transportation security administration ( tsa ) — three of the dhs components reporting among the highest obligations for performance - based service acquisitions in fiscal years 2005 and 2006 . in fact , more than 80 percent of dhs's total procurement dollars are spent on services . while a performance - based approach has been widely accepted , we have found that agencies face certain challenges in implementing the approach — especially for complex or major investments . thank you for inviting me here today to discuss the department of homeland security's ( dhs ) planning and assessment of its complex service acquisitions . prior gao work has found that appropriate planning , structuring , and monitoring of acquisitions is critical to ensuring that the services provided meet the government's needs . improving acquisition management has been an ongoing challenge since the department was established and requires sustained management attention . these actions include routinely assessing requirements for complex investments to ensure that they are well - defined and developing consistently measurable standards linked to those requirements ; systematically evaluating outcomes of major investments and relevant contracting methods ; and improving the quality of fpds - ng data to facilitate identifying and assessing the use of various contracting methods . other factors , such as pressure to get programs up and running , additional external requirements , and technological challenges also impact the ability to achieve good acquisition outcomes . consistent with federal procurement policy , dhs has emphasized a performance - based approach to improve service acquisition outcomes . specifically , i will discuss how contract outcomes are influenced by how well dhs components have defined and developed contract requirements and performance standards . the report we are releasing today recommends that the secretary of homeland security take several actions to increase dhs's ability to achieve improved outcomes for its service acquisitions , including those that are performance - based . moreover , the chief procurement officer ( cpo ) , who has responsibility for departmentwide procurement oversight , has begun some initial review of performance - based service acquisitions , but has not conducted systematic management assessments of this acquisition method . if properly implemented , these characteristics can help ensure that contracted services meet cost , schedule , and performance requirements . i will also discuss the need for improved assessment and oversight to ensure better outcomes . this approach includes a performance work statement that describes outcome - oriented requirements , measurable performance standards , and quality assurance surveillance . in managing its service acquisitions , including those that are performance - based , dhs has faced oversight challenges , including a lack of reliable data and systematic management reviews . my testimony today will focus on the particular challenges dhs has confronted . in addition , the cpo has implemented a departmentwide acquisition oversight program , which was designed with the flexibility to address specific procurement issues , such as performance - based service acquisitions , and is based on a series of component - level reviews .
this statement provides information on two of the objectives in our 2003 report: ( 1 ) whether the judiciary's quantitative case - related workload measures were reasonably accurate measures of district judge and courts of appeals judges' case - related workload ; and ( 2 ) the reasonableness of any proposed methodologies to update the workload measures . our 2003 report was based on the results of our review of documentation provided by the federal judicial center ( fjc ) and the administrative office of the u.s. courts ( aousc ) on the history and development of the case - related workload measures and interviews with officials in each organization . my statement today is based on work completed and reported in 2003 and is focused exclusively on these workload measures . i appreciate the opportunity to be here today to discuss our work on case - related workload measures for district court and courts of appeals judges . if the conference determines that additional judgeships are needed , it transmits a request to congress identifying the number , type , ( courts of appeals , district court ) , and location of the judgeships it is requesting . biennially , the judicial conference , the federal judiciary's principal policymaking body , assesses the judiciary's needs for additional judgeships . however , the judicial conference's analysis begins with the quantitative case - related workload measures it has adopted for the district courts and courts of appeals — weighted case filings and adjusted case filings , respectively . in assessing the need for additional judgeships , the judicial conference considers a variety of information , including responses to its biennial survey of individual courts , temporary increases or decreases in case filings and other factors specific to an individual court . authorized judgeships are the total number of judgeships authorized by statute for each district court and court of appeals . we have no views on the judicial conference's pending request for additional judgeships . these two measures recognize , to different degrees , that the time demands on judges are largely a function of both the number and complexity of the cases on their dockets . whether these measures are reasonably accurate rests in turn on the soundness of the methodology used to develop them . the judicial conference relies on these quantitative workload measures to be reasonably accurate measures of judges' case - related workload . some types of cases may demand relatively little time and others may require many hours of work . in the past decade the judicial conference has considered a number of proposals for developing a revised case - related workload measure for the courts of appeals judges , but has been unable to reach a consensus on any approach . these thresholds are 430 weighted case filings per authorized judgeship for district courts and 500 adjusted case filings per three - judge panel of authorized judgeships for courts of appeals ( courts of appeals judges generally hear cases in rotating panels of three judges each ) . in this statement , we discuss those two objectives first for district courts then for courts of appeals . the scope of our work did not include how the judicial conference used these case - related workload measures to develop any specific request for additional district and courts of appeals judgeships .
the current economic downturn has added to the significant financial stress facing that industry . congress has asked us to review these plans . deteriorating financial , real estate , and labor markets have reduced consumer confidence and available credit , and automobile purchases have declined . after reaching a recent high of about 1.8 million in july 2005 , the number of vehicles sold in the united states dropped to about 800,000 in october 2008 , approximately a 54 percent decline . in deciding whether to provide financial assistance , congress must consider and balance the perceived need for expedience with the need to put a structure in place to ensure that the interests of taxpayers are safeguarded and the specific problems that have put the industry in its current financial crisis are addressed . these principles are ( 1 ) identifying and defining the problem , ( 2 ) determining the national interests and setting clear goals and objectives that address the problem , and ( 3 ) protecting the government's interests . less than three days ago , the big 3 submitted business plans to congress that describe their requests for federal assistance and restructuring plans . we appreciate the opportunity to testify on possible federal assistance to the domestic auto industry . the tightening of the credit markets has also affected the big 3 and their suppliers , which together employ about 730,000 people . officials from the big 3 have requested immediate federal financial assistance , reporting that their companies are experiencing significant financial stress . while most auto manufacturers have experienced declining sales in 2008 , recent economic conditions have particularly hurt sales of the “big 3” domestic auto manufacturers ( general motors , ford , and chrysler ) , in part because these companies have historically derived most of their sales from vehicles such as sport utility vehicles , which are less fuel efficient , but more profitable than small cars . in addition to potential job losses at auto manufacturers , the collapse or partial collapse of the domestic auto industry would adversely affect auto dealers , suppliers , and other sectors . if congress determines that the benefits of federal intervention exceed those of bankruptcy reorganization for one or more of the domestic manufacturers , congress could draft legislation to guide the availability and use of federal assistance . higher gasoline prices over the past several years , which rose to over $4 per gallon in the summer of 2008 before falling steeply this fall , have contributed to a sharp decline in consumer demand for these vehicles . my remarks are based on our extensive body of work on previous federal financial assistance efforts that dates back to the 1970s , including those efforts directed to individual large corporations , such as the chrysler corporation and lockheed aircraft corporation , as well as municipalities and commercial aviation . in my statement today , i will discuss principles that could serve as a framework for considering the desirability , nature , scope , and conditions of possible federal financial assistance and , should congress decide to provide financial assistance , how these principles could be applied in these circumstances . determine national interests and set clear goals and objectives that address the problem: after defining the problem , congress must determine whether a legislative solution best serves the national interest .
on behalf of the federal government , the department of the treasury ( treasury ) , in coordination with the office of management and budget ( omb ) , prepares the cfs . the purpose of this report is to ( 1 ) discuss the details of the material weaknesses we identified during our audit of the fiscal year 2007 cfs relating to internal control over the processes used to prepare the cfs , ( 2 ) recommend improvements to address these weaknesses , and ( 3 ) provide the status of corrective actions taken by treasury and omb to address the 81 recommendations detailed in our previous reports ( see app . this appendix includes recommendations that were open at the beginning of our fiscal year 2007 audit from five of our previous reports: financial audit: process for preparing the consolidated financial statements of the u.s. government needs improvement , gao - 04-45 ( washington , d.c.: oct. 30 , 2003 ) ; financial audit: process for preparing the consolidated financial statements of the u.s. government needs further improvement , gao - 04- 866 ( washington , d.c.: sept. 10 , 2004 ) ; financial audit: process for preparing the consolidated financial statements of the u.s. government continues to need improvement , gao - 05-407 ( washington , d.c.: may 4 , 2005 ) ; financial audit: significant internal control weaknesses remain in preparing the consolidated financial statements of the u.s. government , gao - 06-415 ( washington , d.c.: apr . in our report dated december 10 , 2007 , we disclaimed an opinion on the consolidated financial statements of the u.s. government ( cfs ) for the fiscal years ended september 30 , 2007 and 2006 , except for the 2007 statement of social insurance , which received an unqualified opinion . 21 , 2006 ) ; and financial audit: significant internal control weaknesses remain in the preparation of the consolidated financial statements of the u.s. government , gao - 07-805 ( washington , d.c.: july 23 , 2007 ) . additional material weaknesses were identified during our tests of the federal government's processes used to prepare the cfs . we have reported that the federal government did not have adequate systems , controls , and procedures for preparing the cfs . for the past 11 years , certain material weaknesses in financial reporting and other limitations on the scope of our work have resulted in conditions that prevented us from expressing an opinion on the federal government's accrual basis consolidated financial statements . in our audit report on the fiscal year 2007 cfs , which is included in the fiscal year 2007 financial report of the united states government , we discussed the material weaknesses related to the federal government's processes used to prepare the cfs . as part of our audit of the fiscal years 2007 and 2006 cfs , we evaluated the federal government's financial reporting procedures and related internal control , and we followed up on the status of corrective actions taken by treasury and omb to address open recommendations relating to the processes used to prepare the cfs that were in our previous reports . many of the material weaknesses in internal control that have contributed to our continuing disclaimers of opinion were identified by auditors during their audits of federal agencies' financial statements and were reported in detail with recommendations to the agencies in separate reports .
effective implementation of the recommendations we have made and continue to make through our financial audits and related work could greatly assist irs in improving its internal controls and achieving sound financial management . in its role as the nation's tax collector , the internal revenue service ( irs ) has a demanding responsibility to collect taxes , process tax returns , and enforce the nation's tax laws . we will review the effectiveness of further corrective actions irs has taken or will take to address all open recommendations as part of our audit of irs's fiscal year 2009 financial statements . while we recognize that some actions — primarily those related to modernizing automated systems — will take a number of years to resolve , most of the open recommendations can be addressed in the short term . further efforts are needed to address the internal control deficiencies that continue to exist . irs has made substantial progress in improving its financial management since its first financial audit , as evidenced by unqualified audit opinions on its financial statements for the past 9 years , resolution of several material internal control weaknesses and significant deficiencies , and actions taken resulting in the closure of hundreds of financial management recommendations . irs continues to make progress addressing its significant financial management challenges . this significant deficiency was downgraded from a material weakness in fiscal year 2008 because irs took significant steps to address the deficiencies comprising the material weakness , such as enhancing its cost accounting capabilities and performance measures . nonetheless , more needs to be done to fully address the agency's continuing financial management challenges . because of its role and overall mission , irs's activities affect virtually all of the nation's citizens . sound financial management and effective internal controls are essential if irs is to efficiently and effectively achieve its goals . the following short - term and two long - term recommendations are designed to assist irs in ( 1 ) evaluating its operations , ( 2 ) determining which activities are the most beneficial , and ( 3 ) establishing a good system for oversight . this progress has been the result of hard work by many individuals throughout irs and sustained commitment of irs leadership . a - 123 ; fmfia ; and the federal information system controls audit manual ( fiscam ) . irs's operations cover a wide range of technical competencies with specific expertise needed in tax - related matters ; financial management ; and systems design , development , and maintenance . forty - six recommendations from prior years remain open , a significant number of which have been outstanding for several years . increased budgetary pressures and an increased public awareness of the importance of internal control require irs to carry out its mission more efficiently and more effectively while protecting taxpayers' information . irs has made much progress in improving its financial management since it was first required to prepare a set of financial statements and have them in fiscal year 1992 . in fiscal year 2008 , irs collected about $2.7 trillion in tax payments , processed hundreds of millions of tax and information returns , and paid about $426 billion in refunds to taxpayers .
this appendix provides information on the scope of work and the methodology used to examine the ( 1 ) outcomes of the environmental protection agency's ( epa ) enforcement actions , and the factors considered by federal and private parties in reaching these outcomes ; ( 2 ) trends , if any , in litigation to resolve superfund liability ; and ( 3 ) status and implementation costs of the superfund program . information on these key issues is important for epa to effectively plan the future course of the superfund program , and the congress needs such data to help it make more informed decisions about program funding and policy issues . in this context , you asked us to ( 1 ) identify the outcomes of epa's enforcement actions , and the factors federal and private parties consider in reaching these outcomes ; ( 2 ) examine the trends , if any , in litigation to resolve superfund liability ; and ( 3 ) determine the status and implementation costs of the superfund program . cleanup actions are managed by epa's office of solid waste and emergency response ( oswer ) and progress through several steps: investigation and study ; selection and design of the cleanup method ; and implementation of the cleanup , known as the remedial action . to help assess these financial constraints , epa needs comprehensive and reliable data that can be aggregated to provide information on key issues , such as the ( 1 ) status and cost of cleanups at sites that are not construction complete , particularly sites where cleanup is likely to be complex and expensive ; ( 2 ) extent to which sites lack responsible parties capable of paying for some or all of a site's cleanup activities ; and ( 3 ) financial impacts of having epa shoulder these sites' cleanup costs . the comprehensive environmental response , compensation , and liability act ( cercla ) of 1980 established the superfund program to protect human health and the environment from the effects of hazardous substances . to assist the congress in making decisions about funding the superfund program , we are recommending that the administrator , epa , assess the comprehensiveness and reliability of the data the agency collects and , where necessary , improve the data for the purpose of providing aggregated information on the following issues: the status and cost of cleanups at individual sites , particularly complex and expensive sites ; the extent to which there are viable responsible parties at npl sites ; and the potential financial impacts from epa's inability to obtain reimbursement for agency cleanup costs from nonviable responsible parties . epa can also take removal actions at any time ; these actions are generally short - term or emergency cleanups to mitigate immediate threats . remedial actions — or remedies — are generally long - term cleanups that aim to permanently and significantly reduce contamination . also , without this information , epa cannot determine the financial impacts that the absence of viable parties could have on the agency's future cost recovery efforts . we also recognize that epa has made progress in developing measures that provide information on the extent to which contamination at sites has been addressed .
the federal transit administration ( fta ) distributes federal funding to transit agencies for the construction of projects through a variety of formula and discretionary grant programs , including the new starts grant program for new , large - scale projects . beyond its pilot program , build upon efforts underway in dot to better equip transit project sponsors in implementing transit projects that use alternative approaches , including developing guidance , providing technical assistance , and sponsoring greater use of financial assessments to consider the potential costs and trade - offs . in response to your request , this report addresses ( 1 ) the role of the private sector in the delivering and financing of u.s. transit projects compared to other countries ; ( 2 ) the benefits and limitations of and the barriers , if any , to greater private sector involvement in transit projects and how these barriers are addressed in the department of transportation's ( dot ) public - private partnership pilot program ; and ( 3 ) how project sponsors and dot can protect the public interest in transit projects that use alternative approaches . as national demand for mass transit services increases , more sponsors of transit projects are seeking available federal funding . develop a sound evaluation plan for the public - private partnership pilot program to accurately and reliably assess the pilot programs' results that includes key factors such as: well - defined , clear , and measurable objectives ; measures that are directly linked to the program objectives ; criteria for determining pilot program performance ; a way to isolate the effects of the pilot program ; a data analysis plan for the evaluation design ; and a detailed plan to ensure that data collection , entry , and storage are reliable and error - free . the challenges they raised include ( 1 ) delays , ( 2 ) additional costs , and ( 3 ) the loss of other potential benefits , such as enhanced efficiencies and improved quality . to address these issues , we reviewed pertinent federal legislation and regulations , including: federal register notices and guidance for fta's public - private partnership pilot program and the new starts program ; dot's 2007 report to congress on the costs , benefits , and efficiencies of public - private partnerships for fixed guideway capital projects ; and other dot reports . in particular , we focused on ( 1 ) the role of the private sector in the delivering and financing of u.s. transit projects compared with other countries ; ( 2 ) the benefits and limitations of and the barriers , if any , to greater private sector involvement in transit projects and how these barriers are addressed in the department of transportation's ( dot ) public - private partnership pilot program ; and ( 3 ) how project sponsors and dot can protect the public interest in transit projects that use alternative approaches . many americans rely on mass transit to reach their jobs , schools , and other activities . in 2008 , passengers took over 10.7 billion trips using public transportation , the highest level of ridership in 52 years and a modern ridership record . expanded fta efforts could facilitate the implementation of transit projects that use alternative approaches and protect the public interest through the use of tools such as standardized contracts , technical assistance , and financial assessments .
our objectives for this review were to describe ( 1 ) the known water resource effects of biofuel production in the united states ; ( 2 ) the agricultural conservation practices and technological innovations that exist or are being developed to address these effects and any barriers that may prevent the adoption of these practices and technologies ; and ( 3 ) key research needs regarding the effects of biofuel production on water resources . to understand the potential effects of increased biofuel production on water resources , you asked us to describe ( 1 ) the known water resource effects of increased biofuel production in the united states ; ( 2 ) the agricultural conservation practices and technological innovations that exist or are being developed to address these effects , and any barriers that may prevent the adoption of these practices and technologies ; and ( 3 ) key research needs regarding the effects of biofuel production on water resources . in recent years , the federal government has increasingly encouraged the use of biofuels and other alternatives to petroleum in response to concerns over u.s. dependence on imported oil , climate change , and other issues . the united states is the largest user of petroleum in the world , consuming 19.4 million barrels per day in 2008 , over half of which is imported . the energy independence and security act of 2007 ( eisa ) expanded the renewable fuel standard ( rfs ) by requiring that u.s. transportation fuel contain 9 billion gallons of renewable fuels in 2008 and increasing this amount annually to 36 billion gallons in 2022 . even in water - rich states , such as iowa , concerns have arisen over the effects of increased biofuel production , and research is needed to assess the hydrology and quality of a state's aquifers to help ensure it is on a path to sustainable production , according to one state official . given the maturity of the corn ethanol industry , the extent of knowledge about the effects on water supply and quality from cultivation of corn and its conversion into ethanol , and the uncertainty related to the effects of next generation biofuel production , we believe the balance in the report is appropriate . as biofuel production increases , questions have emerged about the effects that increased production could have on the nation's water resources . moreover , although the shift toward next generation biofuels is a positive step in terms of sustainability , this industry is still developing and the full extent of the environmental benefits from this shift is still unknown . biofuels , such as ethanol and biodiesel , can be produced domestically and are derived from renewable sources , such as corn , sugar cane , and soybeans . doi also suggested that the report should include a discussion of the other environmental impacts of biofuel production , such as effects on wildlife habitat or effects on soil . these groups included relevant state agencies , including those responsible for oversight of agriculture , environmental quality , and water and soil resources ; federal agency officials with responsibility for a particular state or region , such as officials from the u.s. geological survey ( usgs ) , the u.s. department of agriculture's ( usda ) natural resources conservation service , and the environmental protection agency ( epa ) ; university researchers ; industry representatives ; and relevant nongovernmental organizations , such as environmental groups , state - level corn growers' associations , and ethanol producer associations .
these challenges include ( 1 ) improving agencywide management , ( 2 ) transforming epa's processes for assessing and controlling toxic chemicals , ( 3 ) improving implementation of the clean air act , ( 4 ) reducing pollution in the nation's waters , ( 5 ) speeding the pace of cleanup at superfund and other hazardous waste sites , and ( 6 ) addressing emerging climate change issues . the environmental protection agency ( epa ) operates in a highly complex and controversial regulatory arena , and its policies and programs affect virtually all segments of the economy , society , and government . epa's overarching mission is to protect human health and the environment by implementing and enforcing environmental laws intended to improve the quality of our air and water and to protect our land . epa will also receive an additional $7.2 billion in stimulus funding from the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 , primarily for water infrastructure projects and superfund . in these reports , gao has made a number of recommendations intended to improve epa's programs by enhancing the information it uses to manage its programs and strengthening internal controls .  ( see related gao products at the end of this report ) . epa's 2009 budget included about $939 million for clean air and climate change , $2.6 billion for clean water , and $1.7 billion for land restoration . as you know , epa's responsibilities are carried out under a complex set of environmental laws , such as the clean air act and the toxic substances control act ( tsca ) . epa has generally concurred with our recommendations , but has been slow to implement some of them . the agency's budget has been declining in recent years from $7.8 billion in fiscal year 2000 to $7.1 billion requested for fiscal year 2009 – – a decline of about 28 percent in real terms . the just - released president's fiscal year 2010 budget request includes $ 10.5 billion for epa . epa also implements regulations to benefit public health and the environment while balancing , as appropriate , the cost to industry and others — a particularly controversial issue — and implements laws , such as the clean air act , while complying with numerous court orders resulting from the myriad lawsuits brought against the agency by states , concerned citizens , special interest groups , and others . the emergence of issues such as stratospheric ozone depletion and climate change suggest that the agency's responsibilities will continue to grow . considering epa's evolving roles and responsibilities , we were asked to identify the major management challenges and program risks that epa faces as it works to accomplish its mission of protecting human health and the environment . furthermore , enforcement activities primarily occur in epa's 10 regions , which possess considerable autonomy – – causing significant variations in enforcement activities from region to region . the agency is composed of major offices aligned with environmental laws and 10 regional offices . charged initially with cleaning up pollution of the environment , epa's tasks have become increasingly complicated as we understand more about the dangers and pervasiveness of toxic substances .
reentry , the return of juvenile offenders from residential facilities back into their communities , aims to reduce recidivism by using programs that promote the effective reintegration of juvenile offenders and assist them in acquiring the life skills needed to succeed and become law - abiding citizens . although the juvenile arrest rate is near its lowest point in two decades , critical problems affecting states' juvenile justice systems remain , such as recidivism — the act of committing new offenses after having been arrested or convicted of a crime — and substance abuse — a pattern of use of illegal , prescription , or nonprescription drugs leading to significant impairment in functioning . according to the department of justice ( doj ) , approximately 100,000 juvenile offenders are held in residential facilities in the united states on a given day , and most of these juveniles will likely leave these facilities and return home to their communities each year . in addition , in a 2008 annual survey of members conducted by the federal advisory council on juvenile justice , reentry of offenders into communities and schools ( 28 states ) and substance abuse ( 21 states ) were two of the top three programmatic issues most frequently reported as affecting these states' juvenile justice systems . respondents also cited the need for federal agencies and state governments to collaborate on conducting research and evaluations to provide a better explanation of ( 1 ) practices that have been evaluated and have been shown to be effective , ( 2 ) the need for more training from federal agencies on how to conduct evaluations , and ( 3 ) increased funding to establish evaluation procedures ( 23 states ) . related to research and policy , the most common issue state officials cited was the need to identify effective practices for juvenile programs ( 23 states ) followed by the need to enhance the states' capacities to conduct juvenile research and collect data about juvenile programs ( 20 states ) . further , doj has estimated that 62 percent of juveniles in residential facilities self - reported having had at least one prior commitment in the juvenile justice system . for example , from fiscal years 2007 through 2009 , congress provided ojjdp almost $1.1 billion to use for grants to states , localities , and organizations for a variety of juvenile justice programs . in support of its mission , the office also disseminates information to states and communities related to a number of juvenile justice issues , including effective reentry and substance abuse programs , and funds research and evaluations of juvenile justice programs . to what extent does ojjdp have efforts under way to disseminate information about effective juvenile justice programs and assess the utility of the information it is providing through these efforts ? . the office of juvenile justice and delinquency prevention ( ojjdp ) is doj's office charged with providing national leadership , coordination , and resources to help prevent and respond to juvenile delinquency and victimization . to help ensure the effective use of grant funds for juvenile reentry and juvenile substance abuse programs , you asked us to review the available research as well as ojjdp's efforts to provide information about effective programs to the juvenile justice field , that is , program practitioners and communities .
the objectives of this review were to examine ( 1 ) the extent to which u.s. development objectives align with u.s. goals and pakistan's objectives , ( 2 ) u.s. efforts to track the fulfillment of the u.s. pledge , ( 3 ) efforts to measure and report the performance of development programs , and ( 4 ) efforts to monitor development assistance in the federally administered tribal areas ( fata ) . specifically , it examines ( 1 ) the extent to which u.s. development objectives align with u.s. national security goals and pakistan's objectives , ( 2 ) u.s. efforts to track the fulfillment of the u.s. development assistance pledge , ( 3 ) efforts to measure and report the performance of development programs , and ( 4 ) efforts to monitor development assistance in the fata . 111-73 to complete a review of the pakistan assistance strategy report submitted to the congress by the secretary of state , and to complete an independent analysis of the president of the united states' certification that 1 ) the government of pakistan is continuing to cooperate with the united states in efforts to dismantle supplier networks relating to the acquisition of nuclear weapons - related materials and 2 ) the government of pakistan , during the preceding fiscal year , has demonstrated a sustained commitment to and is making significant efforts toward combating terrorist groups . taliban , al qaeda , and other terrorists have exploited pakistan's federally administered tribal areas' ( fata ) loosely governed and impoverished environment to plan and launch attacks on afghan , u.s. , and nato security forces in afghanistan , as well as on pakistani citizens and security forces in pakistan . l. 111-73 ) in october 2009 , with the goal of providing $7.5 billion in new nonmilitary assistance to pakistan over the next 5 years ( 2010 to 2014 ) . since that time , the united states has increased its focus on the use of nonmilitary efforts in pakistan . in addition to the u.s. pledge to provide $750 million between 2007 and 2011 toward sustainable development efforts in pakistan , the u.s. passed the enhanced partnership with pakistan act of 2009 ( pub . to address our objectives , we reviewed strategic , planning , and program - related documentation from the department of state ( state ) and the u.s. agency for international development ( usaid ) , and discussed these issues with relevant department officials in washington , d.c . this report examines the status of efforts to fulfill the u.s. $750 million pledge for development assistance in the fata . as the united states considers how it will go forward with efforts to assist pakistan in securing , stabilizing , and developing the fata and western frontier region , it is vital that continued oversight and accountability over funds used for these efforts are in place . pakistan is a key u.s. ally in the fight against terrorism and violent extremism . in the interim , we believe this report provides useful insight on the u.s. ability to plan for , implement , monitor , and evaluate additional development assistance efforts . to improve upon u.s. efforts to monitor assistance programs in the fata , we recommend that the usaid administrator take steps to improve usaid's documentation of its alternative monitoring efforts related to the fata .
the objectives of this review were to determine the extent to which ( 1 ) available data allow the national marine fisheries service ( nmfs ) to accurately identify the marine mammal stocks that meet the marine mammal protection act's ( mmpa ) requirements for establishing take reduction teams , ( 2 ) nmfs has established take reduction teams for those marine mammal stocks that meet the statutory requirements , ( 3 ) nmfs has met the statutory deadlines established in the mmpa for the take reduction teams subject to the deadlines and the reasons for any delays , and ( 4 ) nmfs has developed a comprehensive strategy for evaluating the effectiveness of the take reduction plans that have been implemented . we recommend that the assistant administrator of nmfs develop a comprehensive strategy for assessing the effectiveness of each take reduction plan and implementing regulations , including , among other things , establishing appropriate goals and steps for comprehensively monitoring and analyzing rates of compliance with take reduction measures . without a comprehensive strategy for assessing the effectiveness of its take reduction plans and implementing regulations and industry's compliance with them , nmfs may be missing opportunities to better protect marine mammals . in the context of nmfs's efforts to measure the success of take reduction plans and implementing regulations , such a strategy would include , at a minimum , ( 1 ) performance goals that identify the desired outcomes of the take reduction regulations ; ( 2 ) steps for assessing the effectiveness of potential take reduction regulations , such as fishing gear modifications , in achieving the goals ; ( 3 ) a process for monitoring the fishing industry's compliance with the requirements of the take reduction regulations ; and ( 4 ) reliable data assessing the regulation's effect on achieving the goals . to facilitate the oversight of nmfs's progress and capacity to meet the statutory requirements for take reduction teams , congress may wish to consider taking the following three actions: direct the assistant administrator of nmfs to report on major data , resource , or other limitations that make it difficult for nmfs to accurately determine which marine mammals meet the statutory requirements for establishing take reduction teams ; establish teams for stocks that meet these requirements ; and meet the statutory deadlines for take reduction teams ; amend the statutory requirements for establishing a take reduction team to stipulate that not only must a marine mammal stock be strategic and interacting with a category i or ii fishery , but that the fishery with which the marine mammal stock interacts causes at least occasional incidental mortality or serious injury of that particular marine mammal stock ; and amend the mmpa to ensure that its deadlines give nmfs adequate time to publish proposed and final take reduction plans and implementing regulations while meeting all the requirements of the federal rulemaking process . as congress prepares to consider the reauthorization of the mmpa , you asked us to determine the extent to which ( 1 ) available data allow nmfs to accurately identify the marine mammal stocks that meet the mmpa's requirements for establishing take reduction teams ; ( 2 ) nmfs has established take reduction teams for those marine mammal stocks that meet the statutory requirements ; ( 3 ) nmfs has met the statutory deadlines established in the mmpa for the take reduction teams subject to the deadlines , and the reasons for any delays ; and ( 4 ) nmfs has developed a comprehensive strategy for evaluating the effectiveness of the take reduction plans that have been implemented .
we examined ( 1 ) the emergency services that the department of state ( state ) provides u.s. citizens , ( 2 ) how state is prepared to assist u.s. citizens in need of emergency services , and ( 3 ) how state monitors the assistance it provides u.s. citizens in need of emergency services . this report addresses: ( 1 ) what services state provides to u.s. citizens who are the victims of crimes , suffer accidents , or otherwise need emergency services ; ( 2 ) how state is prepared to assist u.s. citizens in need of emergency services ; and ( 3 ) how state monitors the assistance it provides to u.s. citizens in need of emergency services . serving and protecting the nearly 5 million americans who reside overseas as well as the u.s. citizens who take more than 64 million trips to foreign countries each year are chief priorities of the department of state ( state ) . while state provides a wide range of emergency services to american citizens overseas , state's ability to comprehensively analyze the global demand for these services is hampered by limitations with its data systems . we also reviewed the training , guidance , and support provided for consular staff , and interviewed foreign service officers ( fso ) and locally employed staff ( les ) about the training and resources available for american citizen services ( acs ) related activities . ensuring better access to emergency assistance information is supposed to be a redesign priority and should be implemented in the first quarter of fiscal year 2010 , with other changes to the site completed over the remaining part of the fiscal year . we also reviewed state's performance reports for fiscal years 2007 and 2008 and its annual performance plan for fiscal year 2009 to ascertain how it was measuring and monitoring its acs emergency services effort . in response , the u.s. embassy in beijing aided the victim's family by coordinating assistance with chinese officials and the police , as well as the hospital and funeral home ; assisting with repatriating the deceased's remains ; and directing the family to the various services available to victims of crime overseas . state's 260-plus embassies and consulates around the world have staff dedicated to assisting americans facing emergencies overseas , such as providing death notification to the next of kin , or visiting americans who have been arrested to ensure they are being treated humanely and understand the charges against them and the country's judicial process . discrepancies with emergency services data , such as deaths and arrests , that consular affairs provided to us for fiscal year 2003 through 2008 further illustrated reliability problems with its data . as a result , the bureau does not know the global demand for its services or if it is allocating its resources effectively . current state data indicate the number of u.s. citizens traveling , working , and studying abroad continues to grow , leading to a growing number of americans who may need u.s. government - provided emergency services during their travel . the system's lack of reliable data is partly attributable to unclear guidance regarding whether certain kinds of information should be entered into the system .
specifically , we are reporting on ( 1 ) the flooding and erosion threats that alaska native villages currently face , ( 2 ) the federal programs that are available to assist villages facing potential disasters , ( 3 ) the status of village relocation efforts , and ( 4 ) how federal assistance to relocating villages is prioritized . to determine the federal programs that are available to assist villages facing potential disasters , we met with officials from additional federal agencies , such as the department of homeland security's federal emergency management agency ( fema ) , interior's bureau of indian affairs , the department of health and human service's indian health service , the department of housing and urban development ( hud ) , and the department of transportation's federal aviation administration . in december 2003 , we reported that most of alaska's more than 200 native villages were affected to some degree by flooding and erosion , most commonly caused by severe storm events on alaska's coastline or by river flooding , such as during the spring breakup of river ice . flooding and erosion have caused millions of dollars of property damage in these remote villages and , in some cases , pose imminent threats to lives , homes , and infrastructure . while federal and state agencies administer programs for constructing flooding and erosion control projects in threatened villages , some villages must relocate to safer locations due to the severity of the problems . since 2003 , state officials have identified the growing impacts of climate change in alaska — which include melting polar ice , increasing storm intensity , and coastal flooding — increasing the urgency of federal and state efforts to identify imminently threatened villages and assess their relocation options . in 2004 , a congressional committee directed the u.s. army corps of engineers ( corps ) to conduct an alaska erosion baseline study to coordinate and plan assistance for alaska villages with the greatest need and to provide an overall assessment on the priority of which villages should receive assistance . in september 2007 , alaska's governor established the climate change sub - cabinet to lead the preparation and implementation of an alaska climate change strategy . we found that successful relocation efforts would involve collaboration among multiple federal and state entities and the villages , and we reported on alternatives for addressing barriers that villages face in obtaining federal services to mitigate flooding and erosion threats . while such efforts have begun to address the immediate needs of some of the most imminently threatened villages , many challenges remain . these obstacles include the inability of many villages to meet the financial and other criteria for federal assistance , the high cost of implementing protection or relocation projects for the remote communities , and the lack of scientific erosion data for sound decision making . within the sub - cabinet , an immediate action workgroup was created for the early assessment and development of an action plan addressing climate change impacts on coastal and other vulnerable communities in alaska . in its deliberations regarding assistance to relocating villages , congress may want to consider designating , or creating , a lead federal entity that could work in conjunction with the lead state agency to coordinate and oversee village relocation efforts .
specifically , we identified ( 1 ) to what extent fta's triennial reviews indicate that grantees met applicable federal requirements from fiscal years 2000 through 2008 , ( 2 ) the strengths and weaknesses of the triennial review process , and ( 3 ) fta's performance measures for the triennial review and to what extent fta's measures meet key attributes of successful performance measures . the department of transportation's federal transit administration ( fta ) fosters the development and maintenance of bus , subway , trolley , passenger ferry boat , and other public transportation systems through several grant programs to transit agencies serving both rural ( population less than 50,000 ) and urban communities ( population 50,000 or more ) . to determine the extent to which the triennial reviews indicate grantees met federal requirements from fiscal years 2000 through 2008 , we reviewed documentation on the federal transit administration's ( fta ) oversight tracking system ( otrak ) — the official electronic information system for tracking and monitoring oversight activities . public transportation systems are playing an increasingly important role in the nation's overall transportation system . public transit increases mobility for millions of americans in communities both large and small , provides congestion relief , promotes safe travel , and helps reduce our country's dependence on foreign oil . in addition , congress recently appropriated an additional $6 billion for the urbanized area formula program in the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 . fta officials recognize the limits of their current performance measures and have begun efforts to enhance them . fta's current performance measures partially address governmentwide priorities by ensuring that fta reports on its timeliness in conducting reviews and in addressing corrective actions . this urbanized area formula program received 42 percent of fta grant funds — about $22 billion from fiscal years 2004 through 2009 . therefore , fta does not assess whether the triennial review program is increasing grantees' ability to continuously meet federal requirements . from fiscal years 2004 through 2008 , fta nearly met its goals in 4 of the 5 years . both measures meet 4 of 9 attributes ; that is , they link to agency goals , provide a measurable target , are clear , and have limited overlap with other measures . strong fta oversight of federal surface transportation grant programs helps ensure that grantees meet federal requirements , provide safe public transportation , and safeguard from misuse the billions of dollars that congress appropriated for surface transportation programs to help america recover from the economic downturn and the billions more that congress plans to reauthorize for surface transportation . we selected these grantees on several factors , including their past performance , as assessed by triennial reviews ; having both a triennial review and another fta oversight review in the same fiscal year ; and demographic features , such as size and geographic region . to identify the extent to which triennial reviews indicate that grantees are meeting applicable federal requirements from fiscal years 2000 through 2008 , we obtained and analyzed data from fta's oversight tracking system ( otrak ) — the official electronic information system used for tracking and monitoring oversight activities .
since the early 1970s , much of the federal government's share of new capital investment in mass transportation has come through the federal transit administration's ( fta ) new starts program . over the last decade , the new starts program has provided state and local agencies with over $10 billion to help design and construct transit projects nationwide . through this program , fta identifies and recommends new fixed - guideway transit projects for grants , typically through full funding grant agreements ( ffga ) . this report discusses the ( 1 ) time it has generally taken for proposed projects to move through the new starts process , and what congress and fta have done to expedite the process , and ( 2 ) options that exist to expedite the process . the safe , accountable , flexible , efficient transportation equity act: a legacy for users ( safetea - lu ) , which authorized the new starts program through fiscal year 2009 , identifies criteria for how fta evaluates and rates projects . we selected these projects based on a range of characteristics , including: ( 1 ) timing ( i.e. , when projects received a ffga ) ; ( 2 ) mode ( i.e. , heavy rail , light rail , or bus ) ; ( 3 ) scope ( i.e. , the total cost of the project ) ; and ( 4 ) geographic area . fta must prioritize projects for funding by evaluating , rating , and recommending potential projects on the basis of specific financial commitment and project justification criteria — including mobility improvements , cost - effectiveness , economic development effects , land use , environmental benefits , and operating efficiencies . these issues and the upcoming reauthorization of all surface transportation programs , including the new starts program , have led stakeholders and policymakers to examine the existing evaluation and rating process and consider potential modifications and other options to reduce the complexity , cost , and time it takes for a new starts project to go through the pipeline . we have previously identified fta's use of a rigorous and systematic evaluation process to distinguish among proposed new starts investments as a model for other transportation programs . we are required by safetea - lu to report each year on fta's processes and procedures for evaluating , rating , and recommending new starts projects for federal funding and on fta's implementation of these processes and procedures . analyze the streamlining options identified in this report , along with any additional options , to determine which options , if any , to implement — seeking legislative change if necessary — to expedite the project development within the new starts program . however , we and other stakeholders and policymakers have also identified challenges facing the new starts program . while fta has taken some steps to improve its data collection and retention , additional work is needed . the federal transit administration evaluated and rated 14 new starts projects in preliminary engineering and final design during the fiscal year 2010 cycle . moreover , this lack of adequate data makes it difficult for congress and fta to assess the extent to which federal efforts designed to expedite the new starts process are succeeding .
3. prior years' performance ; identify opportunities for irs to reduce taxpayers' reliance on rals and refund anticipation checks ( rac ) ; and identify opportunities , based on prior gao reports such as those on higher education tax benefits , for irs to enhance taxpayer compliance during returns processing . for example , timely issuance of refunds can reduce taxpayer demand for refund anticipation loans ( ral ) , which are short - term , often high - interest loans offered by tax preparers or banks that allow taxpayers to receive their refund cash quickly , sometimes within the same day . the internal revenue service's ( irs ) 2009 filing season is an enormous and critical undertaking . in light of its importance , the chair and ranking member of subcommittee on oversight , committee on ways and means , house of representatives , and the chair and ranking members of the senate finance committee asked us to provide an overall assessment of irs's 2009 filing season performance . where irs has the statutory authority , also known as math error authority ( mea ) , it corrects certain errors before interest is owed by taxpayers , and helps taxpayers and irs avoid burdensome audits . irs's filing season performance also has indirect effects on taxpayers . earlier this year , we provided an interim assessment of irs's 2009 filing season performance , made recommendations to improve irs's 2010 filing season performance , and made suggestions to congress to better ensure compliance , when tax returns are being processed , with the first - time homebuyer tax credit . last filing season , irs processed over 140 million individual income tax returns and issued over 100 million refunds . during each of the last two filing seasons , irs has been called upon to quickly implement complex tax law changes , including economic stimulus policies that have resulted in unexpected increases in call volume and created new taxpayer compliance challenges and workload . for this report , our objectives were to 1. assess irs's filing season performance compared to 2009 goals and 2 . irs also answered tens of millions of taxpayer questions through telephone , web site , and face - to - face assistance . the filing season is also the time irs begins its enforcement efforts with its math error program , in which irs uses its computers to identify errors during processing , such as calculation mistakes or omitted or inconsistent entries . interviewed irs officials about current operations , trends , and significant factors and initiatives that affected performance ; efforts to reduce reliance on rals and racs ; and monitoring and oversight of compliance issues , including higher education credit claims . reviewed treasury inspector general for tax administration ( tigta ) reports and interviewed a tigta official about irs's performance and initiatives . to reduce taxpayer confusion and enhance compliance with the eligibility requirements for higher education benefits , irs should determine the feasibility of using current information reported on form 1098-t , such as school location and taxpayer identification number or ssn , in irs's compliance programs ; and revise form 1098-t to improve the usefulness of information on qualifying education expenses .
to meet urgent needs , the department of defense ( dod ) can authorize contractors to begin work and incur costs before reaching a final agreement on the contract terms and conditions — known as an undefinitized contract action ( uca ) . to identify and assess the actions the department of defense ( dod ) has taken to improve departmental insight into and oversight of undefinitized contract actions ( uca ) , we interviewed senior dod and service acquisition policy officials as well as local officials at the selected commands to identify new policies and guidance that would affect the amount of insight senior dod officials have . the act requires dod to issue guidance that would include ( 1 ) circumstances in which it is appropriate for dod to use ucas , ( 2 ) procedures for ensuring compliance with definitization timelines and obligation amounts , ( 3 ) procedures for compliance with regulatory limitations on profit or fee with respect to costs incurred prior to definitization , and ( 4 ) reporting requirements for ucas that fail to meet required timelines for definitization or regulatory limitations on the obligation of funds or on profit or fee . in june 2007 , we reported that dod did not know the extent to which it was using ucas and identified the need to improve dod's ( 1 ) oversight of ucas , ( 2 ) ability to meet required definitization time frames , and ( 3 ) contracting officer documentation of the basis for negotiating contractor profit or fee . the act also required us to assess the extent to which dod's guidance resulted in improvements to its insight and use of ucas . in august 2008 , the department issued a policy memorandum on uca oversight and management , which required dod components to report semi - annually on contract actions with an estimated value exceeding $5 million to the office of the under secretary of defense for acquisition , technology & logistics ( ousd ( at&l ) ) , defense procurement and acquisition policy . accordingly , we assessed whether actions taken by dod have ( 1 ) improved departmental insight and oversight of uca use ; and ( 2 ) resulted in local commands meeting dod's uca management standards for documenting the basis for negotiating the contractor profit or fee , definitization time lines and obligation percentages , and the circumstances in which ucas are used . this type of contract , however , poses risk to the taxpayer as contractors lack incentives to control costs while contract terms and conditions are negotiated and definitized . further , despite dod's call for increased management attention of uca use at dod components , management standards and tools designed to help mitigate uca - related cost risk have not always been met or used . the department reported $18 billion in potential obligations for undefinitized actions exceeding $5 million , during fiscal year 2008 . in addition , the memorandum advised dod components to obligate funds for the undefinitized period consistent with the contractor's requirements for the anticipated undefinitized period and to comply with existing defense federal acquisition regulation supplement ( dfars ) policy on uca use . dod has instituted policies and proposed additional changes intended to enhance its departmental insight and oversight of uca use .
for example , cpsc could consider convening groups of consumers or neighborhood safety network members to advise on the design and implementation of campaigns targeted to specific communities , surveying nsn members , establishing metrics to measure nsn's success , and evaluating the effectiveness of information campaigns targeted to the racial and ethnic groups at highest risk of drowning as part of its implementation of the virginia graeme baker pool and spa safety act . the key practices include defining goals and objectives ; analyzing the situation ; identifying stakeholders ; identifying resources ; researching target audiences ; developing consistent , clear messages ; identifying credible messengers ; designing media mix ; and establishing metrics to measure success . the objectives of this report were to examine ( 1 ) what is known about the relative incidence of preventable injuries and deaths related to drowning , poisoning , and suffocation associated with products intended for children's use among minority children compared with nonminority children , and ( 2 ) what actions the consumer product safety commission ( cpsc ) has taken through its public information and education initiatives to minimize child injuries and deaths , including those in minority populations , related to products intended for children's use . the u.s. consumer product safety commission ( cpsc ) , an independent federal agency charged with protecting the public from consumer products that pose an unreasonable risk of injury and death , estimated that 29,400 deaths in the united states related to consumer products occurred in 2004 . to address this mandate , we examined ( 1 ) what is known about the relative incidence of preventable injuries and deaths related to drowning , poisoning , and suffocation associated with products intended for children's use among minority children compared with nonminority children , and ( 2 ) what actions cpsc has taken through its public information and education initiatives to minimize child injuries and deaths , including those in minority populations , related to products intended for children's use . to improve the effectiveness of consumer information efforts , we recommend that the commission , develop and implement cost - effective ways to enhance and assess the likelihood that cpsc's safety messages are received and implemented by all the intended audiences . cpsc works to fulfill its broad mission in part by conducting research into the causes and prevention of product - related deaths , illnesses , and injury and assisting consumers in evaluating the comparative safety of consumer products . we interviewed federal officials at cpsc and five department of health and human services ( hhs ) organizations to learn about their related programs and initiatives . the consumer product safety improvement act of 2008 ( cpsia ) established consumer product safety standards and other safety requirements for children's products . cpsc has identified certain populations as vulnerable or hard to reach with safety information , including older americans , urban and rural low - income families , new parents , and minority groups . similarly , reports from the centers for disease control and prevention ( cdc ) have documented racial disparities in injury - related death rates among children . for example , steps cpsc could consider include improving the neiss racial and ethnic classification system ; working with neiss hospitals to improve collection of data on patient race and ethnicity ; and leveraging related data collection efforts , such as those sponsored by the maternal and child health bureau , the national center for health statistics , or the national institutes of health .
the national aeronautics and space administration's ( nasa ) constellation program is approaching a crossroads in development as it nears entry into the implementation phase . the program has delayed its entry into implementation , however , and is still modifying its overall architecture and specific requirements . the constellation program is developing the ares i crew launch vehicle and the orion crew exploration vehicle , the agency's first major efforts to support implementation of the vision for space exploration . over $10 billion has already been obligated and nasa budget estimates indicate that over $97 billion is to be spent on the constellation program through 2020 . nasa initiated the constellation program in november 2005 and expected the program to enter implementation in 2009 . to assess nasa's progress toward establishing a sound business case for the ares i and orion projects and identify key technical challenges nasa faces in developing the ares i crew launch and the orion crew exploration vehicles , we obtained and analyzed constellation plans and schedules , risk mitigation information , and contract performance data relative to the standards in our knowledge - based acquisition practices including program and project plans , contracts , schedules , risk assessments , funding profile , budget documentation , earned value reports , and the results of nasa's assessments of the program . meanwhile , the new administration is conducting an independent review of nasa's human spaceflight activities , with the potential for recommendations of broad changes to the agency's approach toward future efforts . the constellation program tracks technical challenges in its integrated risk management application ( irma ) . as nasa addresses the findings and recommendations of the review of u.s. human space flight plans committee , we recommend that the new nasa administrator direct the constellation program , or its successor , to develop a sound business case — supported by firm requirements , mature technologies , a preliminary design , a realistic cost estimate , and sufficient funding and time — before proceeding into implementation , and , if necessary , delay the preliminary design review until a sound business case demonstrating the program's readiness to move forward into implementation is in hand . the constellation program's poorly phased funding plan has affected the program's ability to deal with technical challenges . constellation program officials and contractor cost reports indicate that the new effort has increased the value of the constellation program's developmental contracts from $7.2 billion in 2007 to $10.2 billion in june 2009 . our previous work on best practices and nasa's own acquisition policies indicate that the program's architecture and requirements should be finalized and system designs expected to meet requirements in hand before a program enters the implementation phase . the committee plans to complete this review by august 2009 and include any changes to current plans in an amended submission to its fiscal year 2010 budget request . in may 2009 , the obama administration announced an independent review of u.s. human space flight plans and activities with the stated goal of ensuring that the nation is pursuing the best course for the future of human space flight . since then , nasa has taken steps to decrease risk , including delaying the first crewed flight from september 2014 to march 2015 and deferring work on lunar requirements .
u.s. government agencies including the department of defense ( dod ) , the department of state , and the united states agency for international development ( usaid ) have spent billions of dollars in afghanistan to encourage economic development , improve governance , increase security , and positively influence the afghan people . chief among dod's programs is the commander's emergency response program ( cerp ) . we further recommend that the secretary of defense and administrator of usaid ; collaborate to create a centralized project - development database for use by u.s. government agencies in afghanistan , including establishing specific milestones for its development and implementation . as of april 2009 , congress has authorized about $1.4 billion for fiscal year 2009 for cerp in iraq and afghanistan , of which dod allocated $683 million to fund cerp development projects in afghanistan . as dod plans to increase u.s. troop presence in afghanistan , some dod officials expect the size and funding of cerp to further expand . since 2004 , dod has reported total obligations of about $1 billion for cerp in afghanistan , growing from $40 million in fiscal year 2004 to $486 million in fiscal year 2008 . dod concurred with our recommendation to collaborate with usaid to create a centralized project - development database for use by u.s. government agencies in afghanistan , including establishing specific milestones for its development and implementation . dod partially concurred with our recommendation to require u.s. central command to evaluate workforce requirements and ensure adequate staff to administer the commander's emergency response program ( cerp ) . cerp is designed to enable local commanders in both iraq and afghanistan to respond to urgent humanitarian relief and reconstruction requirements within their areas of responsibility . according to dod's financial management regulation implementing the cerp , there are 20 authorized uses of cerp that include projects and activities to develop afghanistan's transportation , electricity , and agriculture sectors . we recommend that the secretary of defense direct the commander of u.s. central command to evaluate workforce requirements and ensure adequate staff to administer establish training requirements for cerp personnel administering the program , to include specific information on how to complete their duties and responsibilities . due to significant congressional interest in this issue , we conducted a review of the cerp in afghanistan under the authority of the comptroller general to conduct evaluations on his own initiative and examined the following questions: to what extent ( 1 ) does dod have the capacity to manage and oversee the cerp in afghanistan and ( 2 ) has dod established mechanisms to coordinate its cerp projects with usaid ? . to determine the extent to which the department of defense ( dod ) has the capacity to provide adequate management and oversight of the cerp in afghanistan , we reviewed guidance from dod , combined joint task force - 101 ( cjtf - 101 ) , and combined joint task force - 82 ( cjtf - 82 ) to identify roles and responsibilities of cerp personnel , how personnel are assigned to the cerp , the nature and extent of the workload related to managing and executing the cerp , and the training curriculum provided to familiarize personnel with the cerp .
as of october 2008 , there were more than 1.8 million women veterans in the united states ( representing approximately 7.7 percent of the total veteran population ) , and more than 102,000 of these women were veterans of the military operations in afghanistan and iraq , known as operation enduring freedom ( oef ) and operation iraqi freedom ( oif ) . i am pleased to be here today as the committee considers issues related to the department of veterans affairs' ( va ) delivery of health care services to women veterans . historically , the vast majority of va patients have been men , but that is changing . according to va data , in fiscal year 2008 , over 281,000 women veterans received health care services from va — an increase of about 12 percent since 2006 . women veterans also need access to a range of mental health care services , such as care for depression . women veterans seeking care at va medical facilities need access to a full range of physical health care services , including basic gender - specific services — such as breast examinations , cervical cancer screening , and menopause management — and specialized gender - specific services such as obstetric care ( which includes prenatal , labor and delivery , and postpartum care ) and treatment of reproductive cancers . in addition , women veterans of oef / oif present new challenges for va's health care system . looking ahead , va estimates that while the total number of veterans will decline by 37 percent between 2008 and 2033 , the number of women veterans will increase by more than 17 percent over the same period . in my testimony today , i will discuss our preliminary findings , based on visits to selected va facilities , regarding ( 1 ) the on - site availability of health care services at va facilities for women veterans , ( 2 ) the extent to which va facilities are following va policies that apply to the delivery of health care services for women veterans , and ( 3 ) some key challenges that va facilities are experiencing in providing health care services for women veterans . va data show that almost 20 percent of women veterans of oef / oif have been diagnosed with post - traumatic stress disorder ( ptsd ) . the health care services needed by women veterans are significantly different from those required by their male counterparts . based on an analysis conducted by the va in 2007 , the estimated median age of women veterans was 47 , whereas the estimated median age of male veterans was 61 . we used va data to select these sites based on several factors , including the number of women veterans using health care services at each vamc and whether facilities offered specific programs for women veterans , such as outpatient or residential treatment programs for women who have ptsd or have experienced military sexual trauma ( mst ) . va's training programs cover five evidence - based psychotherapies: cognitive processing therapy ( cpt ) and prolonged exposure ( pe ) , which are recommended for ptsd ; cognitive behavioral therapy ( cbt ) and acceptance and commitment therapy ( act ) , which are recommended for depression ; and social skills training ( sst ) , which is recommended for serious mental illness .
over 1.6 million u.s. troops have deployed in operation enduring freedom ( oef ) and operation iraqi freedom ( oif ) since october 2001 . we are pleased to be here today as you examine issues related to meeting the critical needs of recovering servicemembers by reviewing the progress made by the department of defense ( dod ) and the department of veterans affairs ( va ) in jointly developing policies mandated by the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2008 ( ndaa 2008 ) . because of improved battlefield medicine , those who might have died in past conflicts are now surviving , many with multiple serious injuries such as amputations , traumatic brain injury ( tbi ) , and post - traumatic stress disorder ( ptsd ) . we determined whether each of the requirements ( 1 ) had been completed , ( 2 ) was in progress , or ( 3 ) had not been acted upon . specifically , section 1611 ( a ) of the ndaa 2008 directs dod and va to cover four key areas — ( 1 ) care and management , ( 2 ) medical evaluation and disability evaluation , ( 3 ) the return of servicemembers to active duty , and ( 4 ) the transition of recovering servicemembers from dod to va. because of the related ongoing work of the soc , it assumed responsibility for addressing these requirements . beyond adjusting to their injuries , recovering servicemembers may face additional challenges , including difficulties managing their outpatient recovery process , difficulties navigating the military's disability evaluation system , and problems transitioning between care provided by dod and care provided by va . in february 2009 , dod reported that over 33,000 servicemembers have been wounded in action since the onset of these conflicts . in my testimony today , i will discuss our preliminary findings on ( 1 ) the progress dod and va have made in jointly developing comprehensive policies for recovering servicemembers in the areas of care and management , medical and disability evaluation , return to active duty , and transition from care and services received from dod to va as required by sections 1611 through 1614 of the ndaa 2008 and ( 2 ) the challenges dod and va are encountering in the joint development and initial implementation of these policies . questions were raised in the media and by congress about whether dod and va are prepared to meet the needs of the increasing number of recovering servicemembers and veterans . the ndaa 2008 also requires gao to report on the progress dod and va make in developing and implementing the comprehensive policy . in may 2007 , dod and va established the wounded , ill , and injured senior oversight committee ( soc ) to address the problems that had been identified with the care of recovering servicemembers . various review groups investigated the challenges that dod and va faced in providing care to recovering servicemembers and made a number of recommendations to address the problems they identified . in february 2007 , a series of washington post articles disclosed deficiencies in the provision of outpatient services at walter reed army medical center , including poor living conditions at walter reed , a confusing disability evaluation system , and servicemembers remaining in outpatient status for months and sometimes years without a clear understanding about their plan of care or the future of their military service .
as requested , this statement summarizes our draft report that ( 1 ) determines the status and plans of efforts to restructure the center weather service units , ( 2 ) evaluates efforts to establish a baseline of the current performance provided by the center weather service units so that faa and nws can ensure that any operational changes do not degrade aviation weather services , and ( 3 ) evaluates challenges to restructuring the center weather service units . the national weather service ( nws ) plays a significant role in providing weather services to the aviation community . we identified both agencies' efforts to establish a baseline of current performance and compared these efforts to government guidance and best practices of leading organizations in performance management . to identify challenges , we compared the agencies' plans with best practices of leading organizations in system development , interagency collaboration , and architecture planning . thank you for the opportunity to participate in today's hearing on the proposed changes to the aviation weather services provided at the federal aviation administration's ( faa ) en route centers . in september 2005 , faa asked nws to restructure its services to be more efficient . since then , nws has developed and submitted two proposals to faa , both of which were rejected . in preparing our draft report and this testimony , we reviewed nws's proposals and transition plans for restructuring the service units and faa's response to nws's proposals . nws's weather products and data are vital components of faa's air traffic control system , providing weather information to local , regional , and national air traffic management , navigation , and surveillance systems . these include challenges associated with ( 1 ) interagency collaboration , ( 2 ) defining requirements , and ( 3 ) aligning any changes with the next generation air transportation system ( nextgen ) — a long - term initiative to increase the efficiency of the national airspace system . over the last few years , faa and nws have been exploring options for enhancing the efficiency of the aviation weather services provided at en route centers . nws aviation weather products include forecasts and warnings of meteorological conditions that could affect air traffic , including thunderstorms , air turbulence , and icing . in addition to providing aviation weather products that are developed at its own facilities , nws also provides staff on - site at each of faa's en route centers — the facilities that control high - altitude flight outside the airport tower and terminal areas . for the draft report on which this testimony is based , we determined the status of nws's plans for restructuring the center weather service units by reviewing the existing interagency agreement , faa's proposed requirements , and nws's draft and final proposals for addressing faa's requirements . other key contributors to this testimony include colleen phillips , assistant director ; gerard aflague ; kate agatone ; neil doherty ; rebecca eyler ; and jessica waselkow . looking forward , if a proposal is accepted , the agencies could face three additional challenges in implementing the proposal , including ( 1 ) developing a feasible schedule that includes adequate time for stakeholder involvement , ( 2 ) undertaking a comprehensive demonstration to ensure no services are degraded , and ( 3 ) effectively reconfiguring the infrastructure and technologies to the new structure .
finally , if these recommendations are to lead to patient safety improvements , providers must recognize their value and take actions to implement them . in this report , we describe the progress ahrq has made in ( 1 ) listing psos , including pso efforts to serve providers , and ( 2 ) implementing the npsd . in addition , because participation — including submission of data on patient safety events — by psos and providers is voluntary , their actions may also contribute to the law's effectiveness in accomplishing its purpose . because the agency for healthcare research and quality's ( ahrq ) efforts to list patient safety organizations and implement the network of patient safety databases are relatively new but some other patient safety reporting systems are already established , we identified examples of how selected established patient safety reporting systems encourage reporting of patient safety event information by providers and facilitate the development of improvements in patient safety . to achieve these goals , the patient safety act directed the department of health and human services ( hhs ) to create a list of public or private organizations known as patient safety organizations ( pso ) . research has shown that serious injuries or deaths resulting from medical care are both common and often preventable . in a frequently cited report , the institute of medicine ( iom ) estimated in 1999 that preventable medical errors cause as many as 98,000 deaths a year among hospital patients in the united states . partially in response to the iom report , congress passed the patient safety and quality improvement act of 2005 ( the patient safety act ) to encourage health care providers to voluntarily report information on patient safety events and to facilitate the development and adoption of interventions and solutions to improve patient safety . final regulations to implement the act became effective on january 19 , 2009 . in addition , because improvements to patient safety depend on the voluntary participation of providers and psos , it remains uncertain whether the goals of the patient safety act will be accomplished even after ahrq completes its implementation . the iom report noted , however , that health care providers are often reluctant to report or disclose their medical errors and to participate in related learning efforts out of fear of incurring legal liability or professional sanctions . whether the process results in specific recommendations for improving patient safety will depend on the volume and quality of the data submitted and on the quality of the analyses conducted by both psos and by ahrq . as a result , we cannot assess whether , or to what extent , the law has been effective in encouraging providers to voluntarily report data on patient safety events and to facilitate the development and adoption of improvements in patient safety . for example , providers will have to decide whether to work with a pso and the extent to which they will report patient safety data to both the pso and the npsd . to support psos and providers in their efforts to develop and adopt improvements in patient safety , the patient safety act directed hhs to create a network of patient safety databases ( npsd ) .
we included the following programs in our review: children's health insurance program ( chip ) ; community development block grant ( cdbg ) and neighborhood education state grants , state fiscal stabilization fund ( state fiscal federal transit formula grants programs ; head start ; highway planning and construction ; individuals with disabilities education act ( idea ) , part b ; medicaid ; section 8 housing choice vouchers ; temporary aid for needy families ( tanf ) ; and title i grants to local education agencies ( title i ) . of the $580 billion in additional federal spending associated with the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 ( recovery act ) , the federal government obligated an estimated $161 billion through federal grant programs for fiscal year 2009 . the federal government uses formula grants to determine funding amounts for many of the largest federal assistance programs . this report responds to your request that we determine ( 1 ) how much the federal government obligates to the largest federal assistance programs based on the decennial census and related data , and how the recovery act changed that amount ; and ( 2 ) what factors could affect the role of population in grant funding formulas . these programs provide funding for a variety of purposes , including health insurance for low income families and individuals , improvement of highway and public transportation systems , and special education programs . to answer our objectives , we identified 11 federal assistance programs representing the 10 largest programs in each of the fiscal years 2008 and 2009 based on the dollar amounts obligated reported in the president's fiscal year 2010 budget , issued in may 2009 , office of management and budget ( omb ) , analytical perspectives , budget of the united states government , fiscal year 2010 ( fiscal year 2010 budget ) . funding for federal assistance programs continues to increase . we considered funding to be based on census or related data if any part of the funding formula ( s ) or eligibility requirements relied on these data sources . to determine whether the programs' funding relied on census and related data , we reviewed statutes , our prior work , the catalog of federal domestic assistance programs ( cfda ) , congressional research service reports , and agency web pages and reports related to each of the programs . to determine what factors could affect the role of population in grant funding formulas , we reviewed our prior work ( see the list of related gao products at the end of this report ) and other research on formula grants . in june 2009 , the census bureau reported that in fiscal year 2007 the federal government obligated over $446 billion through funding formulas that rely at least in part on census and related data . our objectives were to determine ( 1 ) how much the federal government obligates to the largest federal assistance programs based on the decennial census and related data and how the recovery act changed that amount , and ( 2 ) what factors could affect the role of population in grant funding formulas . more than 10 years ago , we reported that in fiscal year 1998 the federal government obligated about $162 billion through 22 of the largest federal assistance programs using formulas based at least in part on decennial census and related data .
for example , a business chapter 7 bankruptcy case with assets of $50,000 to $499,999 is expected to take about twice as much judge time as a nonbusiness chapter 7 case with assets of $50,000 to $499,999 . my statement today is based on the results of our 2003 review of documentation provided by the federal judicial center ( fjc ) and the administrative office of the u.s. courts ( aousc ) and interviews with officials in each organization as well as selected updates conducted in june 2009 . we assessed whether weighted case filings were a reasonable means of measuring bankruptcy judges' case - related workload and assessed the methodology of proposals to update the current case weights . weighted filings are a statistical measure of the estimated average amount of judge time that specific types of bankruptcy cases are expected to take . i am pleased to be here today to discuss the results of our 2003 review and assessment of bankruptcy court weighted case filings , the workload measure the judicial conference first considers in assessing the need for additional bankruptcy judges . changes in the intervening years in such factors as case characteristics , case management practices , or new statutory and procedural requirements , such as the implementation of the 2005 bankruptcy abuse prevention and consumer protection act ( the bankruptcy reform act ) , may have affected whether the case weights continue to be a reasonably accurate measure of case - related judge workload . some of these changes may have increased the time demands on bankruptcy judges and others may have reduced time demands . my statement today also briefly discusses the judiciary's ongoing study to update the current bankruptcy case weights . the original case weights are now about 18 years old and were based on time data that are now about 21 years old . we did not evaluate how effective these measures may be in ensuring data accuracy . the judicial conference's committee on the administration of the bankruptcy system has approved a revision of the current weights , a study currently underway , whose methodological design is essentially identical to that used to develop the current case weights — a methodology we concluded in 2003 was reasonable . some types of cases may take more judge time than others . in assessing the need for new bankruptcy judgeships , the judicial conference relies on the weighted case filings to be a reasonably accurate measure of case - related bankruptcy judge workload . on the basis of the documentation provided for our review and discussions with fjc and aousc officials , we concluded that weighted case filings , as approved by the judicial conference in 1991 and amended in 1996 , were likely to be a reasonably accurate means of measuring the case - related workload of bankruptcy judges . whether weighted case filings are a reasonably accurate workload measure rests in turn on the soundness of the methodology used to develop the case weights . in summary , my statement includes the following major points: the time demands on bankruptcy judges are largely a function of the number and complexity of the cases on their dockets . aousc said that its staff took a number of steps to ensure that individual cases were assigned to the appropriate case weight category .
the department of defense ( dod ) and the department of veterans affairs ( va ) have been working for over a decade on initiatives to share data between their health information systems . as agreed with the committees of jurisdiction , our objectives for this third report are to ( 1 ) evaluate the departments' progress and plans toward developing electronic health record systems or capabilities that allow for full interoperability and comply with applicable federal interoperability standards and ( 2 ) determine whether the interagency program office established by the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2008 is positioned to function as a single point of accountability for developing and implementing electronic health records . to evaluate the department of defense's ( dod ) and veterans affairs' ( va ) progress toward developing electronic health record systems or capabilities that allow for full interoperability of personal health care information , we reviewed our previous work on dod and va efforts to develop health information systems , interoperable health records , and interoperability standards to be implemented in federal health care programs . in an effort to expedite the exchange of electronic health information between the two departments , the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2008 included provisions directing dod and va to jointly develop and implement , by september 30 , 2009 , fully interoperable electronic health record systems or capabilities that are compliant with applicable federal interoperability standards . further , the act directed us to assess dod's and va's progress in implementing the electronic health record systems and to report semiannually our results to the appropriate congressional committees . to better improve management of dod's and va's efforts to achieve fully interoperable electronic health record systems , including satisfaction of the departments' interoperability objectives , we recommend that the secretaries of defense and veterans affairs direct the director of the dod / va interagency program office to establish a project plan and a complete and detailed integrated master schedule . however , while they have taken important steps , questions have continued to be raised about when and to what extent the departments' intended electronic sharing capabilities will be fully achieved . without these important tools , the office is limited in its ability to effectively manage and provide meaningful progress reporting on the delivery of interoperable capabilities that are intended to improve the quality of health care provided to our nation's veterans . dod and va have continued to increase electronic health information interoperability . such systems and capabilities are important for making patient information more readily available to health care providers in both departments , reducing medical errors , and streamlining administrative functions . accordingly , on july 28 , 2008 , and january 28 , 2009 , we issued reports in response to the act . in addition , the act established an interagency program office to be a single point of accountability for the departments' efforts . if the recommendation is properly implemented , it should better position dod and va to effectively measure and report progress in achieving full interoperability . our prior reports on dod's and va's efforts to develop fully interoperable electronic health records noted their progress and highlighted issues that they needed to address to achieve electronic health record interoperability .
growing recognition of the long - term fiscal challenges facing the nation has also led congress , the agencies , and others to focus on ensuring that federal wildland fire activities are appropriate and carried out in a cost - effective manner . specifically , i will focus on ( 1 ) the progress the forest service and the interior agencies have made in managing wildland fire and ( 2 ) key actions we previously recommended and believe are still necessary to improve the agencies' management of wildland fire . it also prompted a sustained effort , known as the national fire plan , on the part of federal agencies and congress to improve fire suppression capabilities , reduce fuels , restore fire - adapted ecosystems , and help communities better withstand wildland fire . the nation's wildland fire problems have worsened dramatically over the past decade , threatening communities as well as important natural and cultural resources . i am pleased to be here today to discuss wildland fire management by the federal wildland fire agencies — the forest service within the department of agriculture and four agencies within the department of the interior — including key actions that we believe the agencies should take to improve their management of wildland fires and help contain the rising costs of preparing for and responding to fires . both the average acreage burned annually and federal appropriations for wildland fire management activities have more than doubled , with appropriations reaching more than $2.9 billion annually , on average , during fiscal years 2001 through 2007 . uncharacteristic accumulations of vegetation that can fuel wildland fires , due in part to past fire suppression policies and land management practices , and severe regional weather and drought have led to higher - intensity fires and longer fire seasons . a number of factors have contributed to these increases . such data are critical to helping the agencies ( 1 ) identify the extent , severity , and location of wildland fire threats to the nation's communities and resources ; ( 2 ) predict fire intensity and rate of spread under particular weather conditions ; and ( 3 ) evaluate the effect that reducing fuels may have on future fire behavior . to address these objectives , we reviewed previous gao reports and agency documents and interviewed agency officials in washington , d.c. ; at the national interagency fire center in boise , idaho ; and elsewhere . congress , for example , could provide either a specified amount ( known as a definite appropriation ) or as much funding as the agencies need to fund emergency suppression ( known as an indefinite appropriation ) . my testimony today summarizes our previous findings and recommendations related to wildland fire , and also includes preliminary information from our ongoing work examining the extent to which the agencies have improved their wildland fire programs in response to our previous work . the federal land assistance , management , and enhancement act proposes establishing a wildland fire suppression reserve account ; the administration's budget overview for fiscal year 2010 also proposes a $282 million reserve account for the forest service and a $75 million reserve account for the interior to provide funding for firefighting when the appropriated suppression funds are exhausted .
mda has been charged with developing and fielding the ballistic missile defense system ( bmds ) , a system expected to be capable of defending the united states , deployed troops , friends , and allies against ballistic missiles of all ranges in all phases of flight . in march 2009 , we plan to issue our report covering mda's progress toward achieving its goals during fiscal year 2008 as well as its efforts to improve transparency , accountability , and oversight . i am pleased to be here today to discuss the future of the missile defense agency's ( mda's ) testing program . the national defense authorization acts for fiscal years 2002 , 2007 and 2008 mandated that we prepare annual assessments of mda's ongoing cost , schedule , testing , and performance progress . our recommendations include actions to improve cost reporting as well as testing and evaluation . in fulfilling this charge , mda placed an initial set of missile defense components in the field in december 2005 . additionally , in september 2008 , we issued a report on mda's target program . dod is in the process of preparing a formal response to the report and its recommendations . mda has indicated that this new approach to testing will take time to implement , with partial implementation in fiscal year 2010 and full implementation not occurring until fiscal year 2011 . problems with the reliability and availability of targets ( which are themselves ballistic missiles ) have increasingly affected bmds development and testing since 2006 . in particular , the ambitious fiscal year 2009 flight test plan may need to be reassessed with the goal of establishing a robust series of tests that can withstand some delays without causing wholesale changes to the test plan during the transition . our work included examining documents such as program execution reviews , test plans and reports , and production plans . in addition to linking the critical modeling and simulation variables with test events , the review will have to address the factors that have limited the productivity of the current test approach , such as the availability and performance of targets . mda continues to experience difficulties achieving its goals for testing . mda has indicated that its revision will result in a more robust test plan , providing more margin to conduct the tests through , for example , having spare interceptors and targets available . in the mean time , mda will have to be prudent in making decisions to produce and field additional assets . the overall performance of the bmds cannot yet be assessed because mda lacks a fully accredited end - to - end model and simulation capability and , according to the bmds operational test agency , it will not have that capability until 2011 at the earliest . mda intends to complete all three phases of the review by may 2009 . during fiscal year 2008 , while several tests showed progress in individual elements and some system level capabilities , all bmds elements experienced test delays or shortfalls . in that report , we are recommending additional steps to further improve the transparency , accountability , and oversight of the missile defense program .
after completing additional work , we plan to issue a report on the status of dod's actions on gao's previous recommendations , which will include any further recommendations needed to improve the department's implementation of dts and ensure its success in the future . in december 1995 , the department of defense ( dod ) established the program management office — defense travel system ( pmo - dts ) to begin improving the department's travel operations by replacing existing travel systems with a single departmentwide system — dts . this endeavor was in response to the 1995 dod travel reengineering report issued by the dod task force to reengineer travel that pinpointed the following three principal causes for the department's inefficient travel system: ( 1 ) travel policies and programs focused on compliance with rigid rules rather than mission performance , ( 2 ) travel practices that did not keep pace with travel management improvements implemented by industry , and ( 3 ) nonintegrated travel systems . today , our testimony will focus on the actions dod has taken to implement previous gao recommendations regarding implementation of dts and related travel policies , phase out legacy travel systems and their associated costs , and implement electronic travel voucher processing . thank you for the opportunity to discuss our prior work and the preliminary results of our ongoing review of the defense travel system ( dts ) . this body of work was undertaken in response to a joint request by your subcommittee and the subcommittee on readiness , house committee on armed services , and builds on prior gao reports . in closing , we also would like to reiterate that following this testimony , we plan to issue a report on the status of dod's actions on gao's previous recommendations , which will include any further recommendations needed to improve the department's implementation of dts and ensure its success in the future . to address the first objective , for those recommendations that department officials said were implemented , we analyzed specific documentation , such as test documentation , to assess whether we concurred with their assertions . for the remaining recommendations , we identified specific actions the department had taken , or planned to take , and provided our perspective on whether those actions did or would respond to the recommendations and intent . properly defined requirements are a key element in developing and implementing systems that meet their cost , schedule , and performance goals since requirements define the ( 1 ) functionality that is expected to be provided by the system and ( 2 ) quantitative measures by which to determine through testing whether that functionality is operating as expected . our january 2006 and september 2006 reports contained 14 recommendations aimed at improving dod's management oversight and implementation of dts and related travel policies . we have discussed the preliminary findings included in this testimony with dod officials . we also met with officials from the defense travel management office ( dtmo ) , the pmo - dts , and the prime contractor , as appropriate , to obtain an understanding of the status of the recommendations . however , based upon our work to date to validate dod's actions , we consider 7 of the 14 recommendations as closed and the remaining 7 open .
as you know , to be competitive in the global economy , the united states relies heavily on innovation through research and development ( r&d ) . the sbir program is currently being considered by the congress for reauthorization , and both the house and senate have recently passed bills to reauthorize the program . the act established the sbir program to stimulate technological innovation , use small businesses to meet federal r&d needs , foster and encourage participation by minority and disadvantaged persons in technological innovation , and increase private sector commercialization of innovations derived from federal r&d . recognizing the potential of small businesses to be a source of significant innovation , the congress passed the small business innovation development act of 1982 . although sba did not meet its statutorily mandated deadline of june 2001 , the database has been operational since october 2008 , and contains limited new information but may also contain inaccurate historical data . sba has established , through a policy directive , a series of data elements for all the agencies to submit for its public tech - net database . the act provided for a three - phased program: phase i to determine the feasibility and scientific and technical merit of a proposed research idea ; phase ii to further develop the idea ; and phase iii to commercialize the resulting product or process with no further sbir funding . in 2005 awards from three agencies — the department of defense ( dod ) , national institutes of health ( nih ) , and national aeronautics and space agency ( nasa ) — accounted for the majority of sbir funds . in this context , you asked us to summarize the successes and challenges that our past work has identified about the sbir program , summarize the concerns we have previously identified on sba's efforts to establish an interagency database that includes information on sbir applicants and awards , and describe the process that agencies use to determine the eligibility of sbir applicants for the program . to address these concerns , we recommended that sba take three actions: ( 1 ) determine if the certification form needed to be improved and make any necessary revisions , ( 2 ) develop definitions and guidelines for what constitutes “duplicative” research , and ( 3 ) provide interagency access to current information regarding sbir awards in response to our recommendations , sba strengthened the language agencies use in their application packages to clearly warn applicants about the illegality of entering into multiple agreements for essentially the same effort . we are pleased to be here today to testify on our past work on the small business innovation research ( sbir ) program . from its inception in fiscal year 1983 through fiscal year 2004 , federal agencies had awarded over $17 billion for more than 82,000 projects . this database was to be established by mid - 2001 and made available only to government agencies and certain other authorized users . each agency manages its own program , including targeting research areas , reviewing proposed projects , and making research awards through grants , contracts , or cooperative agreements . federal agencies that have budgets of $100 million for research conducted by others , called extramural research , are required to use 2.5 percent of these budgets to establish and operate an sbir program .
postal service ( usps ) operations . my statement will ( 1 ) update usps's financial condition and outlook and explain our recent decision to place usps's financial condition on our high - risk list , and ( 2 ) discuss the need for usps to restructure its mail processing , retail , and delivery networks and its efforts to improve their efficiency . my statement is based upon on our past and ongoing work , including the report being released today on usps efforts to improve delivery efficiency , and our report adding usps to the high - risk list , as well as our continued monitoring of usps's financial condition and outlook . we reported that usps urgently needs to restructure to address its current and long - term financial viability . we stated that usps's restructuring plan should address how it plans to realign postal services , such as delivery frequency , delivery standards , and access to retail services , with changes in the use of mail by consumers and businesses ; better align costs and revenues , including compensation and benefit costs ; optimize its operations , networks , and workforce ; increase mail volumes and revenues ; and retain earnings , so that it can finance needed capital investments and repay its growing debt . usps has limited its capital expenditures to help conserve cash , which may affect its maintenance backlog . as a result , usps is projecting the following for fiscal year 2009: a net loss of about $7 billion , even if it achieves record cost savings of about $6 billion ; an increase in outstanding debt by the annual statutory limit of $3 billion ; and , despite this borrowing , an unprecedented $1 billion cash shortfall . the long - term challenge is to restructure usps operations , networks , and workforce to reflect changes in mail volume , use of the mail , and revenue . under this scenario , usps would increase its outstanding debt by an additional $3 billion , which would bring its total debt to $13.2 billion at the end of fiscal year 2010 — only $1.8 billion less than its $15 billion statutory limit . accordingly , we have called for usps to develop and implement a broad restructuring plan — with input from the postal regulatory commission ( prc ) and other stakeholders , and approval by congress and the administration — that includes key milestones and time frames for actions , addresses key issues , and identifies what steps congress and other stakeholders may need to take . usps's projected cost cutting of about $6 billion for this fiscal year is much larger than its previous annual cost - cutting targets that have ranged from nearly $900 million to $2 billion since 2001 . further , it has high overhead ( institutional ) costs that are hard to change in the short term , such as providing universal service that includes 6-day delivery and maintaining a network of 37,000 post offices and retail facilities , as well as a delivery network of more than 149 million addresses . to achieve financial viability , usps must align its costs with revenues , generate sufficient earnings to finance capital investment , and manage its debt .
the smithsonian has been referred to as america's museum , as its museums hold and provide access to irreplaceable national collections in american and natural history , art , and other areas . the smithsonian has implemented one of the four recommendations we made in 2008 to strengthen its governance reform efforts , and it has taken steps to implement the other three recommendations . in my statement today , i will discuss ( 1 ) the findings of a report we are releasing today — smithsonian institution: implementation of governance reforms is progressing , but work remains — regarding the smithsonian's efforts to implement governance reforms recommended by the board of regents governance committee and by gao in 2008 , and ( 2 ) provide a brief update on the smithsonian's efforts to implement our 2007 facilities and funding recommendations . the board of regents adopted all 25 of the governance committee's recommendations and stated that the irc's recommendations were , for the most part , encompassed by the governance committee's recommendations . thank you for the opportunity to testify before you today on efforts by the smithsonian institution ( smithsonian ) to address challenges related to governance and facilities . while the board of regents has approved policies or plans related to the 2 policy - related reforms , the smithsonian has not completed its implementation of these reforms . as shown in figure 1 , the smithsonian has implemented 9 governance committee reforms since may 2008 , including the following: the smithsonian ( 1 ) developed a database to identify potential conflicts of interest ; ( 2 ) implemented a policy requiring the former smithsonian business ventures ( sbv ) — now reorganized and renamed smithsonian enterprises — to follow smithsonian policies except in the case of a few documented exceptions ; ( 3 ) developed an event expense policy covering regent and other smithsonian events ; ( 4 ) completed a review of the smithsonian's internal controls for travel and expense reimbursement and implemented a number of additional accountability measures for travel and expense reimbursement ; ( 5 ) held two regent annual public forums ; ( 6 ) developed a board orientation process ; ( 7 ) completed a review and revision of the board of regents committees' charters ; ( 8 ) completed a review of appointment procedures to board of regents committees , which included clarifying the process for appointing nonregents to committees and making this process publicly available on the smithsonian's web site ; and ( 9 ) implemented a reform calling for a regular assessment of the board , its committees , and its members . the smithsonian has not completed implementation of 3 reforms — 2 related to improving policies on broader smithsonian operations ( to develop a contracting policy and conduct a comprehensive review of financial reporting and internal controls ) and one related to communication and stakeholder relationships ( to enhance the role of the smithsonian advisory boards ) . in september 2007 , we concluded that if the smithsonian did not develop a viable strategy to address its estimated $2.5 billion in facilities projects , its facilities and collections would face increased risk , and the ability of the smithsonian to meet its mission would likely decline .
as congress considers policies to achieve more robust growth in the u.s. economy , it must consider the full range of tools available to further growth and create new jobs for u.s. workers . thank you for the opportunity to appear today before the subcommittees to provide our perspective on the role of the u.s. export - import bank ( ex - im ) in promoting exports and achieving other u.s. policy goals . as the official export credit agency of the united states , ex - im has a key role in helping many u.s. firms achieve sales in foreign markets . some of these tools are related to promoting exports , which can have broad benefits to the u.s. economy . in addition to establishing ex - im's broad mandate of supporting u.s. employment through exports , congress has laid out specific , targeted goals for the bank in areas such as increasing financing for environmentally beneficial exports and expanding services to small and minority - owned businesses . i will also describe progress ex - im has made in achieving the specific targets set by congress , as well as some challenges the bank faces in meeting those targets . today , i will provide some broad observations regarding ex - im's contribution to the export promotion goals announced in the president's national export initiative . these observations are based on a range of work that we have conducted for congress over recent years on ex - im as well as on the numerous other u.s. agencies involved in export promotion . how any sharp increase in ex - im financing levels will affect specific targets we have described is not clear , and is likely to be an area requiring further discussion on how to balance these overall priorities . more broadly , ex - im faces the challenge of contributing to the doubling of u.s. exports along with meeting other congressional requirements , including operating at little or no cost to the taxpayer . gao made several recommendations to ex - im for improving its performance standards for small business . they include , for example , launching new products designed to ensure credit is available to small and medium - sized enterprises ( sme ) ; focusing efforts on high - potential industries such as medical technology , renewable power , and transportation ; increasing the number and scope of partnerships with financial intermediaries ; and introducing a simplified application for credit insurance . however , the goal of doubling u.s. exports in 5 years is an ambitious goal and would require not only increased activity by agencies such as ex - im but also increases in demand in key nations around the world . while ex - im has had more success in achieving the congressional targets for small business than for environmentally beneficial exports , opportunities remain for a more strategic use of resources and for better communication with congress and other stakeholders . gao has reported on ex - im's efforts to achieve specific targets set by congress regarding the composition of ex - im's export financing . chairmen , the national export initiative has focused the spotlight on u.s. agencies that assist u.s. exporters as a way of expanding economic growth and creating jobs in the united states .
as agreed , the report ( 1 ) identified how many minority - owned or controlled and non - minority - owned or controlled cdes have applied for and received allocations and how much they have applied for and received from 2005 through 2008 ; ( 2 ) explained the nmtc application process and summarized nmtc application scores for minority and non - minority - owned or controlled cdes by cde type from 2005 through 2008 ; ( 3 ) described the challenges minority - owned or controlled and non - minority - owned or controlled cdes have faced in applying for and receiving nmtc allocations ; and ( 4 ) identified efforts the cdfi fund and others are taking to assist minority - owned or controlled cdes in applying for nmtc allocations . congress created the nmtc through the community renewal tax relief act of 2000 to encourage investors to make investments in low - income communities that traditionally lack access to capital . potential changes that could be considered include , but would not be limited to the following: ( 1 ) similar to provisions for certain federal grant programs , requiring that a certain portion of the overall amount of allocation authority be designated for minority cdes ; ( 2 ) in accordance with information we obtained in discussions with several experts in economic development , exploring the potential for creating a pool of nmtc allocation authority to be dedicated specifically for community banks ( minority banks that are certified cdes , in most cases , would likely compete with non - minority community banks with similar characteristics for nmtc allocations ) ; or ( 3 ) similar to other federal programs where preferences are given to targeted populations , offering priority points to minority cdes that apply for nmtc allocations . in addition , implementing these changes would require addressing a number of issues , including legal and administrative concerns , associated with such changes in the nmtc application process . conventional access to credit and investment capital for developing small businesses , retaining jobs , and revitalizing neighborhoods is often limited in economically distressed communities or in communities with large low - income populations . our prior mandated work on the nmtc has focused on the implementation of the program , the effect of the credit on the behavior of individual and corporate investors , and efforts by the cdfi fund and internal revenue service ( irs ) to ensure that cdes and investors are in compliance with nmtc program requirements . i am pleased to be here today to discuss minority community development entities' ( cde ) participation in the new markets tax credit ( nmtc ) program . the community development financial institutions ( cdfi ) fund in the department of the treasury administers the nmtc program and allocates tax credit authority — the amount of investment for which investors can claim a tax credit — to cdes that apply for and obtain allocations . cdes are domestic partnerships or corporations with a primary purpose of serving or providing investment capital to low - income communities or low - income persons . although these options could increase the amount of nmtc authority awarded to minority cdes , in part because we could not definitively identify the reasons why minority cdes have scored lower on the nmtc application than non - minority cdes , the options may not address the underlying reasons for lower minority cde success .
in the over 18 months since the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 ( recovery act ) was enacted in february 2009 , the department of the treasury has paid out approximately $154.8 billion in recovery act funds for use in states and localities . these funds have been used to support and preserve services in a wide range of areas including health , education , transportation , and housing . in this report , the seventh in a series in response to the act's mandate , we update and add new information on the following: ( 1 ) selected states' and localities' uses of recovery act funds , ( 2 ) the approaches taken by the selected states and localities to ensure accountability for recovery act funds , and ( 3 ) states' plans to evaluate the impact of the recovery act funds they receive . specifically , the stated purposes of the recovery act are to preserve and create jobs and promote economic recovery ; assist those most impacted by the recession ; provide investments needed to increase economic efficiency by spurring technological advances in science and health ; invest in transportation , environmental protection , and other infrastructure that will provide long - term economic benefits ; and stabilize state and local government budgets in order to minimize and avoid reductions in essential services and counterproductive state and local tax increases . in this report , we also discuss state and local budget use of recovery act funds ; federal requirements and guidance ; and oversight , transparency , and accountability issues related to the recovery act and its implementation . the recovery act's recurring mandate specifies several roles for gao , including conducting bimonthly reviews of how recovery act funds are being used in selected states and whether they are achieving the stated purposes of the act . this report focuses on the following programs: federal medical assistance percentage ( fmap ) ; state fiscal stabilization fund ( sfsf ) ; title i , part a of the elementary and secondary act of 1965 as amended ( esea ) ; parts b and c of the individuals with disabilities education act , as amended ( idea ) ; federal - aid highway surface transportation and transit capital state energy program ( sep ) ; energy efficiency and conservation block grant ( eecbg ) program ; weatherization assistance program ; public housing capital fund ; tax credit assistance program ( tcap ) ; and grants to states for low - income housing projects in lieu of low - income housing credits program under section 1602 of division b of the recovery act ( section 1602 program ) . as in our previous reports , we collected and reported data on programs receiving substantial recovery act funds in 16 selected states , certain localities , and the district of columbia , and made recommendations when changes could result in improvements . our oversight of programs funded by the recovery act has resulted in more than 62 recovery act related products . departments of health and human services ( centers for medicare and medicaid services ) , education , transportation , energy , and housing and urban development . given that , as of september 3 , 2010 , more than half — about $154.8 billion of the approximately $282 billion — of total recovery act funds for programs administered by states and localities had been paid out by the federal government , evolving to this approach is appropriate and will allow us to provide congress and other decision makers with more in - depth analyses of programs funded by the recovery act and to be responsive to congressional interest in the impact and outcomes of programs as recovery act implementation moves forward .
the postal accountability and enhancement act ( paea ) of 2006 required gao to evaluate strategies and options for the long - term structural and operational reform of the united states postal service ( usps ) . our objectives were to assess ( 1 ) the viability of usps's business model , ( 2 ) strategies and options to address the challenges to usps's current business model , and ( 3 ) actions congress and usps need to take to facilitate progress toward usps's financial viability . the postal accountability and enhancement act ( paea ) of 2006 required us to report on strategies and options for the long - term structural and operational reform of the united states postal service ( usps ) . these proposals could focus on adapting delivery and retail services to declining mail volumes ; making postal operations , networks , and workforce more cost - efficient ; and generating new revenue . these changes provided additional tools to improve its effectiveness and accountability in an increasingly competitive delivery and communications marketplace . these reports could include the actions taken to reduce costs and increase revenues , the results of these actions , and progress toward addressing financial problems . in fiscal year 2010 , usps expects a record loss of over $7 billion , its outstanding debt to increase to $13.2 billion , and limited cash flow that will continue to constrain capital investment . at that time , usps was given additional pricing flexibility and required to develop service standards , while paea reconfigured certain financial obligations . recent developments have highlighted deficiencies in usps's business model , which is to fulfill its mission through self - supporting , businesslike operations . congress also should consider requiring usps to provide regular reports to congress to ensure that usps is making progress to improve its financial condition . making the necessary progress would require ( 1 ) taking more aggressive actions to reduce costs and increase revenues within its current authority , using the collective bargaining process to address wages , benefits , and workforce flexibility , and ( 2 ) congressional action to address legal restrictions and resistance to realigning usps operations , networks , and workforce . these volume declines have been brought on by customers' changing use of the mail and have been accelerated by the recession and continuing difficulties in the economy . usps has incurred close to $12 billion in losses in fiscal years 2007 through 2009 and is rapidly approaching its statutory debt limit . at the same time , to facilitate making progress in difficult areas , congress should consider establishing ( 1 ) a panel of independent experts , similar to a brac - like commission , to coordinate with usps and stakeholders to develop a package of proposed legislative and operational changes needed to reduce costs and address challenges to usps's business model and ( 2 ) procedures for the review and approval of these proposals by the president and congress . usps's financial outlook is poor . as mail volume declined in fiscal years 2007 through 2009 , usps financial viability deteriorated , and it was not able to cut costs fast enough to offset the accelerated decline in mail volume and revenue .
our objectives were to determine ( 1 ) the extent to which the u.s. army corps of engineers' ( corps ) reanalysis addressed the economic analysis limitations we identified in 2002 ; ( 2 ) the extent to which the benefit projections the corps included in its reanalysis of the project , as updated , are consistent with current and anticipated future market and industry conditions ; and ( 3 ) what other key issues , if any , could affect the project , and the extent to which the corps has accounted for these issues and their potential impacts . you asked us to determine ( 1 ) the extent to which the corps' reanalysis addressed the economic analysis limitations we identified in 2002 ; ( 2 ) the extent to which the benefit projections the corps included in its reanalysis of the project , as updated , are consistent with current and anticipated future market and industry conditions ; and ( 3 ) what other key issues , if any , could affect the project , and the extent to which the corps has accounted for these issues and their potential impacts . in 1992 congress authorized the u.s. army corps of engineers ( corps ) to implement the delaware river deepening project . in particular , the corps has made several decisions — such as soliciting information from the public over the winter holiday , and then , following army direction , not seeking public comment on the draft environmental assessment — that have exacerbated public concerns over environmental issues , and as a result , its communications with the public regarding its actions have not been as open as might have been advisable for such a controversial project . noneconomic aspects of project implementation can also add to uncertainties about the project . while some of these changes could be short - term trends , others could have longer - lasting impacts . these issues ranged from errors in benefit and cost estimation — such as the misapplication of commodity growth rates and the omission of disposal site construction costs — to concerns about the corps' treatment of economic uncertainty , the lack of internal quality control in the corps' report review process , and the corps' analysis of selected environmental topics . a key area of such uncertainty is the outcome of the legal challenges to the project's environmental approvals and compliance . such information would help decision makers more fully assess the project's economic justification . to improve consistency and transparency in how the corps handles public participation in the development of environmental documents that are related to controversial projects and that the corps believes have no applicable nepa requirement , we recommend that the chief of engineers develop guidance on the appropriate timing and approaches for public notice and comment on such documents . the corps expects this greater depth to facilitate the movement of certain commodities — liquid cargo ( such as crude oil ) , containerized cargo ( such as refrigerated meat ) , and bulk commodities ( such as steel slabs and other construction materials ) — to receiving refineries and other terminals along the river . because the corps' economic updates have not accounted for the potentially significant impact that some market and industry trends could have on the project's estimated benefits , federal decision makers do not have the most current information about the project , including whether adjustments to the assumptions in the corps' benefit models are necessary .
congress enacted the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 ( recovery act ) to help stimulate the united states economy by providing an estimated $862 billion over 10 years through a variety of programs . in response , we determined ( 1 ) the extent of recovery act funding obligated by federal agencies on contracts , and the extent to which these contracts were awarded noncompetitively , ( 2 ) the reasons selected federal agencies awarded noncompetitive recovery act contract actions , ( 3 ) the extent of oversight of recovery act contracting at selected federal agencies , and ( 4 ) state officials' level of insight into and oversight of the use of noncompetitive recovery act contracts within selected states . we mentioned our prior findings regarding 8 ( a ) eligibility only to illustrate that there may be issues that merit consideration by agency igs as part of their overall approach to audits related to recovery act contracts that were not apparent when they developed their recovery act audit plans . as of may 2010 , $26 billion of recovery act funds had been obligated on contracts awarded by federal agencies . as the igs of the five agencies we reviewed periodically revisit and revise their recovery act audit plans , they should assess the need for allocating an appropriate level of audit resources , as determined using their risk - based analyses , to the noncompetitive contracts awarded under sba's 8 ( a ) program . federal agencies and their inspectors general ( ig ) were provided funding under the recovery act to audit the act's programs and projects , including grant and contract awards . a portion of those funds is being provided directly to federal agencies , which may award contracts and grants for their respective programs . to determine the extent to which contracts using recovery act funds are being awarded noncompetitively by federal agencies , we analyzed governmentwide data from the federal procurement data system — next generation ( fpds - ng ) . another portion of recovery act funds is being provided directly to the states , which in turn may award contracts or grants to businesses or local governments . four agencies — the departments of defense ( dod ) , energy ( doe ) , and health and human services ( hhs ) , and the national aeronautics and space administration ( nasa ) — are the four agencies that obligated the most recovery act funds using noncompetitive contracts . states generally are expected to use competition to the extent practicable when awarding contracts using federal funds . state audit organizations for the selected states are focusing their audit resources on programmatic reviews rather than focusing on the use of noncompetitive recovery act contracts , consistent with their assessments of relative risk . with respect to oversight , each state has supplemented its state - level guidance with some additional recovery act - specific policies and procedures but does not routinely provide state - level oversight of contracts awarded at the local level . the benefits of competition are well - established . it saves taxpayer money , helps improve contractor performance , and promotes accountability for results . the recovery act provides that to the maximum extent practicable , federal agencies' contracts should be awarded competitively with fixed prices .
the objectives of our report were to ( 1 ) describe the characteristics of financial institutions that received funding under the capital purchase program ( cpp ) , and ( 2 ) assess how the department of the treasury ( treasury ) , with the assistance of federal bank regulators , implemented cpp . its objectives are to ( 1 ) describe the characteristics of financial institutions that received cpp funding , and ( 2 ) assess how treasury , with the assistance of federal bank regulators , implemented cpp . as part of its consultation with regulators on their decisions to allow institutions to repay their cpp investments to treasury , and to improve monitoring of these decisions , we recommend that the secretary of the treasury direct ofs to periodically collect and review certain information from the bank regulators on the analysis and conclusions supporting their decisions on cpp repayment requests and provide feedback for the regulators' consideration on the extent to which regulators are evaluating similar institutions consistently . from october 2008 through december 2009 , the u.s. department of the treasury ( treasury ) invested over $200 billion in over 700 financial institutions as part of government efforts to stabilize u.s. financial markets and the economy . these investments were made through the capital purchase program ( cpp ) , which was the initial and largest initiative under the troubled asset relief program ( tarp ) . reviews of regulators' approval recommendations helped ensure consistent evaluations and mitigate risk from treasury's limited guidance for assessing applicants' viability . although regulators said that they consider similar factors when evaluating cpp firms' repayment requests , without collecting information on how and why regulators made their decisions , treasury cannot verify the degree to which regulators' decisions on requests to exit cpp actually were based on such factors . the program was closed to new investments on december 31 , 2009 , after treasury had invested a total of $205 billion in 707 financial institutions over the life of the program . we also recommend that the program office evaluate the information to identify trends or patterns that may indicate whether similar applicants were treated inconsistently across different regulators and take action , if necessary , to help ensure a more consistent treatment . since then , treasury has continued to oversee its investments and collect dividend and interest payments . institutions designated as problem banks have financial , operational , or managerial weaknesses that threaten their continued viability and include firms with either a 4 or 5 composite rating . the regulators provided treasury's office of financial stability ( ofs ) with recommendations approving or denying applications . some participants have repurchased their preferred shares or subordinated debt and left the program with the approval of their primary bank regulators . institutions were evaluated to determine their long - term strength and viability , and weaker institutions were encouraged by their regulators to withdraw their applications . treasury has not established mechanisms to monitor , review , or coordinate regulators' decisions on repayment requests because , in its view , it lacks the authority to do so and is limited to carrying out regulators' decisions regarding the institution making the request .
to strengthen gsa mas program pricing and management , we recommend that the administrator of the general services administration take the following eight actions: in coordination with the gsa inspector general , target the use of pre - award audits to cover more contracts that meet the audit threshold ; fully implement the process that has been initiated to ensure that vendors that meet the pre - negotiation clearance panel threshold receive a panel review ; when considering the mas advisory panel recommendations to clarify the price objective and eliminate the price reduction clause , ensure that any alternative means to negotiate and determine best prices are validated and in place before eliminating these pricing provisions , collect transactional data on mas orders and prices paid , possibly through the expanded use of existing electronic tools or through a pilot data collection initiative for selected mas schedules and make the information available to mas contract negotiators and customer agencies , establish more consistent performance measures across the mas program , including measures for pricing ; take steps to increase the mas customer survey response rate by using a methodologically sound means to identify bona fide program users and employing survey techniques that produce meaningful and actionable information that can lead to program improvements ; clarify and strengthen the mas program office's charter and authority so that it has clear roles and responsibilities to consistently implement guidance , policies , and best practices across gsa's acquisition centers including policies and practices related to the above recommendations ; and report gsa's plans to address these recommendations to the administrator of the office of federal procurement policy . these include the multiple award schedule ( mas ) program contracts ( also known as the federal supply schedule ) , multiagency contracts ( mac ) , and governmentwide acquisition contracts ( gwac ) . as this spending has increased , there has been renewed focus on maximizing efficiencies in the procurement process to achieve cost savings . to provide better transparency and a coordinated approach in awarding macs and enterprisewide contracts , we recommend that the director of the office of management and budget direct the administrator of the office of federal procurement policy to take the following five actions in conjunction with the agencies' senior procurement executives: survey departments and agencies to update the 2006 office of federal procurement policy interagency contracting data collection initiative to identify the universe of macs and enterprisewide contracts in use throughout federal departments and agencies and assess their utility for maximizing procurement resources across agencies ; ensure that departments and agencies use the survey data to accurately record these contracts in fpds - ng ; establish a policy and procedural framework in conjunction with agencies for establishing , approving , and reporting on new macs and enterprisewide contracts on an ongoing basis ; the framework should stress the need for a consistent approach to leveraging the government's buying power across departments and agencies while continuing to use their statutory authorities for buying goods and services ; assess the feasibility of establishing and maintaining a centralized database , which could provide sufficient information on gwacs , macs , and enterprisewide contracts , for contracting officers to conduct market research and make informed decisions on the availability of existing contracts to meet the agencies' requirements ; and as part of developing the pending far rule to implement the 2009 national defense authorization act , ensure that departments and agencies complete a comprehensive business case analysis as described by the sara panel , and include a requirement to address potential duplication with existing contracts , before new macs and enterprisewide contracts are established .
improve the agency's strategic planning process by ( 1 ) defining and documenting roles for the board , management , and stakeholders in strategic planning ; ( 2 ) ensuring that the strategic plan is sufficiently long term ; ( 3 ) ensuring that board - approved strategic goals and objectives are linked to updated performance measures ; ( 4 ) including internal and external assessments and program evaluations ; and ( 5 ) reviewing the strategic plan on a regular basis and updating it as needed . in 2008 , wmata estimated that it had about $11 billion worth of capital needs over 10 years , or $1.1 billion per year ; its capital budget for fiscal year 2011 is $712.3 million . our objective was to assess the washington metropolitan area transit authority's ( wmata ) governance in terms of the board's roles and responsibilities , oversight , strategic planning , and governance structure , and identify changes , if any , that should be made . conduct a regular assessment of the board's performance , including elements such as an evaluation of the effectiveness of the board's organization , structure , and functioning , and its impact on performance . in 2010 , two reports concluded that weaknesses in wmata's governance contributed to the safety and operational reliability challenges facing the transit system and recommended changes to wmata's governance structure . however , wmata's public rail transit system is 35 years old and has experienced problems related to the safety and reliability of its services , including fatal accidents , equipment breakdowns , delays in scheduled service , crowding on trains , and tunnel fires . in addition , we provide information on the appointment of federal members to wmata's board by the general services administration ( gsa ) . our objective was to assess wmata's governance in terms of the board's roles and responsibilities , oversight , strategic planning , and governance structure , and identify changes , if any , that should be made . the board sets policies and oversees all of wmata's activities , including capital and operating budgeting , system development and expansion , safety , and procurement . in addition , the agency faces challenges in maintaining the aging system while expanding the system to dulles international airport , adding 23 miles and additional riders to the rail transit system . in conducting our work , we focused on wmata's governance in terms of the board's structure , communication , policies , practices , and documentation relating to its oversight of management and implementation of its organizational mission . the washington metropolitan area transit authority's ( wmata ) public rail transit and bus systems are vital to meeting the transportation needs of the national capital region , accounting for nearly 1.2 million passenger trips per weekday . we analyzed management's role in certain areas , such as strategic planning ; however , we did not fully assess the adequacy of management's role in effectively operating the agency . wmata has developed elements of strategic planning over the past 4 years , but the agency's board and management could improve their strategic focus and long - term planning processes .
to obtain more information about the quality of national data on child fatalities and near fatalities from maltreatment , the chairman , house ways and means committee , asked us to examine ( 1 ) the extent to which hhs collects and reports comprehensive information on child fatalities from maltreatment , ( 2 ) the challenges states face in collecting and reporting information on child fatalities from maltreatment to hhs , and ( 3 ) the assistance hhs provides to states in collecting and reporting data on child fatalities from maltreatment . estimate the costs and benefits of collecting national data on near fatalities and take appropriate follow - up actions . according to estimates by the national child abuse and neglect data system ( ncands ) , 1,770 children in the united states died from physical abuse or other forms of maltreatment in fiscal year 2009 . the department of health and human services ( hhs ) is the principal federal agency that provides oversight of state child welfare systems , which are intended , in part , to protect children who have been maltreated and help prevent maltreatment . infants and toddlers are the most vulnerable to such abuse and neglect . to better understand the scope of child maltreatment , including child fatalities , and inform efforts to address and prevent it , the 1988 amendments to the child abuse prevention and treatment act ( capta ) required hhs to establish a national data collection and analysis program for child maltreatment data . as of fiscal year 2009 , all states reported at least some data on child maltreatment to ncands . the most recent report , for fiscal year 2009 , presents national data about child abuse and neglect known to child welfare agencies in the united states . use stronger mechanisms to routinely share analyses and expertise with its partners on the circumstances of child maltreatment deaths , including insights that could be used for developing prevention strategies . collecting complete and consistent information is important for understanding the magnitude of the problem and for targeting efforts to help prevent future child deaths and near deaths from maltreatment . these efforts could include identifying and sharing states' best practices , particularly those that foster cross - agency coordination and help address differences in state definitions and interpretation of maltreatment and / or privacy and confidentiality concerns . every year , children in the united states die after being physically abused , severely neglected , or otherwise maltreated , frequently at the hands of their parents or others who are entrusted with their care . yet such cooperative efforts are a work in progress , and assistance from hhs to help states collect and report more comprehensive child fatality data is important . in its comments , hhs agreed with our recommendations to improve the comprehensiveness , quality , and use of national data on child fatalities from maltreatment . to improve the comprehensiveness , quality , and use of national data on child fatalities from maltreatment , the secretary of hhs should take the following four actions 1 . some experts believe that more children have died from maltreatment than are captured in these estimates . hhs responded to this mandate by establishing and maintaining ncands , which is a voluntary data - reporting system .
the department of health and human services' food and drug administration ( fda ) has responsibility for ensuring the safety of seafood imports . the united states has increased the amount of seafood it imports over the past 10 years , currently importing seafood from approximately 130 countries . we did not address the remaining practices: ( 1 ) define and articulate a common outcome ; ( 2 ) establish mutually reinforcing or joint strategies ; ( 3 ) agree on roles and responsibilities ; ( 4 ) develop mechanisms to monitor , evaluate , and report on results ; ( 5 ) reinforce agency accountability for collaborative efforts ; and ( 6 ) reinforce individual accountability for collaborative efforts . to better ensure the safety of seafood imports , we recommend that the secretary of health and human services direct the commissioner of fda to take the following three actions: study the feasibility of adopting other practices used by other entities , such as requiring foreign countries that want to export seafood to the united states to develop a national residues monitoring plan to control the use of aquaculture drugs , to more efficiently ensure the safety of imported seafood and report its findings to the secretary ; develop a more comprehensive import sampling program for seafood by more effectively using its laboratory resources and taking into account the imported seafood sampling programs of other entities and countries ; and develop a strategic approach with specific time frames for enhancing collaborative efforts with nmfs and better leveraging nmfs inspection resources . specifically , this report addresses the extent to which ( 1 ) fda's program is able to ensure the safety of seafood imports against residues from unapproved drugs and ( 2 ) fda and nmfs have implemented the 2009 mou to enhance federal oversight of seafood and leverage federal resources . we provided the departments of agriculture , commerce , and health and human services ( hhs ) a draft of this report for their review and comment . according to estimates from the department of commerce's national oceanic and atmospheric administration , in 2010 more than 80 percent of seafood consumed in the united states — such as shrimp , salmon , and tilapia — was imported , with about half coming from aquaculture ( fish farming ) . provisions in the new food safety legislation also provide fda with more specific direction and opportunity for greater collaboration with nmfs through , in part , more effective use of its inspection resources or results . because fish grown in confined aquacultured areas can have high rates of bacterial infections , farmers may treat them with drugs , such as antibiotics and antifungal agents , to increase their survival rates . furthermore , although fda worked effectively with nmfs in ensuring the safety of domestic seafood during the gulf of mexico oil spill , it lacks systematic collaboration with that agency . according to the department of health and human services' food and drug administration's ( fda ) 2008 report to congress , the residues of some drugs can cause cancer , allergic reactions , and antibiotic resistance when consumed by humans . further , fda will work with nmfs to develop strategic approaches for enhancing collaboration and better leveraging seafood inspection resources .
to increase the safety , capacity , and efficiency of the national airspace system , the federal aviation administration ( faa ) , in cooperation with aviation industry stakeholders and other federal agencies , is developing a new , technologically advanced air traffic management system — the next generation air transportation system ( nextgen ) . to help improve and expand faa's capability to use data for aviation safety oversight , we recommend that the secretary of transportation direct the faa administrator to take the following four actions: develop and implement a comprehensive plan that addresses how data fit into faa's implementation of a proactive approach to safety oversight and ensure that this plan fully describes the relevant data challenges ( such as ensuring data quality and continued access to voluntarily reported safety data ) , analytical approaches , and staffing requirements and integrates efforts to address them ; given the importance of high - quality data , extend standard quality controls , as appropriate , to the databases that support aviation safety oversight to ensure that the data are as reliable and valid as possible ; proceed with all deliberate speed to develop the capability to model the impact of nextgen changes on the national airspace system and manage any risks emerging from these changes ; and systematically identify the reasons that carriers are not participating in voluntary reporting programs , such as through a survey , and identify and implement further steps to encourage greater program participation , especially by smaller carriers . furthermore , sms will allow faa to test the impact of nextgen changes on aviation safety and to identify safety vulnerabilities and mitigating measures . at the same time , faa is attempting to further enhance aviation safety by shifting to a new data - driven , risk - based safety oversight approach , which industry and international air traffic management organizations are also adopting . faa has efforts under way to address two key challenges to using data more effectively to manage risk . under this new approach , called a safety management system ( sms ) approach , faa will continue to use data on aviation accidents and incidents — referred to collectively as safety events — to identify and address their causes . you asked us to assess faa's capacity to use available data to oversee aviation safety . however , without carrier - specific information on why air carriers are not participating in these programs , faa cannot determine if its efforts to increase participation are sufficient . as faa improves its ability to integrate and analyze data from multiple sources , it plans to increase its capacity to model the impact of nextgen changes and to identify and manage risks . efforts such as the training faa provides to smaller carriers on how to develop programs that require less capital investment have the potential to increase participation and improve safety . in this report , we assessed the federal aviation administration's ( faa ) capacity to use available data to oversee aviation safety . aviation safety data are critical to faa's safety oversight and its planned implementation of sms . to answer these questions , we reviewed 13 aviation safety databases maintained by faa , the national aeronautics and space administration ( nasa ) , the national transportation safety board ( ntsb ) , and the u.s. department of agriculture ( usda ) .
for years , gao and other entities have reported on weaknesses that affect the department of defense's ( dod ) ability to effectively manage its major defense acquisition programs ( mdap ) . our objective was to identify previously reported weaknesses that impair the department of defense's ( dod ) ability to provide reliable cost information for military equipment acquired through major defense acquisition programs ( mdaps ) and determine what actions dod has taken to address them . since 2003 , dod's portfolio of mdaps has increased steadily from 77 to 98 and the cumulative estimated investment in these programs has grown from approximately $1.2 trillion to $1.7 trillion . 111-23 ) , section 304 ( b ) , directed us to perform a review of weaknesses in dod's operations that affect the reliability of financial information on assets acquired through mdaps . our objective was to identify previously reported weaknesses that impair dod's ability to provide reliable cost information for military equipment acquired through mdaps and determine what actions dod has taken to address them . mdaps are used to acquire , modernize , or extend the service life of some of the department's most expensive assets , primarily military equipment such as aircraft , ships , tanks , and self - propelled weapons . to address the objective , we searched databases of audit reports issued during calendar years 2005 through 2009 using key terms ( e.g. , military equipment ) to identify weaknesses in business operations that impair dod's ability to account for the cost of military equipment based on relevant federal financial accounting standards . the weapon systems acquisition reform act of 2009 ( pub . while the department has reported over a trillion dollars in its military equipment investments on its financial statements , dod acknowledged that the department lacks the process and system capabilities to reliably identify , aggregate , and report the full cost of these assets . in august 2009 , the dod comptroller directed that the department focus its limited financial management improvement resources and efforts on identifying and addressing weaknesses in areas deemed most useful to dod managers . given the magnitude of dod's military equipment assets and the inherent risk associated with managing large acquisition programs , having reliable and timely cost information is essential for proper planning and effective management and oversight . the dod comptroller stated that many difficult problems remain unresolved — including implementing compliant systems and valuing the department's significant investment in property , plant , and equipment — and will require the involvement of many functional groups across dod . although mdaps can include any major acquisition program that meets the dollar or other criteria necessary for mdap designation , dod officials stated that approximately 75 percent of the total number of mdaps reported in july 2009 are likely to involve the acquisition of military equipment assets . specifically , the comptroller prioritized efforts focused on ensuring the reliability of the department's budgetary information and property accountability records for mission critical assets , which includes military equipment . the act also requires our office to review the growth in operating and support costs of major weapon systems . dod has acknowledged that additional actions are needed before the department achieves cost accounting and management capabilities , but stated that its improvement efforts are not yet focused on achieving these capabilities .
in this regard , the department requested about $38 billion for its information technology ( it ) investments for fiscal year 2012 , including about $25 billion in combined investments at the departments of the air force , army , and navy ( don ) . the department of defense ( dod ) spends billions of dollars each year to maintain operational systems and processes intended to support its mission . for decades , dod has been challenged in modernizing its systems environment to reduce duplication and increase integration between its systems . further , dod's enterprise architecture approach relies on each level of its organization ( e.g. , dod - wide , military departments , and programs ) to develop a meaningful architecture . because dod is provided with over $30 billion each year for its it systems environment , the potential for identifying and avoiding the costs associated with duplicative functionality across its it investments is significant . effective use of a well - defined enterprise architecture is a basic tenet of successful systems modernization and associated organizational transformation efforts , such as the one dod has long been seeking to accomplish . while dod has been provided with considerable resources for its it systems environment , the department is not managing its systems in a consistent , repeatable , and effective manner that , among other things , maximizes mission performance while minimizing or eliminating system overlap and duplication . accordingly , the development and use of a military department enterprise architecture is critical for organizational transformation and systems modernization across dod and within each military department . in the event that a military department does not intend to fully satisfy all elements of our framework , the plan should include a rationale for why the department deems any such element ( s ) to be not applicable . as we have previously reported , without a well - defined enterprise architecture , it is unlikely that dod , including its component organizations , will be able to transform business processes and modernize supporting systems to minimize overlap and maximize interoperability . dod has been provided with over $30 billion annually for its it systems environment , but it is not managing its systems in a consistent , repeatable , and effective manner that , among other things , maximizes mission performance while minimizing or eliminating system overlap and duplication . according to dod's systems inventory , the department's it environment is composed of 2,324 systems and includes 338 financial management , 719 human resource management , 664 logistics , 250 real property and installation , and 300 weapon acquisition management systems . dod also provided technical comments on this report , which have been incorporated as appropriate . further , because the military departments do not have the robust enterprise architectures that dod's federated architecture approach depends on , the department at large is also without a complete road map to effectively guide its transformation . establishing such a road map is critical to dod transformation . further , the military departments have been limited in their ability to overcome long - standing enterprise architecture management challenges , thus indicating a lack of organizational commitment to effective enterprise architecture development and use .
this report examines ( 1 ) the general state of the science regarding geoengineering approaches and their potential effects ; ( 2 ) the extent to which the federal government is sponsoring or participating in geoengineering research or deployment ; and ( 3 ) the views of legal experts and federal officials about the extent to which federal laws and international agreements apply to geoengineering activities , and associated challenges , if any , to geoengineering governance . gao recommends that the appropriate entities within the executive office of the president ( eop ) , such as the office of science and technology policy ( ostp ) , in consultation with relevant federal agencies , develop a clear , defined , and coordinated approach to geoengineering research in the context of a federal strategy to address climate change that ( 1 ) defines geoengineering for federal agencies ; ( 2 ) leverages existing resources by having federal agencies collect information and coordinate federal research related to geoengineering in a transparent manner ; and if the administration decides to establish a formal geoengineering research program , ( 3 ) sets clear research priorities to inform decision - making and future governance efforts . changes in the earth's climate attributable to increased concentrations of greenhouse gases may have significant environmental and economic effects within the united states and internationally . our objectives were to examine ( 1 ) the general state of the science regarding geoengineering approaches and their potential effects ; ( 2 ) the extent to which the federal government is sponsoring or participating in geoengineering research or deployment ; and ( 3 ) the views of legal experts and federal officials about the extent to which federal laws and international agreements apply to geoengineering activities , and associated challenges , if any , to geoengineering governance . global change research program ( usgcrp ) had begun to develop governmentwide strategies to address adaptation and reduce the nation's vulnerability to adverse impacts from climate change . in its recent study advancing the science of climate change , the national research council ( nrc ) stated that temperature increases related to rising greenhouse gas levels are closely associated with a broad spectrum of climate impacts , such as changes in rainfall and widespread ocean acidification . we also met with federal officials from the environmental protection agency ( epa ) and the department of state ( state ) to collect their views on the applicability of domestic laws and international agreements to geoengineering , and governance challenges , if any . these effects are expected to vary across regions , countries , and economic sectors . even if policymakers decide that geoengineering should not be pursued domestically , knowledge of geoengineering approaches and their potential effects will be essential to inform international negotiations regarding other countries' consideration of , or actions related to , geoengineering research and deployment . these impacts pose significant risks for — and in many cases are already affecting — a wide range of human and environmental systems , including freshwater resources , the coastal environment , agriculture , fisheries , human health , ecosystems , and national security , according to the study . however , many countries with significant greenhouse gas emissions , including the united states , china , and india , have not committed to binding limits on co emissions , and atmospheric co in particular , we reported that federal entities such as the president's council on environmental quality ( ceq ) , the office of science and technology policy ( ostp ) , and the u.s .
in order for dea to better determine to what extent its efforts are decreasing diversions and to inform future program decisions , we recommend that the administrator of dea strengthen the agency's performance measurement for the diversion control program by reassessing its set of performance measures for the program to identify ways to enhance the measures and their link to the program outcome goal of reducing diversion . according to the office of national drug control policy ( ondcp ) , the abuse of controlled prescription drugs such as pain relievers , depressants , and stimulants is the nation's fastest - growing drug problem . by reassessing the program's current performance measures and making changes where necessary to the measures , dea will be in a better position to provide enhanced information to program managers , other decision makers such as congress , and the public on the extent to which the program is achieving its stated longer range performance goal of reducing diversion . although such prescription drugs have legitimate medical uses , they also pose a potential for abuse and addiction and , thus , being diverted for nonmedical illicit uses . how does dea help ensure that policies and procedures are followed for diversion investigations and to what extent does it determine the results of its efforts on the diversion problem ? . making more meaningful information available externally about the program's results would enable program managers and external stakeholders to better understand what the program is accomplishing and provide more effective oversight . because of the rising diversion and illicit use of controlled prescription drugs , you asked us to review dea's management of its diversion control investigations to combat this problem . by developing an outcome measure that demonstrates programwide results of benefit to the public and revising other performance measures to better track and report on the results of investigations and their results on reducing diversion of prescription drugs , dea could make the measures more effective for demonstrating results . dea has established a set of performance measures for the program , but the link between most of the measures and how they demonstrate the progress dea is making towards the overall goal of reducing diversion is unclear . in its comments , dea stated it would take action to address the recommendation to strengthen its set of performance measures for the diversion control program but that it disagreed with the finding that its performance measures do not adequately measure how its efforts reduce diversion or that such deficiencies impede resource allocation decisions . doing so could also provide dea program managers and other decision makers such as congress better information to target program approaches accordingly to further optimize results against diversion . how does dea manage its investigation efforts to address the growing and evolving nature of prescription drug diversion ? . within the drug enforcement administration ( dea ) , the office of diversion control is directly responsible for enforcing the provisions of the csa as they pertain to ensuring the availability of substances such as prescription drugs and listed chemicals for legitimate uses while preventing their diversion . to address the first objective , we reviewed dea policies and procedures on how dea carries out its investigative responsibilities , including program documents such as dea's current strategic plan and budget justification submissions for fiscal years 2008 to 2012 .
this report describes ( 1 ) what has been reported in state and local governments' comprehensive annual financial reports ( cafr ) about unfunded opeb liabilities , ( 2 ) actions state and local governments have taken to address the liabilities associated with retiree health benefits , and ( 3 ) the overall fiscal pressures these governments face . when state and local governments ( referred to in this report as governments ) provide health benefits to their retired employees , they may do so by paying for a portion of the costs of these benefits . given concerns about state and local governments' fiscal challenges and the potential erosion of retiree health benefits , you asked us for information on state and local governments' retiree health liabilities . governments have typically funded their share of the cost of retiree health benefits when they are paid or provided to retirees ( i.e. , during retirement ) , as opposed to during active employment . to describe state and local governments' unfunded opeb liabilities , we reviewed the most recent cafrs for the 50 states and 39 large local governments ( cities and counties with total revenue of $2 billion or more according to u.s. census bureau data ) . under accounting standards issued in 2004 , governments are required to account for the costs of postemployment benefits other than pensions — referred to as other postemployment benefits ( opeb ) — as employees earn the benefits and the costs are accrued , not when the benefits are paid or provided . the model's results are not a prediction of future decisions on government policies ; in the face of growing fiscal pressure , changes in policies are likely . to describe what is reported about state and local governments' unfunded other postemployment benefits ( opeb ) liabilities , we reviewed the most recent governmentwide comprehensive annual financial reports ( cafr ) , as of june 30 , 2009 , for the states and selected local governments . this has raised concerns about the fiscal pressures that state and local governments will face in the coming decades and leads to questions about the actions state and local governments can take to address their opeb liabilities , such as changing their retiree health benefits . additionally , reporting of governments' opeb liabilities has brought renewed focus on how governments will address these liabilities . such changes could include reductions in health care benefits , reductions in the number of retirees receiving benefits , increases in state and local taxes , or a combination of these . in general , state and local retiree benefits are not subject to federal laws governing private sector retiree benefits . while the standards include requirements for the reporting of governments' opeb liabilities , they do not include requirements for funding opeb , such as retiree health benefits . because state and local governments have historically funded retiree health benefits when paid or provided rather then when the benefits are earned , much of their opeb liability may be unfunded . under the accounting standards , fiscal year 2008 was generally the first year that the largest governments were to begin reporting , in annual financial statements , the amount of government's obligation to employees who have earned opeb ; these amounts are known as opeb liabilities .
health care delivery in the united states has long been characterized by fragmentation at the national , state , and local levels . one way that hospitals , physicians , and other providers have addressed fragmentation is by forming integrated delivery systems ( ids ) to improve efficiency , quality , and access to care . fragmentation of care delivery can lead to poor quality of care , medical errors , inefficient delivery of services , higher costs , and patient dissatisfaction . because of cost and connectivity issues , its school - based health centers do not currently have access to the system's ehrs . fragmentation can be especially burdensome for patients with chronic illnesses because of their ongoing care needs and for underserved populations — individuals who are uninsured or medically underserved — because of their financial and other challenges to accessing services . the health care safety net act of 2008 directed gao to report on integrated health system models that integrate primary , specialty , and acute care and serve uninsured and medically underserved populations . care is delivered by multiple providers , in multiple care settings , and often without systematic coordination and communication across providers and settings . henry ford has also encountered challenges in implementing its ehr system . in this follow - on report , we provide more in - depth information on 1. organizational features that idss use to support strategies to improve 2. approaches idss use to facilitate access to care for underserved 3. challenges idss encounter in providing care , including care provided to underserved populations . an ids can be integrated across its providers and facilities in terms of such aspects as clinical care , financial management , and human resources . payer mix ( percentage of patient population ) uninsured medicaid medicare private other 2 some idss are organized into multiple subsystems — local or regional delivery systems that are organized below the system level — that integrate clinical care within themselves . to address our research objectives , we selected a judgmental sample of 15 idss that clinically integrate primary , specialty , and acute care and serve uninsured and medically underserved populations . a henry ford official said that the school - based health centers have competing priorities for funds provided by henry ford , including staffing needs , and that henry ford has not been able to pay for the implementation of the ehr at the school - based health centers but plans to do so eventually . the organizational features , patient care strategies , approaches to facilitate access , and challenges that we describe are not necessarily unique to idss , but may also be found in other health care settings and experienced by different providers . to fulfill its mission to provide health care to underserved populations , seton provides primary care services to uninsured patients through its community clinics . rural residents also face barriers to access because of physician shortages in rural areas . while public idss have a mission of providing care to underserved populations , some private idss share this mission and others serve these populations to varying degrees . we administered a structured interview protocol with chief medical officers ( or other system officials , as appropriate ) to obtain information on organizational features that idss use to support strategies to improve patient care ; approaches idss use to facilitate access to care for underserved populations ; and challenges idss encounter in providing care , including care provided to underserved populations .
in particular , i will provide an update on the progress the bureau is making in addressing issues that prompted us to designate the 2010 census a high - risk area , including ( 1 ) the reliability of key it systems ; ( 2 ) a broad range of activities critical to an effective headcount , some of which were problematic in either earlier 2010 operations or in the 2000 census ; and ( 3 ) the quality of the bureau's cost estimates . the broad range of activities i will discuss today include procedures for fingerprinting temporary employees ; the rollout of key marketing efforts aimed at improving the participation of hard - to - count populations and how american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 ( recovery act ) funds are being used as part of that effort ; the bureau's plans for mailing a second , follow - up questionnaire and the removal of late mail returns ; and the bureau's plans to enumerate people who are vulnerable to being missed by the census , including the homeless and those displaced by recent economic conditions and the hurricanes that slammed the gulf coast . in short , the success of these operations will have a major impact on the ultimate cost and accuracy of the census . with census day , april 1 , fast approaching , the nation has entered one of the most crucial time periods in the decade - long census life - cycle . on the one hand , key it systems — most notably an automated system used to manage field data collection known as the paper - based operations control system ( pbocs ) and a personnel and payroll processing system called the decennial applicant personnel and payroll system ( dapps ) — were experiencing significant performance issues . i am pleased to be here today to discuss the u.s. census bureau's ( bureau ) readiness for the 2010 census . as you know , in march 2008 , we designated the 2010 census a high - risk area because of cost overruns and weaknesses in the bureau's information technology ( it ) acquisition and contract management function . in mid - march , the bureau delivered questionnaires to around 120 million households , and in the coming weeks , the bureau will launch additional operations aimed at counting people in migrant worker housing , boats , tent cities , homeless shelters , nursing homes , dormitories , prisons , and other diverse dwellings , as well as millions of households that fail to mail back their census questionnaires , all in an effort to ensure a complete and accurate enumeration . at the same time , the unprecedented commitment of resources and total cost of the census — now estimated at around $14.7 billion — underscores the importance of identifying lessons learned from the 2010 headcount in order to reexamine the nation's approach to the 2020 census and future population tallies . my testimony today is based on our ongoing and completed reviews of key census - taking operations . indeed , to secure a successful headcount , the bureau needs to align thousands of activities , process millions of forms , hire around 1 million temporary employees , and partner with thousands of public and private sector entities across the country .
our objectives were to describe ( 1 ) states' practices for overseeing health insurance premium rates in 2010 , including the outcomes of premium rate reviews , and ( 2 ) changes that states that received department of health and human services ( hhs ) rate review grants have begun making to enhance their oversight of health insurance premium rates . this report describes ( 1 ) states' practices for overseeing health insurance premium rates in 2010 , including the outcomes of premium rate reviews ; and ( 2 ) changes that states that received hhs rate review grants have begun making to enhance their oversight of health insurance premium rates . we selected these states — california , illinois , maine , michigan , and texas — based on differences among the five states in terms of their ( 1 ) state insurance departments' authority to oversee premium rates , ( 2 ) proposed changes to their existing practices for overseeing premium rates , ( 3 ) size , and ( 4 ) geographic location . while oversight of private health insurance , including premium rates , is primarily a state responsibility , the 2010 patient protection and affordable care act ( ppaca ) established a role for the department of health and human services ( hhs ) by requiring the secretary of hhs to work with states to establish a process for the annual review of unreasonable premium increases . since the enactment of ppaca , members of congress and others have continued to raise questions about rising health insurance premium rates and states' practices for overseeing them . finally , some states reported taking steps to review their current authority to determine if changes were necessary . in 2009 , about 173 million nonelderly americans , about 65 percent of the u.s. population under the age of 65 , had private health insurance coverage , either through individually purchased or employer - based private health plans . specifically , respondents reported that they have taken steps in order to ( 1 ) improve their processes for reviewing premium rates , ( 2 ) increase their capacity to oversee premium rates , and ( 3 ) obtain additional legislative authority for overseeing premium rates . to describe states' practices for overseeing health insurance premium rates in 2010 , including the outcomes of premium rate reviews , we surveyed officials from the insurance departments of all 50 states and the district of columbia ( collectively referred to as “states” ) . hhs announced the second cycle of rate review grants in february 2011 with $199 million available in grant funding to states . in addition , ppaca required the secretary of hhs to carry out a program to award grants to assist states in their review practices . the cost of this health insurance coverage continues to rise . specifically , the practices reported by state insurance officials varied in terms of ( 1 ) the timing of rate filing reviews — whether rate filings were reviewed before or after the rates took effect , ( 2 ) the information considered during reviews , and ( 3 ) opportunities for consumer involvement in rate reviews . you asked us to review certain aspects of states' oversight of health insurance premium rates .
we provided a draft of this report to omb and the departments of health and human services ( hhs ) and housing and urban development ( hud ) . to achieve our objectives , we selected six federal social services and housing grants from two federal agencies: the department of health and human services ( hhs ) and the department of housing and urban development ( hud ) . for example , the serve america act increases the limit on nonprofits' use of program funds for administrative costs from 5 to 6 percent for some federal education grant programs , and the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 ( recovery act ) makes $50 million available through the department of health and human services' strengthening communities fund to help build the capacity of nonprofit organizations . our objectives were to provide information for selected federal grant programs and nonprofits on ( 1 ) how indirect cost terminology and classification vary , ( 2 ) how indirect costs are reimbursed , and ( 3 ) if gaps occur between indirect costs incurred and reimbursed , steps nonprofits take to bridge the gaps . the selected grants are promoting safe and stable families ( pssf ) grant and family violence prevention and services / grants for battered women's shelters administered by hhs's administration for children and families ( acf ) , block grants for community mental health services and block grants for prevention and treatment of substance abuse administered by hhs's substance abuse and mental health services administration ( samhsa ) , and emergency shelter grants ( esg ) and housing opportunities for persons with aids grant ( hopwa ) administered by hud's office of community planning and development ( cpd ) . as such , we have reported that nonprofits often struggle to cover the costs of doing business , which raises concerns about the long - term financial health and durability of the sector and its ability to effectively deliver federal services and programs . the congressional research service ( crs ) estimates that government grants and payments to the nonprofit sector increased almost 53 percent from 1995 to 2005 , demonstrating governments' increased reliance on this sector to deliver public services . responding to your request for more information on indirect cost reimbursement , especially when federal funding is passed through to nonprofits from other entities such as state and local governments , we reviewed , for selected federal grant programs and nonprofits , ( 1 ) how indirect cost terminology and classification vary , ( 2 ) how indirect costs are reimbursed , and ( 3 ) if gaps occur between indirect costs incurred and reimbursed , steps nonprofits take to bridge the gaps . gao recommends that the director of omb bring together federal , state , and local governments , and nonprofit representatives to propose ways to clarify and improve understanding of how indirect costs should be treated , particularly for grants passed through state and local governments to nonprofits by clarifying the definitions of indirect costs and administrative costs and their relationship to each other and considering ways to help nonprofits improve their understanding and ability to better capture , categorize , report , and recover indirect and administrative costs .
civilian agencies' efforts to ( 1 ) compile their fiscal year 2011 inventories and ( 2 ) review and report on their fiscal year 2010 inventories . to satisfy the mandate , we assessed civilian agencies' efforts to ( 1 ) compile their fiscal year 2011 inventories and ( 2 ) review and report on their fiscal year 2010 inventories . to assess agencies' efforts to compile their fiscal year 2011 inventories , we reviewed the act , omb guidance , and the proposed federal acquisition regulation ( far ) rule on service contract inventories . section 743 of the 2010 consolidated appropriations act directed gao to report on the second annual service contract inventory that civilian agencies were required to submit to the office of management and budget ( omb ) by december 31 , 2011 . we also selected five civilian agencies — the department of health and human services ( hhs ) , the department of homeland security ( dhs ) , the department of transportation ( dot ) , the general services administration ( gsa ) , and the national aeronautics and space administration ( nasa ) — for a more in - depth review as to how they compiled and reviewed their service contract inventories . congress has also expressed concern with agencies' reliance on contractors and has directed omb and other federal agencies to examine similar workforce issues , which include identifying functions that are not appropriate for contractors to perform or require increased government oversight . to help ensure that the service contract inventories contain consistent and reliable information and that the service contract inventory analysis reports have sufficient information to provide greater context and value , we recommend that the administrator of omb's office of federal procurement policy clarify guidance to: require agencies to fully describe in their inventory review reports the scope of the inventory reviews , including information such as the number of contracts and the percentage of contracts reviewed for each product and service code selected and the total universe of contracts ; require agencies to consistently report on the number of contractor personnel and functions that were involved with the workforce issues identified during their inventory reviews ; and require agencies to include , as part of their inventory review reports , the status of agency efforts to resolve findings identified in previous reviews until they are resolved . to help improve civilian agency compliance for compiling , reviewing , and reporting on inventories , we recommend that the administrator of omb's office of federal procurement policy work with agencies to improve how compliance with statutory and omb requirements is monitored , which might include agencies designating accountable officials to ensure appropriate internal management attention and responsiveness . omb directed agencies to conduct a meaningful review of their fiscal year 2010 inventory and identify at a minimum ( 1 ) the special interest functions studied by the agency , including the dollars obligated to those specific product and service codes in fiscal year 2010 ; ( 2 ) the methodology used to support their reviews ; ( 3 ) their findings ; and ( 4 ) the actions taken or planned by the agency to address any identified weaknesses or challenges . in fiscal year 2011 , federal civilian agencies reported $161 billion in total contract obligations , of which $126 billion , or almost 80 percent , were for services .
the national nuclear security administration ( nnsa ) , a separately organized agency within the department of energy ( doe ) , is working to re - establish the country's capability to produce tritium — a key radioactive isotope used to enhance the power of nuclear warheads and bombs . nnsa also stated that adjustments to its budget requests and refinements to its acquisition strategy will continue as part of its efforts to accommodate changes to the nuclear weapons stockpile . we are encouraged by nnsa's pledge to adjust its budget requests in response to changes in program needs and by other actions nnsa is taking to reduce its unexpended funding balances . tva noted that it has been and continues to be dedicated to working with nnsa in evaluating and deciding among alternative approaches to help better assure that future tritium production will be a the necessary levels . however , as our draft report notes , unexpended funding balances in excess of doe's threshold for unexpended funds increased every year since fiscal year 2006 with the exception of fiscal year 2009 and nnsa estimates the program will exceed doe's threshold by approximately $50 million by the end of fiscal year 2010 . in our view , these increases in unexpended funding call into question the effectiveness of nnsa's monitoring of the program's financial management . ensure nnsa's future budget requests account for the large unexpended balances in the tritium readiness program and better reflect the amount of funding the program is able to spend annually . nnsa's inability to overcome the technical challenges and meet its original tritium production goals has raised serious questions about the agency's ability to provide a reliable source of tritium to maintain the nation's nuclear weapons stockpile in the future . we also reviewed nnsa's strategic plans for the tritium readiness program , including program execution and implementation plans ; past and planned schedules for completing tpbar fabrication , transportation , irradiation , and extraction activities ; and the program's risk management plan . nuclear weapons stockpile requirements for tritium are established jointly by the department of defense ( dod ) and nnsa . since that time , as the united states decreased the size of its nuclear arsenal , nnsa has been able to meet its tritium requirements by harvesting and recycling it from dismantled nuclear warheads . this alternatives analysis should be coordinated closely with dod and take into account current and future nuclear weapons stockpile requirements for tritium . however , because of tritium's short half - life , nnsa cannot meet its tritium needs in this manner indefinitely and is attempting to re - establish new tritium production . in this context , in response to your request that we review the tritium readiness program , we ( 1 ) determined the extent to which nnsa has been able to overcome technical challenges producing tritium , ( 2 ) determined the extent to which nnsa is able to meet current and future nuclear weapons stockpile requirements for tritium , and ( 3 ) assessed the management of nnsa's tritium readiness program . because tritium has a relatively short half - life of 12 years and therefore decays at a rate of about 5.5 percent per year , tritium in existing weapons must be periodically replenished , and an assured source of tritium is necessary to maintain the u.s. nuclear weapons stockpile .
for decades , the department of defense ( dod ) has been challenged in modernizing its business systems . in 1998 , the army initiated the logistics modernization program ( lmp ) in order to replace two aging army systems used to manage its inventory and its repair operations at the depots . in 1995 , we designated dod's business system modernization program as high risk , and continue to do so because these systems are fundamental to addressing long - standing weaknesses related to the management of contracts , finance , and the supply chain . you also asked us to monitor the actions taken by the army after the system has been deployed to ensure that its stated processes are adequate and have been effectively implemented . however , the effectiveness of the army's management processes could not be evaluated until the second deployment had occurred on may 14 , 2009 . moreover , we continue to report on business system investments that fail to effectively deliver promised benefits and capabilities on time and within budget . through 2009 , the army has obligated more than $1 billion to implement lmp , and estimates a total life cycle cost in excess of $2.6 billion to procure and operate the system . accordingly , the objective of this review was to evaluate the effectiveness of the army's management processes in enabling the second deployment sites to realize the full benefits of lmp . organizations that implement enterprise resource planning systems have faced substantial challenges because of the complexity of the endeavor , and the army is no exception . you asked us to continue monitoring the army's efforts to deploy lmp and evaluate the army's progress in addressing the issues that are critical to successful implementation . we previously assessed the army's preparation for the second deployment of lmp and reported that the army had begun to implement our prior recommendations related to past issues on data conversion , billing and collection , requirements management and testing , and independent verification and validation . lmp was originally scheduled to be completed by 2005 , but the army delayed fielding lmp because of the significant problems faced by the first deployment sites — the communications - electronics command and tobyhanna army depot — in july 2003 , which we detailed in several reports . the army has since determined that fielding of lmp would occur in two additional phases of deployment: the aviation and missile command in 2009 , which includes corpus christi army depot and letterkenny army depot , and the tank - automotive and armaments command , the joint munitions and lethality command , and the army sustainment command in october 2010 . the army expects that lmp will reduce redundant and stove piped information technology investments and assist in driving business transformation across the army , which will enable the army to supply and service the warfighter more quickly and cost effectively . we also reported that the army had implemented critical project management processes and controls that enabled the army to identify and understand the risks associated with making a deployment decision . in written comments on a draft of this report , dod stated that the army concurred with our recommendations and highlighted the corrective actions it is taking to ( 1 ) improve testing activities to obtain reasonable assurance that the data used by lmp can support the lmp processes , ( 2 ) improve training for lmp users , and ( 3 ) establish performance metrics that will enable the army to assess whether the deployment sites are able to use lmp as intended .
to examine the department of veterans affairs' ( va ) spending and workload for mental health services , we examined , for fiscal year 2009 , ( 1 ) va's spending for mental health services and ( 2 ) va's workload for mental health services . in this report , we examined , for fiscal year 2009 , ( 1 ) va's spending for mental health services and ( 2 ) va's workload for mental health services . the department of veterans affairs ( va ) operates one of the largest health care delivery systems in the nation . va provides , or pays for , a range of mental health services throughout its 21 health care networks for veterans with conditions such as depression , post - traumatic stress disorder ( ptsd ) , and substance use disorders . complete and accurate mental health spending and workload information can help congress effectively oversee va's mental health services and identify va's intended use of resources and workload . complete and accurate information on va's mental health spending and workload is also important for congressional oversight of va's mental health services . va's reporting of mental health spending and workload does not give congress a complete overview of va's mental health services and limits information available for congressional oversight . to enhance information available for congressional oversight and use by stakeholders on va's spending and workload for mental health services , we recommend that the secretary of veterans affairs take the following four actions: include workload information , including number of encounters and average daily census , by type of service , for mental health services provided in va settings primarily used for providing mental health services with its presentation of mental health spending in its annual congressional budget justification ; include spending and workload information , including number of encounters and average daily census , for mental health services that va pays non - va providers to deliver in community settings in its annual congressional budget justification , or in a separate , annual , publicly available report soon after the information becomes available ; include spending and workload information , including number of encounters and average daily census , for mental health services provided in va settings not primarily used for providing mental health services in its annual congressional budget justification , or in a separate , annual , publicly available report soon after the information becomes available ; and include workload information , including number of visits , for counseling services to address mental health issues provided by vet centers in its annual congressional budget justification , or in a separate , annual , publicly available report soon after the information becomes available . this information is used to conduct congressional oversight functions , for example determining the adequacy of va funding and assessing va's current efforts to address the mental health care of veterans . to effectively manage its resources and achieve its goal , va needs com plete and accurate information on the amount it spends each fiscal year to provide mental health services and on its mental health workload , which is the amount of mental health care va provides . we also recommend that the secretary of veterans affairs direct the under secretary for health to identify ways of incorporating spending information for vet center counseling services that address mental health issues in va's annual congressional budget justification or in a separate , annual , publicly available report soon after the information becomes available .
we focused on identifying companies that ( 1 ) were publicly traded prior to the termination of their pension plan ( s ) , ( 2 ) had significant unfunded pension liabilities on a termination basis ( $100 million or more ) , ( 3 ) had a high unfunded liability per plan participant ratio ( $10,000 or more per participant ) , and ( 4 ) had more than 5,000 plan participants . the pension benefit guaranty corporation's ( pbgc ) mission is to protect the pensions of almost 44 million american workers and retirees who participate in more than 29,000 defined benefit pension plans . given the recent decline in global financial markets and increase in corporate bankruptcies , pbgc's deficit will likely continue to increase , with implications for pbgc's financial position . in may 2009 , pbgc's acting director testified before the senate special committee on aging that through the first two quarters of 2009 , pbgc's estimated deficit had tripled to reach $33.5 billion , due largely to an increase in completed and probable plan terminations and a decrease in interest rates . in 2003 , gao placed pbgc on its high - risk list due , in part , to the significant underfunding of large plans in struggling industries . pbgc is responsible for the current and future pensions of about 1.3 million people even though their sponsor companies may no longer be in business . we focused on identifying companies that ( 1 ) were publicly traded prior to the termination of their pension plan ( s ) , ( 2 ) had significant unfunded pension liabilities on a termination basis ( $100 million or more ) , ( 3 ) had a high unfunded liability per plan participant ratio ( $10,000 or more per participant ) , and ( 4 ) had more than 5,000 plan participants . since some companies terminated multiple pension plans over a period of time , for those companies our review may cover more than 5 years . in 2006 , congress enacted the pension protection act ( ppa ) to address some identified deficiencies in funding requirements . we reviewed securities and exchange commission ( sec ) filings and pbgc documents disclosing missed contributions and plan underfunding at the time of termination . these plans are sponsored by a wide range of employers , including large companies with over 100,000 covered participants , and small ones which may have as few as a dozen participants . to determine pay and other compensation received by executives in the years preceding their company's termination of an underfunded defined benefit pension plan , we first obtained a database from the pension benefit guaranty corporation ( pbgc ) identifying companies that had terminated underfunded pension plans from 1999 to 2008 . to determine pay and other benefits received by selected executives , we first obtained data from pbgc to identify companies whose underfunded plans had been terminated in the past 10 years . we limited our review to the time period beginning 5 years prior to a company's first pension plan termination and ending with the company's final pension plan termination . the ceo received split - dollar life insurance benefits in some years in excess of $1 million .
and it is through the budget process that congress and the president reach agreement about the areas in which the federal government will be involved and in what way . the budget determines the fiscal policy stance of the government — that is , the relationship between spending and revenues . budgeting is the process by which we as a nation resolve the large number of often conflicting objectives that citizens seek to achieve through government action . my testimony today outlines some elements that could facilitate debate and contribute to efforts to place the government on a more sustainable long - term fiscal path . our increased awareness of the dangers presented by the long - term fiscal outlook leads to a focus on enforcement provisions within the budget process that can facilitate the debate and contribute to efforts to put the government on a more sustainable long - term fiscal path . while concerns about the strength of the economy may argue for phasing in policy changes over time , the longer action to change the government's long - term fiscal path is delayed , the greater the risk that the eventual changes will be more disruptive and more destabilizing . it is a pleasure to be here today as you consider the role and design of appropriate budget enforcement mechanisms in changing the government's fiscal path . we have all heard the statement “the process is not the problem ; the problem is the problem,” which in this case is the federal government's unsustainable fiscal path . but at the same time we want a process that presents congress and the american people with a framework to understand the significant choices and the information necessary to make the best - informed decisions about federal tax and spending policy . since our first simulations in 1992 , we have continued to report on the nature and drivers of the long - term imbalance and on mechanisms to help address the challenge . as the committee knows , we have been raising concerns about the long - term trajectory of the budget for nearly two decades . starting on the path to sustainability now offers many advantages . our first long - term simulation of the federal budget path was issued in 1992 for members of the finance and budget committees . focusing on the long term does not mean ignoring the near term . because these decisions are so important , we expect a great deal from our budget and budget process . carefully designed mechanisms , however , can enforce agreements that have already been made and ensure compliance . this is not easy . we want the budget to be clear and understandable . as in 1992 , our latest simulations continue to show that the federal budget is structurally unbalanced and on an unsustainable path . a process should 1. provide information about the long - term effect of decisions , both macro — linking fiscal policy to the long - term economic outlook — and micro — providing recognition of the long - term spending implications of government commitments 2. provide information and be structured to focus on important trade - offs such as the trade - off between investment and consumption spending .
as requested , after providing some context about records management in the federal government and the roles of federal agencies and the national archives and records administration ( nara ) , my statement will focus on describing the challenges of electronic records management and potential means of addressing these challenges . as you are aware , federal agencies are increasingly using electronic means to create , exchange , and store information , and in doing so , they frequently create federal records . i appreciate the opportunity to discuss critical issues surrounding electronic records management in the federal government . according to the federal records act , federal records are information in whatever form that documents government functions , activities , decisions , and other important transactions , and such records must be managed and preserved in accordance with the act . strong indications from the congress that records management needs more attention could also raise the priority among agency management . accordingly , we recommended that it develop a strategy for conducting systematic inspections of agency records management programs to ( 1 ) periodically assess agency progress in improving records management programs and ( 2 ) evaluate the efficacy of nara's governmentwide guidance .  ( a transition to electronic recordkeeping was under way at one of the four agencies , and two had long - term plans to use electronic recordkeeping. ) . however , we concluded that the new approach that nara initiated ( targeted assistance ) did not provide systematic and comprehensive information for assessing progress over time . we attributed weaknesses in agency e - mail management ( such as senior officials not conforming to regulations ) to factors including insufficient training and oversight regarding recordkeeping practices ( as well as the onerousness of handling large volumes of e - mail ) — similar to the effects of low priority described by sra . accordingly , to ensure that they have appropriate recordkeeping systems with which to manage and preserve their records , agencies are required to develop records management programs . nara concluded that the varying levels of agency compliance with its records management regulations and policies have implications for the government's effectiveness and efficiency in conducting its business , protecting citizens' rights , assuring government accountability , and preserving our national history . the federal records act gave nara responsibility for oversight of agency records management programs by , among other functions , making it responsible for conducting inspections or surveys of agencies' records and records management programs and practices ; conducting records management studies ; and reporting the results of these activities to the congress and omb . without adequate and readily accessible documentation , agencies may not have access to important operational information to make decisions and carry out their missions . also significant is the push for open government , which , by heightening the importance of agencies' providing information to the public , makes information a more central part of their missions and could help highlight the actual importance to agencies of actively managing their information . accordingly , we recommended that agencies with weaknesses in oversight , policies , and practices develop and apply oversight practices , such as reviews and monitoring of records management training and practices , that would be adequate to ensure that policies were effective and that staff were adequately trained and were implementing policies appropriately .
the department of defense ( dod ) and the department of veterans affairs ( va ) have long - standing efforts to increase sharing of data between their health information systems . as agreed with the committees of jurisdiction , our objectives for this fourth report are to determine the extent to which ( 1 ) dod and va developed and implemented electronic health record systems or capabilities that allowed for full interoperability by the september 30 , 2009 , deadline and ( 2 ) the interagency program office established by the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2008 is functioning as a single point of accountability for developing and implementing electronic health records . to determine the extent to which the department of defense ( dod ) and the department of veterans affairs ( va ) developed and implemented electronic health record systems or capabilities that allowed for full interoperability by the september 30 , 2009 , deadline , we reviewed our previous work on dod and va efforts to develop health information systems , interoperable health records , and interoperability standards to be implemented in federal health care programs . to expedite the exchange of electronic health information between the two departments , the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2008 included provisions directing dod and va to jointly develop and implement , by september 30 , 2009 , fully interoperable electronic health record systems or capabilities that are compliant with applicable federal interoperability standards . as a result , the interagency program office's ability to effectively provide oversight and management , including meaningful progress reporting on the delivery of interoperable capabilities , is jeopardized . further , the act directed us to assess dod's and va's progress in implementing the electronic health record systems and to semiannually report our results to the appropriate congressional committees . however , while the departments have progressively increased electronic health information sharing , questions have been raised about when and to what extent the departments intend such sharing capabilities to be fully achieved . furthermore , implementation of our recommendations will also better position the office to function as a single point of accountability for the delivery of interoperable electronic health records , which are intended to improve service members' and veterans' health care . if the departments continue to implement our recommendations , they should be better positioned to effectively manage their ongoing efforts to increase their interoperable electronic health record capabilities . if the departments fully implement our recommendations , they will have the comprehensive picture that they need for effectively defining and managing progress toward meeting their interoperability objectives and goals , including vler . such systems and capabilities are important for making patient information more readily available to health care providers in the departments , reducing medical errors , and streamlining administrative functions . in addition , the act established an interagency program office to be a single point of accountability for the departments' efforts . our january 2009 report noted that the departments had defined plans to further increase their sharing of electronic health information ; however , the plans did not contain results - oriented ( i.e. , objective , quantifiable , and measurable ) performance goals and measures that could be used as a basis to track and assess progress .
i am pleased to be here today to discuss the findings and recommendations from our march 2009 report on the international atomic energy agency's ( iaea ) technical cooperation ( tc ) program and the actions the department of state and iaea have taken to implement the recommendations in that report . in march 2011 , we reviewed documentation provided by state and iaea and interviewed state and department of energy ( doe ) officials to obtain updated information on actions taken to implement our 2009 recommendations . we also interviewed a doe official for his views regarding changes in the quantity and timeliness of information doe has received on tc proposals since our 2009 report and whether this information has improved doe's ability to assess proposed tc projects for potential proliferation concerns . it has the dual mission of promoting the peaceful uses of nuclear energy and verifying that nuclear technologies and materials intended for peaceful purposes are not diverted to weapons development efforts . to that end , the tc program helps iaea member states achieve their sustainable development priorities by furnishing them with relevant nuclear technologies and expertise , and the program plays a role in facilitating article iv of the treaty on the non - proliferation of nuclear weapons ( npt ) , which affirms that all states party to the treaty have a right to participate in the exchange of equipment , materials , and scientific and technological information for peaceful uses of nuclear energy . through the tc program , iaea has supported the development of nuclear technology for peaceful applications in a variety of areas , including energy , human health , food and agriculture , and nuclear safety . the tc program is a main pillar of iaea's mission to promote the peaceful uses of nuclear energy . iaea is an independent international organization based in vienna , austria , affiliated with the united nations . in 2007 , the tc program disbursed over $93 million in nuclear technical assistance to 122 countries and territories . proliferation concerns about the tc program have persisted because of the assistance it has provided to certain countries , including four countries — cuba , iran , sudan , and syria — that the united states has designated as state sponsors of terrorism , and because nuclear equipment , technology , and expertise can be dual - use — capable of serving peaceful purposes , such as the production of medical isotopes , but also useful in contributing to nuclear weapons development . the united states participates as a donor and is the largest financial contributor to the tc program , providing approximately 25 percent of its budget , or approximately $19.8 million , in 2007 . we also reviewed documentation provided by state and iaea concerning our recommendations and the steps taken to implement them . all iaea member states are eligible for tc assistance ; however , not all countries request assistance . despite its disagreement with our matter for congressional consideration , state has taken our other 2009 report recommendations seriously and has communicated directly with iaea officials on their potential implementation . in its comments on our 2009 report , state objected to the matter for a number of reasons , noting that ( 1 ) it would be counterproductive to a separate recommendation we made in the report encouraging all states to pay their full share to the tcf ; ( 2 ) it would not stop tc projects in targeted countries because tcf funding is fungible ; ( 3 ) congress has exempted iaea contributions from this type of proportionate withholding ; ( 4 ) none of the tc projects in state sponsors of terrorism have been shown to have contributed to a wmd program ; ( 5 ) there are adequate safeguards within iaea's secretariat to prevent tc projects from contributing to a wmd program ; and ( 6 ) it would negatively impact the ability of the united states to achieve other critical objectives within iaea .
within the department of health and human services ( hhs ) , cdc is responsible for promoting the health and well - being of the u.s. population , including creating policies to prevent unintentional injuries among children and adolescents and to minimize the consequences of these injuries . other federal agencies that have responsibilities for promoting the health and wellness of children and youth are the department of education ( education ) and the consumer product safety commission ( cpsc ) . hhs's health resources and services administration ( hrsa ) is responsible for strengthening the maternal and child health infrastructure in concert with states , communities , and private partners , including promoting children's health and increasing access to comprehensive services for patients with severe head injuries . several federal agencies have responsibility for working to promote the health and wellness of children and youth , such as by developing programs for the prevention or management of injuries . hhs's national institutes of health ( nih ) is responsible for conducting and supporting medical research to improve health and save lives , including developing strategies to prevent childhood illness and death and developing techniques and technologies for the rehabilitation of individuals with physical disabilities resulting from injuries , such as concussion .  ( 4 ) what are the recommendations of voluntary nationwide guidelines for the management of concussion incurred in high school sports ? .  ( 3 ) what are the components of key state laws regarding the management of concussion incurred in high school sports ? . concussion is an injury to the brain that results in the temporary loss of normal brain function and can have serious , long - term consequences .  ( 2 ) what federal programs are directed specifically at the prevention of concussion incurred in high school sports ? . concussion among athletes has recently received increased attention , and the long - term effects of concussion among professional football players has been the focus of several congressional hearings . education has responsibility for administering programs that promote the health and well - being of students , including a discretionary grant program related to physical education . we also conducted interviews with federal officials and experts from organizations that conduct work in the area of high school athletics or sports medicine to obtain assistance in identifying relevant data sources and to obtain information about the strengths and limitations of existing data sources . more than 7.5 million high school students participated in high school sports in 2008-2009 , according to the national federation of state high school associations ( nfhs ) . the three key state laws regarding the management of concussion that were identified by federal officials and experts all include requirements related to concussion education and athletes' return to play . an athlete who sustains a repeat concussion before the brain recovers from the first — within hours , days , or weeks — may recover more slowly or may have increased likelihood of long - term consequences . all five sets of guidelines contain similar recommendations for assessing concussion and managing the athlete , including making return - to - play decisions . research has also shown that children and adolescents are more likely than adults to sustain a concussion and take longer to recover from one , although the reasons for this difference remain unclear .
data from the census — a constitutionally mandated effort — are used to apportion seats in the congress , redraw congressional districts , help allocate more than $400 billion in federal aid to state and local governments , and redraw local political boundaries . group quarters consist of college dormitories , prisons , nursing homes , and other facilities typically owned or managed by an entity providing housing , services , or both for the residents . as requested , my remarks today will focus on ( 1 ) the extent to which the bureau has strengthened its procedures for counting group quarters compared to the 2000 census and ( 2 ) particular challenges and opportunities for an accurate group quarters count in brooklyn . i am pleased to be here today at the brooklyn borough hall to discuss the u.s. census bureau's ( bureau ) efforts to conduct an accurate count of people living in dwellings known as group quarters as part of the 2010 census . thus , for brooklyn , as with all localities , an incomplete count could have implications for political representation and getting its fair share of federal assistance . my testimony today is based on our completed and ongoing reviews of the bureau's efforts to build an accurate address list , including address canvassing , where temporary census employees go door - to - door verifying addresses , and an initial group quarters operation called group quarters validation , where the bureau determines whether an address is either a group quarters or conventional housing unit . brooklyn's range of group quarters — including colleges , hospitals , convents , and correctional facilities — only add to the bureau's enumeration challenges within the borough . because of brooklyn's demographic diversity and other socioeconomic factors , the bureau has identified a number of sections of brooklyn as particularly hard to count . census data are also used for planning purposes by the public and private sectors . for both reviews , we analyzed key documents , including plans , procedures , and guidance for the selected activities , and interviewed cognizant bureau officials at headquarters and local census offices . while a few miscounted households might not seem particularly problematic , especially in a nation of more than 300 million people , an accurate enumeration is in fact critical . mr. chairman , with little more than a month remaining until census day , the bureau's efforts to enumerate group quarters generally appear to be on track and more robust compared to similar efforts for the 2000 census , better positioning the bureau for a complete and accurate headcount . during the first of the three group quarters operations ( group quarters validation ) , approximately 25,000 temporary workers identified over 240,000 group quarters facilities from a workload of over 2 million potential group quarters in both the united states and puerto rico . ensure that census workers have knowledge of neighborhood culture and living arrangements and possess the language skills to reach out to residents with limited english proficiency . the bureau developed and tested new procedures to address the difficulties it had in identifying and counting this population during the 2000 census . during the 2000 census , for a variety of reasons , group quarters were sometimes counted more than once , missed , or included in the wrong location .
specifically , my comments will focus on ( 1 ) the extent to which db plans have invested in hedge funds and private equity , ( 2 ) challenges that such plans face in investing in hedge funds and private equity , ( 3 ) steps that plan sponsors can take to address these challenges , and ( 4 ) the implications of these challenges for plan sponsors and the federal government . much has happened in the financial markets since we issued three reports in 2008 — one that addressed defined benefit ( db ) pension plan investments in hedge funds and private equity , another that addressed federal oversight and other issues regarding hedge funds exclusively , and a third that addressed private equity funds . specifically , this project — being conducted for the ranking member of the subcommittee on health , employment , labor and pensions of the house committee on education and the workforce — seeks to assess the extent to which db plans have realized desired benefits from investing in hedge funds and private equity , and what actions they may have taken in response to lessons learned over the last 5 years . as you know , millions of americans rely on retirement savings plans for their financial well - being in retirement . according to a 2009 industry survey , most hedge fund strategies produced double - digit losses in 2008 , and hedge funds saw approximately $70 billion in redemptions between june and november 2008 . hedge funds were deeply affected by the financial market events of 2008 . nevertheless , many of these investments have rebounded , and a 2010 industry survey of institutional investors suggests that these investors continue to be committed to investing in hedge funds , but with a shifting set of objectives and criteria . my statement today is based primarily on findings from our 2008 report on private and public sector db pension plan investments in hedge funds and private equity , and a subsequent 2010 testimony that we have updated to reflect more recent data . we obtained and analyzed data on the extent of pension plan investments in hedge funds and private equity from private organizations such as greenwich associates and pensions & investments . in conducting our prior work , we reviewed relevant literature and survey data and conducted in - depth interviews with pension plan representatives and industry experts . in light of these challenges , and as predecessors to this 2011 erisa advisory council have concluded , the department of labor ( labor ) can play a role in helping to ensure that plans fulfill their employee retirement income security act of 1974 ( erisa ) fiduciary duties when investing in hedge funds and private equity . these plans were selected based on several criteria , including the range of investment in hedge funds and private equity and the amount of total plan assets . in addition , we currently have work under way examining db plans' recent experiences investing in these vehicles . we expect to issue a report on this work early next year . for example , we stated that labor's employee benefits security administration ( ebsa ) could outline the implications of a hedge fund's or fund of funds' limited transparency on the fiduciary duty of prudent oversight .
i appreciate the opportunity to appear before the subcommittee to discuss our report , which is being released today , on the actions that the department of homeland security ( dhs ) has taken towards integrating its various management processes , systems , and people , both within and across areas such as information technology , financial management , acquisition , and human capital , as well as in its administrative services . subsequently , the implementing recommendations of the 9 / 11 commission act of 2007 ( 9 / 11 commission act ) required dhs to develop a strategy for management integration . these activities are primarily led by the under secretary for management ( usm ) , departmental management chiefs , and management chiefs in dhs's seven components . we also reviewed dhs's performance goals and measures for fiscal years 2008 and 2009 , and assessed these goals and measures against government performance and results act of 1993 ( gpra ) requirements to determine the extent to which they provided a framework for assessing management integration across the department . it is critically important that dhs work to unify and strengthen its management functions because the effectiveness of these functions will ultimately affect its ability to fulfill its various missions . after the department was first created , you asked us to assess the status of dhs's management integration . dhs could also improve the extent to which it is measuring its progress on management integration , and holding its management chiefs accountable for implementing management integration . in particular , dhs officials identified ( 1 ) departmentwide documents that provide guidance that relate to management integration across the department , such as dhs's integrated strategy for high risk management and management directorate strategic plan ; and ( 2 ) documents for management of functional areas . for example , the transformation and systems consolidation ( tasc ) initiative is the department's current effort to consolidate its financial management , acquisition , and asset management systems . without such a set of measures , dhs cannot assess its progress in implementing and achieving management integration both within and across its functional areas . to address the extent to which dhs developed a management integration strategy , we assessed whether dhs documents and plans included the characteristics recommended in our 2005 report for a management integration strategy , which required that the strategy: look across the initiatives within each of the management functional units ; clearly identify the critical links that must occur among these initiatives ; identify trade - offs and set priorities ; set implementation goals and a time line to monitor the progress of these initiatives to ensure the necessary links occur when needed ; and identify potential efficiencies , and ensure that they are achieved . we also recommended that the under secretary take several actions to implement existing performance management mechanisms — such as having the departmental management chiefs provide written input into component chiefs' performance plans and evaluations , and strengthening linkages between department goals and objectives in individual performance plans for component management chiefs — to ensure that the management directorate can exercise its authority and leadership to implement a management integration strategy . we recommended that once the strategy is developed , dhs's usm should establish performance measures to assess progress made in achieving departmentwide management integration .
in response to the crisis , congress passed the dodd - frank wall street reform and consumer protection act ( dodd - frank act ) in 2010 , which includes numerous reforms to strengthen oversight of financial services firms and consolidate certain consumer protection responsibilities in the bureau of consumer financial protection ( cfpb ) . the dodd - frank act requires or authorizes various federal agencies to issue hundreds of regulations to implement its reforms . our objectives in this report were to examine ( 1 ) the regulatory analyses , including benefit - cost analyses , federal financial regulators have performed to assess the potential impact of selected final rules issued pursuant to the dodd - frank act ; ( 2 ) how federal financial regulators consulted with each other in implementing selected final rules issued pursuant to the dodd - frank act to avoid duplication or conflicts ; and ( 3 ) what is known about the impact of the final dodd - frank act regulations . the crisis threatened the stability of the u.s. financial system and the solvency of some large financial institutions , prompting the u.s. government to take extraordinary steps to moderate the adverse economic impacts . as agencies have turned their attention to developing and implementing these regulations , some industry associations and others have raised concerns about the potential impact of the regulations , individually and cumulatively , on financial markets and both financial and nonfinancial institutions . specifically , we are directed to analyze ( 1 ) the impact of regulations on the financial marketplace , including whether relevant federal agencies are applying sound benefit - cost analysis in promulgating rules ; ( 2 ) efforts to avoid duplicative or conflicting rulemakings , information requests , and examinations ; and ( 3 ) other related matters that we deem to be appropriate . the recent u.s. financial crisis is often described as the worst since the great depression , resulting in the loss of trillions of dollars in household wealth . 12866 ) requires executive agencies to assess anticipated costs and benefits not only of the proposed regulatory action but also of any alternatives . this report does not independently assess the impact of the dodd - frank act regulations because ( 1 ) most of the required regulations have not been finalized or the effective dates of finalized rules have not been reached or ( 2 ) for the final regulations that have reached their effective dates , adequate time has not elapsed to assess their impacts . however , this executive order does not apply to independent regulatory agencies , including the banking , futures , and securities regulators ( i.e. , federal financial regulators ) . agencies can anticipate and evaluate the consequences of their regulations through regulatory analysis . to maximize the usefulness of the required retrospective reviews , we recommend that the federal financial regulatory agencies develop plans that determine how they will measure the impact of dodd - frank act regulations — for example , determining how and when to collect , analyze , and report needed data . such planning efforts are important to help ensure that fsoc can not only accurately measure the impact of significant dodd - frank act regulations but also efficiently coordinate with its members to leverage their retrospective reviews .
the coast guard authorization act of 2010 required that that the transportation worker identification credential ( twic ) reader pilot report include ( 1 ) the findings of the pilot program with respect to key technical and operational aspects of implementing twic technologies in the maritime sector ; ( 2 ) a comprehensive listing of the extent to which established metrics were achieved during the pilot program ; and ( 3 ) an analysis of the viability of those technologies for use in the maritime environment , including any challenges to implementing those technologies and strategies for mitigating identified challenges . given dhs's challenges in implementing twic over the past decade , at a minimum , the assessment should include a comprehensive comparison of alternative credentialing approaches , which might include a more decentralized approach , for achieving twic program goals . over $23 million had been made available to pilot participants from two federal emergency management agency ( fema ) grant programs — the port security grant program and the transit security grant program . ports , waterways , and vessels handle billions of dollars in cargo annually , and an attack on our nation's maritime transportation system could have serious consequences . we recommended , among other things , that dhs ( 1 ) assess twic program internal controls to identify needed corrective actions ; ( 2 ) assess the twic program's effectiveness ; and ( 3 ) use the information from the assessment as the basis for evaluating the costs , benefits , security risks , and corrective actions needed to implement the twic program in a manner that will meet program objectives and mitigate existing security risks . the department of homeland security's ( dhs ) transportation worker identification credential ( twic ) program was initiated in december 2001 in response to the september 11 , 2001 , terrorist attacks . instead , congress should require that the secretary of homeland security first complete an assessment that evaluates the effectiveness of using twic with readers for enhancing port security , as we recommended in our may 2011 report , and then use the results of this assessment to promulgate a final regulation as appropriate . maritime workers , including longshoremen , mechanics , truck drivers , and merchant mariners , access secure areas of the nation's estimated 16,400 maritime - related transportation facilities and vessels , such as cargo container and cruise ship terminals , each day while performing their jobs . securing transportation systems and maritime - related facilities requires balancing security to address potential threats while facilitating the flow of people and goods that are critical to the u.s. economy and necessary for supporting international commerce . the depth and pervasiveness of the twic program's planning and implementation challenges require a reassessment of dhs's efforts to improve maritime security through the issuance of a u.s. government - sponsored twic card and card readers . within dhs , the transportation security administration ( tsa ) and the u.s. coast guard ( uscg ) jointly administer the twic program . this limited tsa's ability to assess performance results by various reader and access control system characteristics . thus , a comprehensive comparison of alternative credentialing approaches , which could include a more decentralized approach , would provide the necessary assurance that dhs is pursuing the most effective option for enhancing maritime security .
in response to ongoing concerns with ides performance , this report provides information on ( 1 ) the extent to which dod and va are meeting ides performance goals , and ( 2 ) steps dod and va are taking to improve ides performance . this could include issuing guidance to facilities or developing best practices on preventing and correcting data entry errors ; and developing reporting capabilities in vta to alert facilities to potential issues with their data . in conducting our review of the integrated disability evaluation system ( ides ) , our objectives were to examine ( 1 ) the extent to which the departments of defense ( dod ) and veterans affairs ( va ) are meeting ides performance goals , and ( 2 ) steps dod and va are taking to improve ides performance . in response to concerns that wounded , ill , or injured servicemembers had to undergo two complex disability evaluations — first by the department of defense ( dod ) then by the department of veterans affairs ( va ) — dod and va jointly designed a new integrated disability evaluation process to expedite the delivery of benefits to servicemembers . in november 2007 , dod and va began pilot testing the integrated disability evaluation system ( ides ) at three military treatment facilities in the washington , d.c. area , and expanded the number of sites over time . 2 ) to improve dod's ability to measure servicemembers' satisfaction with the ides process , we recommend that the secretary of defense develop alternative approaches for collecting more meaningful and representative information in a cost effective manner . past gao work highlighted challenges dod and va experienced while piloting the ides and recommended a number of improvements . dod has also begun rethinking its approach to determining servicemember satisfaction with ides . as of october 1 , 2011 , ides had replaced the military services' existing — or “legacy” — disability evaluation systems for almost all new disability cases . we assessed the reliability of these data and analyzed them to look for changes in performance over time ; factors that may help or hinder performance ; and relationships between servicemember satisfaction and case outcomes and timeliness . for instance , we reported in december 2010 that insufficient staff and logistical challenges contributed to delays in completing ides cases and recommended the agencies take steps to ensure adequate staffing levels and develop a systematic process for monitoring caseloads . meanwhile , the dod - led business process review should identify and ultimately eliminate any redundant or inefficient information systems for tracking cases as well as for other ides purposes . servicemembers who are injured in war or as the result of accidents and illnesses may face a difficult transition as they leave the military and become veterans . finally , providing local facilities the capability to track and generate reports on the status of their cases is long overdue and may empower local staff to better address challenges . 3 ) to ensure that ides management decisions continue to be based upon reliable and accurate data , we recommend that the secretaries of defense and veterans affairs work together to develop a strategy to continuously monitor and remedy issues with vta timeliness information .
our objectives were to determine ( 1 ) how fannie mae and freddie mac's ( the enterprises ) multifamily loan activities , products , and loan performance have changed over time ; ( 2 ) the enterprises' role in the multifamily housing financing marketplace and the extent to which they have met their affordable housing goals ; and ( 3 ) how the enterprises' credit standards and delinquency rates compare with those of other mortgage capital sources and how they have managed credit risk associated with their multifamily housing activities . specifically , this report discusses ( 1 ) how the enterprises' multifamily loan activities , products , and loan performance have changed over time , ( 2 ) the enterprises' role in the multifamily housing financing marketplace and the extent to which they have met their affordable housing goals , and ( 3 ) how the enterprises' credit standards and delinquency rates compare with those of other mortgage capital sources and how they have managed credit risk associated with their multifamily housing activities . most of the discussion about the future of the enterprises has focused on their role in supporting financing for single - family homes , but they have played a larger role in providing financing for multifamily properties ( those with five or more units ) since the financial crisis of 2007 . congress established fannie mae and freddie mac in 1968 and 1989 , respectively , as for - profit , shareholder - owned corporations.primary mission that has been to stabilize and assist the u.s. secondary mortgage market and facilitate the flow of mortgage credit . on september 6 , 2008 , the federal housing finance agency ( fhfa ) placed fannie mae and freddie mac into conservatorship out of concern that the deteriorating financial condition of the two government - sponsored enterprises ( the enterprises ) threatened the stability of financial markets.while the conservatorships can remain in place indefinitely as efforts are undertaken to stabilize the enterprises and restore confidence in financial markets , fhfa has said that the conservatorships were not intended to be permanent . through 2008 , the department of housing and urban development ( hud ) set the goals for each year ; fhfa currently does so . fhfa also identified deficiencies with fannie mae's information systems in 2009 and 2010 . congress and the executive branch will face difficult decisions on how to restructure the enterprises and promote housing opportunities while limiting risks to taxpayers and the stability of financial markets . we interviewed officials from hud's federal housing administration ( fha ) , the department of agriculture's rural housing service ( rhs ) , the national council of state housing agencies ( ncsha ) , the national association of affordable housing lenders , the commercial real estate finance council , and the american council of life insurers ( acli ) to obtain information on the key credit standards generally used by institutions they represent and their loan performance . in 2011 , fhfa found that fannie mae needed to improve its risk - management practices for multifamily loans . in its 2010 annual report to congress , fhfa continued to report on deficiencies with freddie mac's asset - management function , including that it was poorly managed and lacked the necessary process and controls to identify , evaluate , and control problem assets .
the objectives of our report were to determine ( 1 ) the extent to which the department of defense ( dod ) has policies for identifying and responding to possible human exposures to environmental hazards on its installations ; ( 2 ) what programs currently exist to provide health care and compensation to individuals for adverse health conditions resulting from environmental exposures on military installations and any factors that may affect these individuals' access to health care or compensation ; and ( 3 ) the features of alternative federal programs that provide medical benefits or compensation to large groups of individuals affected by a specific environmental exposure , which may be considered as possible options in the design of any future programs for individuals harmed by environmental hazards .  ( 3 ) provide guidance on what actions , if any , dod should take to identify and address possible health risks faced by individuals from past exposures at military installations . section 314 of the ike skelton national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2011 set out a number of congressional findings related to military environmental exposures and directed gao to conduct an assessment of possible exposures of individuals to environmental hazards while living and working on military installations.that mandate , our objectives were to determine ( 1 ) the extent to which dod has policies for identifying and responding to possible human exposures to environmental hazards on its installations , ( 2 ) what programs currently exist to provide health care and compensation to individuals for health conditions resulting from environmental exposures on military installations and any factors that may affect how these individuals obtain access to health care or compensation , and ( 3 ) what features of alternative federal programs that provide medical benefits or compensation to large groups of individuals affected by a specific environmental exposure may be considered as possible options in the design of any future programs for individuals harmed by environmental hazards . without these improvements , dod is missing opportunities to ensure that vital public health issues are adequately addressed . congress has also expressed interest regarding how the u.s. government provides compensation and medical benefits for those who may have suffered adverse health effects from their exposure to such hazards . however , the department of defense's ( dod ) response in identifying , studying , addressing , and communicating these three environmental hazards has raised congressional concerns in general about how dod responds to possible individual exposures to environmental hazards on its installations . dod only recently revised its policy on health surveillance to include dependents when collecting data that could improve its ability to address health risks that may have resulted from environmental exposures . specifically: dod stated that it will review its procedures for tracking dod's responses to agency for toxic substances and disease registry recommendations and , if needed , make the appropriate changes to its tracking system .  ( 2 ) establish a policy that identifies when installations should consider requesting public health assessments in addition to the initial assessments at national priorities list sites . therefore , we believe dod needs to make improvements to its tracking system . dod stated that its cleanup policy is adequate because the comprehensive environmental response , compensation , and liability act does not require responsible parties to identify individuals who may have been exposed to contamination in the past .
postal service ( usps ) was unable to make its statutorily required payments of $5.5 billion in fiscal year 2011 and $5.6 billion in fiscal year 2012 to prefund retiree health benefits . implementing strategies and options to better align costs with revenues may better enable usps to be in a financial position to prefund its retiree health benefit liability for its over one million active and retired postal employees and their beneficiaries . this report ( 1 ) describes the status and financial outlook of the postal service retiree health benefits fund ( psrhbf ) , ( 2 ) analyzes how alternative proposals for funding retiree health benefits could affect future usps payments and unfunded liabilities , and ( 3 ) determines key considerations for policymakers assessing the alternative proposals or other approaches . usps has also proposed withdrawing from the federal employees health benefits program ( fehbp ) and administering its own health care plan for its employees and retirees . this report ( 1 ) describes the status and financial outlook of the postal service retiree health benefits fund , ( 2 ) analyzes how alternative approaches for funding retiree health benefits could affect future usps payments and unfunded liabilities , and ( 3 ) determines key considerations for policymakers assessing the alternative approaches . the postal accountability and enhancement act ( paea ) required usps to make fixed annual payments to begin prefunding the cost of future retiree health benefits accrued by current employees and retirees . in previous reports , we have provided strategies and options , to both reduce costs and enhance revenues , that congress could consider to better align usps costs with revenues and address constraints and legal restrictions that limit usps's ability to reduce costs and improve efficiency . because of significant financial difficulties , the u.s . the act required annual payments ( ranging from $5.4 billion to $5.8 billion per year ) from fiscal years 2007 through 2016 to be deposited into a new fund established in the u.s. treasury and administered by the office of personnel management ( opm ) called the postal service retiree health benefits fund ( psrhbf ) . as of the end of fiscal year 2012 , opm estimated that usps's total health benefit liability was approximately $94 billion — of which for future and current retirees$48 billion was unfunded and $46 billion was in the psrhbf . while usps may have limited control of its revenue stream because of advances in technological communication , it is important that usps reduce its expenses to avoid even greater financial losses , repay its outstanding debt , and increase capital for investment . we have suggested that congress must take action to address the uncertainty related to: 1 ) usps's inability to meet the current retiree health prefunding 2 ) reducing the unfunded retiree health benefit liability over time , 3 ) determining the proper allocation of costs between current and 4 ) enacting comprehensive postal reform legislation that would improve prospects for usps's long - term financial viability . projected declines in mail volumes and revenues will continue to exacerbate usps's difficulties in paying for the cost of its retiree health benefits . we have previously reported that usps cannot be financially viable until congress and usps address the cash flow problems that limit its immediate prefunding capability while also addressing how to pay for the long - term cost of usps's unfunded retiree health benefit liability .
for this report , we evaluated the extent to which ( 1 ) dod developed and implemented a plan to achieve cost savings and efficiencies at the joint bases and has tracked the costs , estimated savings , and efficiencies from joint basing ; ( 2 ) joint base common standards provide a common framework to manage and plan for installation support services at the joint bases ; and ( 3 ) the joint bases or dod have a process in place to consistently identify and address any implementation challenges to facilitate achievement of joint basing goals . gao has designated department of defense ( dod ) support infrastructure as a high - risk area , and identified installation support as one key support infrastructure category where opportunities existed for savings . in order to assess the extent to which the department of defense ( dod ) developed and implemented a plan to achieve cost savings and efficiencies at the joint bases and tracked the costs , savings , and efficiencies resulting from joint basing , we analyzed dod guidance related to joint base implementation , specifically looking for any measures or reporting processes on efficiencies and cost savings . in originally citing support infrastructure as high risk , we stated that reducing the cost of excess infrastructure activities was critical to making use of scarce resources and maintaining high levels of military capabilities . the brac commission approved a modified version of dod's recommendation , which the commission found more fully reflected statutory selection criteria and dod's force structure plan . in a subsequent recommendation submitted to the 2005 base realignment and closure ( brac ) commission , dod proposed that the department consolidate 26 military installations into 12 joint bases to take advantage of opportunities for efficiencies arising from such consolidation and elimination of duplicate support services on bases located close to one another . as a result , in 2009 dod significantly reduced its estimated 20-year cost savings projection from $2.3 billion to about $273 million . however , we also noted that despite the potential for reducing base operating support costs through greater reliance on interservice - type agreements , differing service traditions and cultures and concern over losing direct control of support assets had caused commanders to resist such measures . as we believed in 1997 and continue to believe , dod needs to improve its ability to update savings from brac recommendations . we are conducting this follow - on review under the comptroller general's authority to conduct evaluations on his own initiative in order to provide updated information on dod's progress in achieving its joint basing objectives . our most recent high - risk report , issued in february 2011 , continued to designate dod's management of its support infrastructure as an area of high risk . through updates to our high - risk series reports , we have continued to monitor dod's ability to achieve economies of scale and savings by consolidating and eliminating duplicate installation support services . to enable dod to achieve cost savings and efficiencies and to track its progress toward achieving these goals , we recommend that the secretary of defense direct the deputy under secretary of defense ( installations and environment ) to take the following two actions: develop and implement a plan that provides measurable goals linked to achieving savings and efficiencies at the joint bases and provide guidance to the joint bases that directs them to identify opportunities for cost savings and efficiencies .
specifically , this report addresses ( 1 ) dod's approach for fuel demand management , including at forward - deployed locations in afghanistan ; ( 2 ) the extent to which dod has initiatives to promote fuel efficiency at forward - deployed locations in afghanistan and efforts to coordinate and collaborate on such initiatives ; and ( 3 ) dod's efforts to measure the results of its fuel demand management initiatives and establish a baseline measure of fuel consumption in afghanistan . dod has made progress in establishing visibility and accountability for fuel demand management since our 2009 report by making organizational changes and issuing an operational energy strategy ( operational energy strategy ) and related operational energy strategy implementation plan ( implementation plan ) to provide direction for dod's overall fuel demand management efforts , including efforts at forward - deployed locations in afghanistan . the department of defense ( dod ) depends heavily on petroleum - based fuel to sustain its forward - deployed locations around the world — particularly at remote locations that are not connected to local power grids and must rely on fuel - consuming generators for heating , cooling , lighting , and other base support activities . in addition , global oil supply routes flow through unstable regions , which can pose supply vulnerabilities , and sharp rises in fuel prices have increased dod's operating costs at a time when the department faces mandated reductions to defense spending . at a time when the federal government faces increasing fiscal challenges and competition across the government for discretionary funds , these efforts by dod could help maximize the benefits of its energy efficiency investments for forward - deployed locations and better position the department for future missions . dod's operational energy strategy established three overarching operational energy goals to: ( 1 ) reduce demand for energy in military operations , ( 2 ) expand and secure energy supplies , and ( 3 ) build energy security into the future force , and dod has begun to take steps to establish metrics to measure progress toward these goals . to further enhance dod's approach for managing fuel demand , including at forward deployed locations such as those in afghanistan , we recommend that the secretary of defense direct the assistant secretary of defense for operational energy plans and programs , in consultation with the joint staff , combatant commanders , and military service components , to finalize and implement a systematic approach that includes establishing a mechanism to identify and track fuel demand management initiatives that have been fielded , or are in the research and development phase to ensure information concerning these efforts is effectively shared across the services . in 2009 , we reported that each of the services had efforts planned or underway to reduce fuel demand , but these efforts were not well coordinated and dod lacked an effective approach for implementing its fuel demand management initiatives and maintaining sustained attention to fuel demand management at its forward - deployed locations . to help reduce its demand for fuel in military activities abroad , the services expect to spend approximately $4 billion over the next 5 years on operational energy initiatives . in 2011 , dod consumed almost 5 billion gallons of fuel in military operations worldwide , at a cost of approximately $17.3 billion .
the objectives of this report were to determine ( 1 ) to what extent does the federal emergency management agency ( fema ) have policies and procedures in place to govern the disaster assistance employee ( dae ) program ; ( 2 ) to what extent are fema's human capital controls over the dae workforce consistent with internal control standards ; and ( 3 ) to what extent does fema's dae training incorporate key attributes of effective training and development programs . since fiscal year 2007 , there have been 376 federal major disaster declarations in which the federal emergency management agency ( fema ) has obligated $33 billion in major disaster assistance payments . to meet its mission , fema relies heavily upon its cadre of disaster assistance employees ( dae ) , a reserve workforce that interacts with disaster survivors . the annual number of federal major disaster declarations has grown 44 percent from fiscal years 2007 to 2011 . fema is tasked with leading the nation in mitigating , responding to , and recovering from major disasters , both natural and manmade . the department of homeland security ( dhs ) did not provide comments on gao's recommendations ; however , in 2008 fema issued its strategic human capital plan , 2008-2012 , intended to address this recommendation . daes support joint field office ( jfo ) leadership that administers fema's disaster assistance programs , such as individual assistance ( ia ) and public assistance ( pa ) . moreover , insufficient detail is provided related to fema's plans for three of the recommendations ; thus it is not clear to what extent these plans will fully address the three recommendations . fema has taken a number of steps to address recommendations made by us and the dhs oig , but key recommendations remain unaddressed as discussed later in this report . moreover , the dhs office of inspector general ( oig ) reported that , in the aftermath of hurricane katrina in 2005 , fema new hires did not receive adequate training during fema's accelerated orientation process and fema did not have a central training records management system . further , the dhs oig noted that the shortage of qualified staff for key positions responding to hurricane katrina negatively impacted the effectiveness of fema's response and recovery operations . fema has taken actions to make policies and procedures readily available to reservists ; however , fema did not provide details about the mechanisms it has established for its regions to monitor dae policies and procedures or daes' implementation of fema's disaster policies . however , fema has not identified specifics to these broad plans that allowed us to evaluate the effectiveness of its planned actions . develop a systematic process to track training costs . the actions dhs reported are important first steps ; however , fema's implementation plans do not fully address one of the seven recommendations , as discussed below . fema's decentralized structure allows for flexibility in responding to disasters ; however , fema does not monitor how the regions implement dae policies , and how daes implement disaster policies and procedures . dhs concurred with the recommendations and indicated that fema has taken or is taking steps to address them .
over the past three decades , federal agencies and state and local governments have established a number of entities ( e.g. , units , centers , and task forces ) nationwide that may — in all or in part — collect , process , analyze , or disseminate information in support of law enforcement and counterterrorism - related efforts . the federal government — specifically , the department of justice ( doj ) , the department of homeland security ( dhs ) , and the office of national drug control policy ( ondcp ) — operates or , through grant funding or personnel , supports five types of these field - based information - sharing entities . sustaining a national information - sharing capability to efficiently and effectively gather , analyze , and disseminate law enforcement , public safety , and terrorism - related information is critical to our nation's efforts to combat criminal and terrorist threats . specifically , these include the following: joint terrorism task forces ( jttf ) , which are funded and managed by doj's federal bureau of investigation ( fbi ) , aim to prevent , preempt , deter , and investigate terrorism and related activities affecting the united states as well as to apprehend terrorists . this report addresses ( 1 ) the extent to which these field - based entities are distinct , fragmented , overlapping , or potentially duplicative ; ( 2 ) the extent to which doj , dhs , and ondcp hold these entities accountable for coordination and have assessed opportunities for coordination to reduce overlap and duplication and what practices , if any , select entities have reported using to coordinate and achieve efficiencies ; and ( 3 ) how , if at all , doj , dhs , and ondcp incorporate information they collect on the results that these field - based entities achieve when making funding decisions for them . we have previously reported that defining and articulating a common outcome ; developing mechanisms to monitor , evaluate , and report on results ; and reinforcing agency accountability for collaborative efforts through agency plans and reports can help enhance and sustain coordinated efforts among agencies . state and major urban area fusion centers ( fusion centers ) , which are funded through a variety of federal and state sources , including in part through dhs and doj grants , are state and locally - owned and operated to serve as intermediaries for sharing terrorism and other threat - related information between the federal government and state , local , tribal , territorial , and private sector homeland security partners . regional information sharing systems ( riss ) centers , which are funded through grants administered by doj's bureau of justice assistance ( bja ) , support regional law enforcement , public safety , and homeland security efforts to , among other things , combat major crimes and terrorist activity , and promote officer safety by linking federal , state , local , and tribal criminal justice agencies through secure communications and providing information - sharing resources and analytical and investigative support . the results of this assessment could be used by the agencies to provide recommendations or guidance to the entities to create coordinated governance boards or colocate entities , which can result in increased efficiencies through shared facilities and resources and reduced overlap through coordinated or collaborative products , activities , and services .
since the early 1990's , the federal judiciary ( judiciary ) and the general services administration ( gsa ) have undertaken a multibillion - dollar federal courthouse construction program . we recommended that gsa should: ( 1 ) ensure that courthouses are within their authorized size or notify congressional committees ; and that the judiciary should: ( 2 ) retain caseload projections to improve the accuracy of its 10-year judge planning and ( 3 ) establish and use courtroom - sharing policies based on scheduling and use data . we examined ( 1 ) the extent to which the judiciary's capital - planning process aligns with leading practices and provides information needed for informed decision making and ( 2 ) the extent to which courthouse projects recommended for funding in fiscal years 2014 to 2018 were assessed under the judiciary's current capital - planning process . specifically , 33 federal courthouses completed from 2000 to 2010 included 3.56 million square feet of extra space that cost an estimated $835 million to construct and $51 million annually to operate and maintain . however , rising costs and other budget priorities have slowed the construction program . to date this program has resulted in the completion of 78 new courthouses or annexes and 16 projects in various stages of development . in light of this program history and the federal government's current fiscal challenges , you asked us to review the judiciary's current plans for new courthouse construction . our recommendations have not yet been implemented . gsa and the judiciary agreed with the recommendations , but expressed concerns with gao's methodology and key findings . while the judiciary has made significant strides in improving its capital - planning process , most of the 12 projects listed on the 5-year plan are products of its former process . in addition , we found in 2010 that recent federal courthouses had been constructed larger than necessary because of poor planning , oversight , and inefficient courtroom use . current fiscal challenges also require that the federal government focus on essential projects . impose a moratorium on projects on the current 5-year plan until amp evaluations are completed for them and then request feasibility studies for courthouse projects with the highest urgency scores that qualify for new construction under the amp process . there is widespread agreement that the federal government faces formidable near - and long - term fiscal challenges . this should include linking the amp process to the judiciary's strategic plan and developing and sharing with decision makers a long - term capital investment plan . in the meantime , future 5- year plans should provide comprehensive information on new courthouse projects , including: a ) a summary of why each project qualifies for new construction and is more urgent than other projects , including information about how the amp process and other judiciary criteria for new courthouse construction were applied to the project ; b ) complete cost estimates of each project ; and c ) the alternatives to a new project that were considered , including courtroom - sharing , and why alternatives were deemed insufficient . it is possible that some of the 12 projects do not reflect the most urgent capital investment needs of the judiciary under its current criteria .
to further improve the visa fraud prevention process , we recommend that the secretary of state take the following two actions: ( 1 ) formulate a policy to systematically utilize anti - fraud resources available at the kentucky consular center , based on post workload and fraud trends , as determined by the department ; and ( 2 ) establish standardized training requirements for fraud prevention managers , to include training in advanced anti - fraud technologies , taking advantage of distance learning technologies , and establishing methods to track the extent to which requirements are met . this report examines ( 1 ) countries and visa categories subject to the most visa fraud ; ( 2 ) state's technologies and resources to combat fraud ; and ( 3 ) training requirements of state officials responsible for fraud prevention . this report examines ( 1 ) countries and visa categories subject to the most visa fraud ; ( 2 ) technologies and resources to combat fraud ; and ( 3 ) training requirements of state officials responsible for fraud prevention . the department of state's ( state ) visa issuance process is the first line of defense against fraudulent or unlawful entry into the united states . state issues visas for both temporary visitors ( referred to as nonimmigrant visas ) and those seeking to enter the united states as permanent immigrants ( referred to as immigrant visas ) . absent effective support and training , fraud prevention units may make uninformed decisions , thus enabling ineligible aliens , including potential terrorists , to gain admission to the united states . in recent years , state has taken steps to enhance the tools and services available to combat visa fraud , including the deployment of new anti - fraud technologies and resources improving state's ability to prescreen applications for indicators of fraud and to readily access information from prior visa applications . as a result , fraud prevention managers may not be fully equipped to detect and combat fraud . the evolving nature of fraud and increases in the volume of visas adjudicated require state to continuously update its anti - fraud efforts . in 2007 , we reported that the security of visas had been enhanced but more needed to be done to prevent their fraudulent use . to assess state's use of technologies and resources to combat fraud , we met with state's bureau of consular affairs office of consular systems and technology to review state's major data systems as well as the latest technological tools available to consular officers and fraud prevention managers , and we visited the kentucky consular center ( kcc ) to observe prescreening and anti - fraud activities . for example , state increased hiring of consular officers , revamped consular training with a focus on counterterrorism , and increased resources to combat visa fraud . state and dhs provided technical comments , which we incorporated as appropriate . citizenship and immigration service ( uscis ) , fraud detection national security directorate is responsible for detecting , pursuing , and deterring immigration benefit fraud , and identifying persons seeking benefits who pose a threat to national security and public safety . state seeks to identify and prevent attempts by applicants to obtain travel documents through unauthorized means , such as knowingly altering or using counterfeit identity documents or intentionally making false claims or statements .
over the longer term , such a strategy should include an analysis of medical services spending based on reliable and detailed agency - wide data , and should enable dod to identify opportunities to consolidate requirements and reduce costs . this report ( 1 ) describes the contracting practices used by the military departments to provide health care professional services and what is known about the cost effectiveness of these practices , ( 2 ) assesses the extent to which the military departments have consolidated their health care staffing requirements , ( 3 ) identifies the percentage of contract health care professionals at on - base and off - base facilities and discusses the extent to which the costs associated with care provided by these professionals can be compared , ( 4 ) describes the training requirements and experience of medical services contracting personnel , and ( 5 ) identifies the extent to which the military departments have policies or procedures that address legislated quality standards for contract health care professionals and for the staffing companies that provide them . the department of defense ( dod ) operates a large and complex health care system that employs more than 150,000 military , civilian , and contract personnel working in military hospitals and clinics , commonly referred to as military treatment facilities ( mtf ) . in addition , dod must balance the challenges posed by maintaining a health care system that meets the military's readiness needs while also making changes in its business and health care practices to control costs and improve effectiveness . the strategy should identify specific responsible organizations and timeframes , and should consist of both near - term and long - term components: in the near term , and to enable dod to assess the efficacy and impact of such a strategy , dod should identify a category of health care professionals or a multi - service market to pilot an approach to consolidating health care staffing requirements . dod's fiscal year 2014 budget request for health care is almost $50 billion , and is projected to increase substantially in the next few years . historical rates of cost growth in dod's military health system have been significantly higher than the corresponding rates in the national economy . section 726 of the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2012 ( ndaa for fy 2012 ) directed us to review the contracting activities of the military departments with respect to providing health care professional services to members of the armed forces , dependents , and retirees . to achieve additional cost savings and efficiencies through increased use of strategic sourcing , we are recommending that the secretary of defense develop and implement a dod - wide strategy to contract for health care professionals . dod stated that a shared services contracting subworking group will include this report and its recommendations in their comprehensive review of contracting strategies , governance , and processes . to address all objectives , we interviewed and obtained documentation , including contract data , from officials at 11 mtfs and the following organizations: army health care acquisition activity , navy medical logistics command , air force medical service , joint task force national capital region medical command ( jtf capmed ) , and dod's tricare management activity ( tma ) .
gao , national security: key challenges and solutions to strengthen interagency collaboration , gao - 10-822t ( washington , d.c.: june 9 , 2010 ) . among the key practices we identified were ( 1 ) defining and articulating a common federal outcome ; ( 2 ) establishing strategies that are mutually reinforcing or joint to help the agencies align their activities , core processes , and resources to accomplish their common outcome ; ( 3 ) agreeing on roles and responsibilities ; ( 4 ) establishing compatible policies , procedures , and other means to operate across agency boundaries ; and ( 5 ) including collaboration competencies in designing performance management systems and set performance expectations for collaboration to reinforce individual accountability for collaborative efforts . our objectives for this engagement were to ( 1 ) examine selected u.s. department of agriculture ( usda ) farm service agency ( fsa ) and small business administration ( sba ) disaster assistance programs and the types of small agricultural producers that they cover ; ( 2 ) identify the main factors , if any , that may limit small aquaculture and nursery producers' participation in disaster assistance from fsa and sba ; and ( 3 ) examine fsa and sba efforts to collaborate in providing disaster assistance to small aquaculture and nursery producers . develop a strategy to better formalize collaboration through means such as developing a memorandum of understanding on interagency collaboration and educating staff about the other agency's disaster assistance programs . farmers and other agricultural producers are exposed to natural disasters , such as droughts , floods , hurricanes , and tornadoes . small agricultural producers , which the u.s. department of agriculture ( usda ) describes as a diverse group that produces a range of food and fiber and that can include family farms , commodity producers , aquaculture ( such as farmed fish and shellfish ) producers , nursery producers ( such as trees and plants ) , and other farmers and ranchers . moreover , fsa's general lack of awareness about sba's disaster assistance programs and sba's limited understanding of the factors that might lead small aquaculture and nursery producers to repay their loans reduce both agencies' abilities to fully serve these producers . a new farm bill was being debated as of august 2012 , and the final bill may reauthorize some of these programs and may include retroactive assistance for damages resulting from natural disasters occurring after september 30 , 2011 . to help ensure that small aquaculture and nursery producers are aware of the disaster assistance programs available to them , we recommend that the secretary of agriculture and the administrator of the small business administration direct fsa and sba officials to take the following two actions: conduct targeted outreach to small aquaculture and nursery producers , for example , by building on existing agency outreach programs . both usda , through its farm service agency ( fsa ) , and the small business administration ( sba ) are major sources of disaster assistance , but there is little overlap in the populations served by the fsa and sba programs . in this report , our objectives were to ( 1 ) examine fsa and sba disaster assistance programs and the coverage they provide small producers ; ( 2 ) identify the main factors , if any , that may limit small aquaculture and nursery producers' participation in disaster assistance programs from fsa and sba ; and ( 3 ) examine fsa and sba efforts to collaborate in providing disaster assistance to small aquaculture and nursery producers .
this review's objectives were to address ( 1 ) the key means by which non - federally recognized tribes have been eligible for federal funding and ( 2 ) the amount of federal funding awarded to non - federally recognized tribes for fiscal years 2007 through 2010 , by agency and program . accordingly , this report addresses ( 1 ) the key means by which non - federally recognized tribes have been eligible for federal funding and ( 2 ) the amount of federal funding awarded to non - federally recognized tribes for fiscal years 2007 through 2010 , by agency and program . federal recognition of indian tribes confers specific legal status on these tribes and imposes certain responsibilities on the federal government , such as an obligation to provide the tribes and their members with certain benefits . the federal government has signed treaties with or taken other actions to recognize indian tribes , although some tribes have never developed a formal relationship with the federal government . as far back as the 17th century , some tribes developed relationships with colonial governments by , for example , signing treaties or residing on reservations established by these colonial governments . changes in federal indian policy throughout u.s. history have influenced which tribes are recognized today by the federal government . to ensure that grants under the american indian vocational rehabilitation services program are made consistent with applicable law , we recommend that the secretary of education review the department's practices with respect to eligibility requirements and take appropriate action with respect to grants made to tribes that do not have federal or state reservations . in response , hhs has begun taking administrative steps to encourage the accohannock indian tribe to meet its federal financial reporting obligations . in addition , this report provides information about some cases we identified during our work concerning non - federally recognized tribes' eligibility for funding and compliance with federal financial reporting requirements . education's commitment to review its practices and take appropriate action is consistent with our revised recommendation . to ensure the proper award and oversight of grants by the department of health and human services , we recommend that the secretary of health and human services take the following two actions . in this report , we refer to those groups that self - identify as indian tribes but are not recognized by the federal government as non - federally recognized tribes . you asked us to report on federal funding for non - federally recognized tribes . while agreeing to review its practices , education disagreed with our finding ( which was the basis for the recommendation ) that state - recognized tribes without state reservations , but with self - defined tribal service areas , are likely ineligible for the american indian vocational rehabilitation services grant program . to address these objectives , we first compiled a list of approximately 400 non - federally recognized tribes in the contiguous 48 states from a variety of information sources , such as data collected by the department of the interior ( interior ) , and information provided to us by officials from selected states.collected by interior's indian arts and crafts board and the u.s. census bureau , a list of 15 states that were most likely to have state - recognized tribes within their borders .
thank you for the opportunity to testify today on the department of defense's ( dod ) latest round of base realignments and closures ( brac ) , commonly referred to as brac 2005 . gao has two long - standing roles in the brac process . my testimony today is based on work completed to date , and i will identify ( 1 ) key factors and challenges that contributed to brac 2005 implementation and results and ( 2 ) the most - recent estimated costs and savings attributable to brac 2005 . second , once the recommendations became binding , our role has been to review dod's efforts to implement the recommendations , just as we routinely review the efficiency and effectiveness of many other congressionally mandated or authorized programs across the government . first , as requested by congressional committees for the 1988 brac round and mandated by law since 1990 , we have served as an independent and objective observer of the brac process and have assessed and reported on dod's decision - making processes leading up to proposed realignment and closure recommendations . the brac process is designed to overcome obstacles to eliminating unneeded infrastructure and to help dod match needed infrastructure to the force structure and to support military missions . as such , we have issued about 50 reports related to the brac 2005 round and prior brac rounds since 1989 ( see related gao products at the end of this testimony ) in addition to our statutorily required report providing a detailed analysis of the brac 2005 selection process and the secretary of defense's proposed realignment and closure recommendations to the brac commission . dod had to develop brac oversight mechanisms to improve accountability for implementation of the brac recommendations . dod's management of its support infrastructure is on our high - risk list , in part due to the challenges dod faces in eliminating unneeded infrastructure . the secretary acknowledged that the brac process is controversial but stated that it is the only effective way to achieve needed infrastructure savings , and that the upcoming request comes as a result of dod plans to reduce its force structure . dod has faced long - term challenges in managing its portfolio of facilities , halting degradation of facilities , and reducing unneeded infrastructure to free up funds to better maintain the facilities it still uses and to meet other needs . the brac legislation required dod to complete recommendations for closing or realigning bases made in brac 2005 by september 15 , 2011 — 6 years from the date the president submitted his approval of the recommendations to congress . interdependent recommendations affected dod's ability to meet the statutory deadline . we have operated in a real - time setting and had access to significant portions of the process as it evolved . gao identified several factors and challenges that contributed to dod's implementation of brac 2005 and the results achieved . as directed by the house armed services committee in its report accompanying the national defense authorization act for 2008 , we have been reviewing brac 2005 to monitor implementation of the recommendations and identify lessons that could be used to improve future brac rounds should congress authorize additional rounds .
the department of homeland security ( dhs ) estimated that as of january 2011 there were about 11.5 million aliens ( non - u.s. citizens ) living in the united states without lawful immigration status . as of april 2012 , the u.s. immigration and customs enforcement ( ice ) had awarded four contracts and planned to award additional contracts to modernize its alien criminal response information management ( acrime ) system . dhs's u.s. immigration and customs enforcement ( ice ) is responsible for apprehending and removing aliens who have violated immigration law . to help ensure that ice acquires effective technology to support the secure communities program and effectively uses its workforce , we recommend that the director of ice take the following three actions to follow sound management practices: establish well - defined requirements prior to awarding additional develop an integrated master schedule that identifies all tasks to be performed by the government and current and future contractors , and links activities being performed by different contractors ; and develop a workforce plan to support the analysis of immigration status determinations under secure communities . developing a workforce plan to guide workforce resource decisions could help ensure workforce decisions are made in an effective and cost - efficient manner . ice has invested millions of dollars to modernize acrime capabilities that are central to secure communities' success , but has not followed best practices in its acquisition of the modernized technology . in addition to secure communities , ice's criminal alien program ( cap ) is designed to identify , process , and remove criminal aliens from prisons across the united states ; the national fugitive operations program is to pursue known at - large criminal aliens and fugitive aliens ; and the 287 ( g ) program , authorized by section 287 ( g ) of the immigration and nationality act , is to provide state and local law enforcement agency officers with delegation of authority , training , and resources to perform certain functions of an immigration officer .  ( 2 ) to what extent has ice adhered to best practices to acquire secure communities – related technology ? . dhs , office of the inspector general , communication regarding participation in secure communities , oig - 12-66 ( washington , d.c.: march 2012 ) , and operations of united states immigration and customs enforcement's secure communities , oig - 12-64 ( washington , d.c.: april 2012 ) ( revised ) . dhs concurred with our three recommendations and described efforts underway to address them . likewise , a modernized acrime , along with the extension of secure communities to all jurisdictions , will change ice workforce requirements for the analysis of immigration status determinations .  ( 3 ) what safeguards , if any , does ice have in place to protect against potential civil rights abuses under secure communities ? . effective management of future acrime modernization efforts hinges on establishing well - defined requirements and the development of a reliable integrated master schedule . this report addresses the following questions: ( 1 ) what trends can be identified in ice's enforcement actions related to the secure communities program ? . the schedule delays and cost increases can be attributed in part to weaknesses in ice's planning , including ice ( 1 ) not fully defining requirements before awarding contracts and ( 2 ) not developing an integrated master schedule .
the objectives for this review were to examine ( 1 ) trends in the department of defense's ( dod ) use of noncompetitive awards ; ( 2 ) factors influencing dod's competition rate ; ( 3 ) the extent to which justifications for exceptions to competitive procedures provided insight into the reasons for noncompetitive awards ; and ( 4 ) the impact of dod's new requirement on contracts awarded using competitive procedures but for which only one offer was received . to better inform dod's efforts to enhance competition , we recommend that the secretary of defense take the following three actions: identify and track the specific factors that affect the competition rate , such as foreign military sales , and consider this information when setting annual competition goals for each dod component ; develop guidance that could enable dod components to apply lessons learned from past procurements to increase competition for the same good and services in the future ; and develop an action plan for dod components to collect reliable data on competitive procurements for which only one offer is received , so that the department can determine the effect of its new requirement on one - offer contracts . accordingly , we examined ( 1 ) the trends in dod's use of noncompetitive awards ; ( 2 ) the factors affecting dod's competition rate ; ( 3 ) the extent to which justifications for exceptions to competitive procedures provided insight into the reasons for noncompetitive awards ; and ( 4 ) the impact of dod's new requirement on contracts awarded using competitive procedures but for which only one - offer was received . in fiscal year 2012 , the department of defense ( dod ) obligated $359 billion through contracts and task orders , of which 57 percent was competed . lastly , due to unreliable data in fpds - ng , dod's ability to measure the effectiveness of its new one - offer requirement is limited . without knowing its impact , dod risks continued investment in a requirement that may not address the most significant factors leading to one - offer awards . the benefits of competition in acquiring goods and services from the private sector are well established . to identify trends in dod's use of noncompetitive awards , we used the federal procurement data system - next generation ( fpds - ng ) to identify dod obligations under competitive and noncompetitive contracts in fiscal years 2008 through 2012 . competitive contracts can help save taxpayer money , conserve scarce resources , improve contractor performance , curb fraud , and promote accountability for results . recognizing the need to make more efficient use of resources , dod's 2010 “better buying power” initiative placed an emphasis on maximizing opportunities for competition in the acquisition of products and services . dod described actions it plans to take the address the recommendations . while federal statute and acquisition regulations generally require that contracts be awarded on the basis of full and open competition , they also permit federal agencies to award noncompetitive contracts in certain circumstances , for example , when only one vendor can supply the requirements or when a sole - source award is made under specified small business programs .
to assess the progress agencies have made since 2008 in establishing recommended proliferation security initiative ( psi ) policies and procedures , and issuing required annual reports , we reviewed the findings and recommendations in gao's 2006 and 2008 reports on psi and the implementing recommendations of the 9 / 11 commission act of 2007 ( the 9 / 11 act ) . the u.s. government issued the national strategy to combat weapons of mass destruction in 2002 , and the proliferation of wmd , such as nuclear - or missile - related goods or technology , remains one of today's key challenges to international security . for almost 10 years , the united states has been actively participating in the proliferation security initiative ( psi ) to assist in u.s. efforts to break up black markets , detect and intercept weapons of mass destruction ( wmd ) materials in transit , and use financial tools to disrupt this dangerous trade . specifically , this report assesses ( 1 ) the progress relevant agencies have made since 2008 in establishing recommended psi policies and procedures and issuing required annual reports ; and ( 2 ) the extent to which psi activities have enhanced and expanded u.s. counterproliferation efforts . following our report , congress passed the implementing recommendations of the 9 / 11 commission act of 2007 ( the 9 / 11 act ) , in which it expresses its sense that relevant agencies and departments take actions to expand and strengthen psi , including establishing clear psi policies and procedures and performance indicators to measure the results of psi activities . the 9 / 11 act also required dod and state to submit annual psi reports and mandated gao to assess and report periodically on psi's effectiveness , including progress made in implementing the law's provisions . to assess how psi activities have enhanced and expanded u.s. efforts to prevent the flow of wmd materials and to determine what actions , if any , agencies have taken to develop indicators of psi's success , we reviewed and analyzed documents from dod , state , the department of homeland security ( dhs ) , and the department of justice ( doj ) . according to the department of state ( state ) , psi's objective is to enhance and expand u.s. efforts to prevent the flow of wmd , their delivery systems , and related materials on the ground , in the air , and at sea , to and from states and nonstate actors of proliferation concern . in may 2003 , president bush announced psi , a multinational effort , including the united states , to focus on building wmd interdiction capabilities by endorsing the statement of interdiction principles . we also requested and reviewed annual reports submitted to congress by state and the department of defense ( dod ) and analyzed them for compliance with the requirements in the 9 / 11 act . this report updates and provides information on the to assess what agencies have done since 2008 to establish recommended psi policies and procedures and issue required annual reports , we reviewed the findings and recommendations in gao's 2006 and 2008 reports on psi and the congressional mandate . develop a framework for measuring psi activities' results , including performance measures where possible that help link the results to psi's objective .
to provide states with fiscal relief and to help maintain state medicaid programs so beneficiaries are assured continuity of services during this most recent recession , the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 ( recovery act ) provided states with $89 billion through an increased federal share of medicaid funding from october 2008 through december 2010 . during economic downturns , states' employment and tax revenues typically fall as enrollment in the medicaid program , a federal - state health financing program for low - income populations , tends to increase . the federal funding states receive for medicaid is determined by a statutory formula , the federal medical assistance percentage ( fmap ) . we found that past economic downturns hampered states' ability to fund increased medicaid enrollment and maintain existing services , and that the recovery act assistance began during the national recession while nearly all states were experiencing medicaid enrollment increases . the mandate specifically called for recommendations to improve the starting and ending of temporary assistance , and to account for variations in state economic conditions . the most recent national recession , as defined by the national bureau of economic research ( nber ) , lasted from december 2007 through june 2009 . while the medicaid fmap formula was the mechanism used for delivering federal aid under the recovery act , the level of funding was intended to assist states with fiscal needs beyond medicaid . in a march 2011 report , we reviewed how past economic downturns affected states' ability to fund medicaid , examined the responsiveness of past increased fmap assistance to state medicaid needs , and identified options for adjusting the increased fmap formula for use during future economic downturns . the recovery act also mandated that we conduct an analysis of past national economic downturns , including the effects of any increased fmap during these periods , and provide recommendations for modifying the increased fmap formula to make it more responsive to state medicaid program needs during future downturns . the formula was designed to provide assistance to states during periods of national economic downturns , not for downturns limited to an individual state or group of states . however , as of july 2011 , 20 states and the district of columbia continued to experience unemployment rates above 9 percent , and more than 13.9 million people were considered unemployed . state budget challenges — due to increased unemployment and lowered tax revenues — can persist well beyond the end of a recession . however , we also found that the increased fmap funds provided through the recovery act did not distinguish among states with varying degrees of reduced revenue in the allocation of assistance . in keeping with the general framework provided in our past reports , we use the period of the most recent national economic downturn — from december 2007 through june 2009 — to evaluate the three components of our prototype formula , including the start of assistance , the methods used to target funds based on states' medicaid program needs , and the end of assistance . to ensure that federal funding efficiently and effectively responds to the countercyclical nature of the medicaid program , congress could consider enacting an fmap formula that is targeted for variable state medicaid needs and provides automatic , timely , and temporary increased fmap assistance in response to national economic downturns .
this report focuses on ( 1 ) the factors that have affected the resources available in the federal buildings fund ( fbf ) ; ( 2 ) the general services administration's ( gsa ) potential maintenance and repair liability for its owned assets and the implications for the fund ; and ( 3 ) the information gsa considers when evaluating capital investment proposals and how its practices compare to leading practices for making capital investment decisions . to provide a predictable source of revenue for the general services administration ( gsa ) to manage its real estate portfolio , the public buildings act amendments of 1972 established the federal buildings fund ( fbf ) . develop and publish a comprehensive 5-year capital plan and include a summary of it annually in its budget request to omb and congress to help ensure that long - term goals are fully considered when making decisions and to document how gsa would spend needed fbf funds . this report focuses on ( 1 ) the factors that have affected the resources available in the fbf , ( 2 ) gsa's potential maintenance and repair liability for its owned assets and the implications for the fund , and ( 3 ) the information gsa considers when evaluating capital investment proposals and how its practices compare to leading practices for prioritizing capital investments . our overall approach to addressing these topics was to ( 1 ) review laws , studies , and gao , gsa inspector general , and congressional research service reports on federal real property and the fbf ; ( 2 ) analyze data and documents pertaining to the fund's balance , including budget requests and appropriations acts from fiscal years 2006 to 2012 ; ( 3 ) evaluate the financial performance of gsa's real property portfolio of approximately 10,000 assets based on data from fiscal years 2006 through 2011 ; ( 4 ) analyze data maintained by gsa on the identified repairs needed in its owned assets ; ( 5 ) compare gsa capital investment practices to leading practices for making capital investment decisions identified in the office of management and budget's ( omb ) capital programming guide and gao's executive guide ; ( 6 ) interview gsa officials and omb staff on the state of gsa's real property portfolio ; and ( 7 ) review the four highest cost repairs and alterations projects of gsa's fiscal year 2012 budget submission to assess data used to determine project requirements and how gsa evaluated project alternatives . in addition , the agency's lack of a comprehensive long - term capital plan could limit its ability to provide perspective on how funding for requested projects aligns with its long - term investment strategy . capital assets , such as real estate , can require significant resources to construct , operate , and maintain over the course of their life cycle . to enhance transparency , allow for more informed decision making related to gsa's real property priorities , and make a stronger case for using funds in the fbf to meet capital investment needs , we recommend that the administrator of gsa take the following two actions: document in its annual budget request to omb how gsa uses its prioritization criteria to generate its annual and 5-year lists of prioritized projects to ensure that congress understands the rationale behind prioritized project lists and that gsa is maximizing return on fbf investments .
on august 14 , 2008 , congress passed the consumer product safety improvement act of 2008 ( cpsia ) to strengthen cpsc's authority to enforce safety standards and provide greater public access to product safety information . in this report , we examine ( 1 ) the information required for submitting a report of harm to saferproducts.gov , ( 2 ) the extent to which the information required for submitting a report of harm is sufficient to identify the product and to allow cpsc to review a manufacturer's claim that a report of harm contains materially inaccurate information ( mii ) , and ( 3 ) the length of time cpsc takes to review and resolve manufacturers' claims of material inaccuracy in a report of harm . a large number of consumer product recalls in 2007-2008 has led to heightened scrutiny of consumer product safety regulation , and congress has considered the accessibility to the public of consumer complaints submitted to the consumer product safety commission ( cpsc ) . we assessed the reliability of these data by ( 1 ) performing electronic testing , ( 2 ) reviewing existing information about the data and the system that produced them , and ( 3 ) interviewing agency officials knowledgeable about the data and related management controls . the reporting objectives were to examine ( 1 ) the information required for submitting a report of harm to saferproducts.gov , ( 2 ) the extent to which the information required for submitting a report of harm is sufficient to identify the product and to allow cpsc to review a manufacturer's claim that a report of harm contains materially inaccurate information , and ( 3 ) the length of time cpsc takes to review and resolve manufacturers' claims of material inaccuracy in a report of harm . additionally , we obtained and analyzed electronic data from cpsc's safety information database to identify ( a ) what type of individuals and entities are submitting reports of harm , ( b ) what information is captured in the database , ( c ) the type of product identification information included in reports , ( d ) reports that include claims of material inaccuracy and the outcomes for these claims , ( e ) the length of time manufacturers take to respond to a report of harm , and ( f ) the length of time cpsc takes to resolve a claim of material inaccuracy . we found that 5,464 reports of harm were submitted to saferproducts.gov by the five categories of submitters eligible to file a report of harm — ( 1 ) consumers ; ( 2 ) local , state , or federal government agencies ; ( 3 ) health care professionals ; ( 4 ) child service providers ; and ( 5 ) public safety entities . to effectively implement the recent amendments to cpsia , we recommend that cpsc enhance the analytic methods it uses to identify product information in a report of harm , such as by verifying whether the model field in its data contains a number ( versus a text response , which would not meet the statutory requirement ) or by searching for model numbers or serial numbers that may be listed in other fields .
postal service's ( usps ) cost structure has become unsustainable in part because its declining revenue is insufficient to cover the costs of operating usps's vast network of post offices and mail - processing centers . for example , by considering factors , such as the distance of cpus to existing post offices , cpu hours and days of service , and usps's costs of compensating cpus , usps could better inform its retail strategy in order to make better strategic use of cpus in its future retail network , which will likely include reduced hours at thousands of post offices . usps reached its statutory $15 billion borrowing limit in september , 2012 , and usps's cash resources are so low that it is unable to meet all of its retiree health care prefunding obligations . over the past year , gao has issued a series of reports examining how aspects of usps's current operations and financial obligations affect its costs and financial condition . the role of cpus is also addressed in postal reform legislation pending in both chambers of congress . usps provided a written response ( see appendix iii ) in which they discussed usps's efforts beyond cpus to provide customers with sufficient and convenient access to its products and services through other types of partnerships and alternatives to post offices . to determine how contract postal units ( cpus ) supplement the u.s . usps revenue from cpus and compensation to them from fiscal years 2007 to 2011 , and 3. challenges usps might face if it increases its use of cpus . to reverse this course , usps has stated that it must better align its operational network with the realities of declining mail volume through a number of actions , including reducing the costs of operating post offices . a bill passed by the house of representatives committee on oversight and government reform would prohibit appeals of certain post office closures when a cpu is located within 2 miles . this report addresses usps's use of contract postal units ( cpus ) — independent retailers that , under contract with usps , provide customers with a broad range of the same products and services as post offices at the same prices , but at a potentially lower cost to usps . as usps continues to develop this retail strategy , we believe that usps can capitalize on growing acceptance of retail alternatives by using information about cpus to inform its decisions . we continue to believe , as we stated in november 2011 , that it is important that such a strategy discuss how usps plans to increase its use of retail alternatives — including cpus — while considering significant changes to its network of post offices and the means through which it provides access to usps's customers . given the retail service decisions facing usps and the potential usps reforms that congress is considering , you asked us to provide you with information on cpus . our past work has shown that replacing postal - owned and - operated facilities with privately owned and operated facilities is a strategy some foreign posts have used to restructure their retail networks to reduce facility and labor costs .
in response to your interest in a report on the repealed ctaa program and , more specifically , on how eda awarded the ctaa grants and how those grants fit in with other eda grant programs , we examined the ctaa program to determine ( 1 ) how eda made grant award decisions , ( 2 ) what mechanisms eda established to monitor the grants and evaluate their effectiveness , and ( 3 ) how the ctaa program compared with other eda community grant programs . the trade and globalization adjustment assistance act of 2009 ( tgaaa ) , passed as part of the american reinvestment and recovery act in february 2009 , reauthorized and amended trade adjustment assistance ( taa ) programs that assist trade - impacted workers , farmers and fishermen , firms , community colleges , and communities . for fiscal year 2010 , the department of commerce's economic development administration ( eda ) awarded $36.8 million in ctaa grants to 36 communities to develop a strategic plan to help the community adjust to trade impacts and to promote economic diversification or to implement programs and projects as part of a strategic plan . commerce also provided further information on planned improvements to eda's performance measures . the administration proposed to discontinue the program , contending that eda could provide similar assistance to communities at a lower cost through its economic adjustment assistance ( eaa ) program . from 2001 to 2011 , u.s. imports of goods and services almost doubled from $1.4 trillion to $2.7 trillion . we also reviewed a nonprobability sample of 12 grant files , selected to provide a variety of grant awards on the basis of region , grant amount , and grant type ( i.e. , whether the purpose of the grant was to help a community develop a strategic plan or implement part of an existing strategic plan ) . the tgaaa reestablished the taa for communities programs , including the community trade adjustment assistance ( ctaa ) program and two other programs . in late june 2009 , congress appropriated $40 million in funding for the ctaa program . the federal government has recognized that , although the benefits of free trade are widely dispersed across the economy , worker dislocation can have an adverse effect on communities . the increase in imports and the ongoing trade liberalization have resulted in the loss of certain u.s. jobs , as companies that cannot compete with lower priced imports have closed or relocated to lower wage countries . we also interviewed eda regional officials regarding their grant monitoring practices and how they plan to evaluate the effectiveness of the program . congress responded by repealing the ctaa program in 2012 . as noted above , the administration proposed to discontinue the ctaa program in 2012 , contending that eda could provide similar assistance to communities at a lower cost through its eaa program ( see table 4 for more on the funding of these programs ) . to determine how eda made grant award decisions , we reviewed relevant laws , guidance , and regulations . tgaaa mandated that we report on the operation and effectiveness of the amended taa programs . to determine how commerce made grant award decisions , we reviewed relevant laws and regulations , the ctaa federal funding opportunity , and grant files .
the federal employees' compensation act ( feca ) program provides workers' compensation coverage to approximately 2.8 million federal and postal employees for work - related injuries and illnesses . benefits include wage - loss benefits , medical benefits , vocational - rehabilitation benefits , and survivors' benefits . in fiscal year 2012 , the feca program made more than $2.1 billion in wage - loss compensation payments to claimants . the program , administered by the department of labor ( labor ) , provides benefits to federal employees who sustained injuries or illnesses while performing their federal duties . postal service represents over 40 percent ( approximately $14.4 billion ) of these estimated liabilities . labor's office of workers' compensation programs ( owcp ) estimated that future actuarial liabilities for government - wide feca compensation payments to those receiving benefits as of fiscal year 2012 would total over $34 billion ( this amount does not include any costs for workers added to the feca rolls in future years ) ; the u.s . federal agencies' offices of inspector general ( ig ) have identified programmatic deficiencies at the employing department and at labor that may make the program vulnerable to fraud and abuse . this report is a follow - up to our january 2012 report identifying potential vulnerabilities in the program's design and controls that could increase the risk for fraud and promising practices that could help to reduce the risk of fraud within the feca program . for those claims that are approved , employing agencies reimburse labor for payments made to their employees , while labor bears most of the program's administrative costs . to answer this objective , we determined whether individuals potentially received improper payments , potentially committed fraud , or received overlapping payments by comparing feca data to quarterly wage ( qw ) and unemployment insurance ( ui ) data from selected states . to identify factors that may have contributed to potentially improper or overlapping benefits , and how , if at all , labor could address these factors , we conducted interviews with officials from labor's owcp and employment and training agency ( eta ) , and reviewed prior inspector general ( ig ) and gao reports . this report addresses the following question: what examples , if any , of improper payments , potential fraud , or overlapping benefits can be found in the feca program , what factors may contribute to these issues , and how , if at all , could labor address these factors ? . we also reviewed labor's oversight mechanisms , which establish policies , guidelines , and procedures for adjudicating and managing claims under the feca program and compared them with those outlined in the standards for internal control in the federal government . in addition , we conducted investigations of 3 of the 51 ( 19 ui and 32 qw ) individual cases . we identified 530 individuals who had received concurrent feca wage - loss compensation payments and wage payments of at least $5,000 for the 1-year period ( i.e. , july 2009 to june 2010 ) we then randomly selected up to seven claimants from each of the five states for an in - depth review , for a total of 32 cases .
the joint polar satellite system ( jpss ) and the geostationary operational environmental satellite - r ( goes - r ) programs are meant to replace current operational satellites , and both are considered critical to the united states' ability to maintain the continuity of data required for weather forecasting . as requested , this statement summarizes our two reports being released today on ( 1 ) the status , plans , and risks for jpss and ( 2 ) the status , schedule management process , and risk management process within the goes - r program . thank you for the opportunity to participate in today's hearing on two satellite acquisition programs within the department of commerce's national oceanic and atmospheric administration ( noaa ) . they each contain a detailed overview of our scope and methodology , including the steps we took to assess the reliability of cost and schedule data . as noted in those reports , we found that the jpss cost and goes - r contractor cost data were sufficiently reliable for our purposes . in early 2012 , in response to congressional direction , dod decided to terminate the program because it still has two satellites to launch within its legacy defense meteorological satellite program . dod is currently identifying alternative means to fulfill its future environmental satellite requirements . both the jpss and goes - r programs face risks going forward during their development ; implementing the recommendations in our accompanying reports should help mitigate those risks . further , while we found that the goes - r schedule and management reserve data were not sufficiently reliable , we reported on the data's shortcomings in our report . in preparing this testimony , we relied on the work supporting those reports . as a result , noaa has improved its ability to fully meet its mission - essential function of providing continuous satellite imagery in support of weather forecasting . goes - r has also encountered a number of technical challenges , some of which remain to be fully addressed . this could result in the need for noaa to rely on older satellites that are not fully functional . so far , noaa has been able to address certain delays and technical challenges with an available contingency reserve , in which a portion of the program's budget is allocated to mitigate risks and manage problems as they surface during development , and has not changed its 2007 cost estimates for the development of the first two program satellites . any delays in the launch readiness date for goes - r , which is already at risk due to increasing development costs and use of program reserves , would further increase the probability of a gap in satellite continuity . execute the program's risk management policies and procedures to provide more timely and adequate evaluations and reviews of newly identified risks , and provide more information , including documented handling strategies , for all ongoing and newly - identified risks in the risk register . in addition to polar - orbiting satellites , noaa operates goes as a two - satellite geostationary satellite system that is primarily focused on the united states . while the goes - r program has made progress in completing its design , many key milestones were completed later than planned .
in 2010 , the federal government spent about $114 billion on the medicare advantage ( ma ) program , a private plan alternative to the original medicare fee - for - service ( ffs ) program that covers about a quarter of all medicare beneficiaries . such steps could include , for example , accounting for additional beneficiary characteristics , including the most current data available , identifying and accounting for all years of coding differences that could affect the payment year for which an adjustment is made , and incorporating the trend of the impact of coding differences on risk scores . to help ensure appropriate payments to ma plans , the administrator of cms should take steps to improve the accuracy of the adjustment made for differences in diagnostic coding practices between ma and medicare ffs . if cms does not update its methodology , excess payments due to differences in coding practices are likely to increase . by not updating its estimate with more current data , cms also did not account for the additional years of cumulative coding differences in its estimate: 4 years for 2011 ( 2007 to 2011 ) and 5 years for 2012 ( 2007 to 2012 ) . the centers for medicare & medicaid services ( cms ) , the agency that administers medicare , pays ma plans a monthly amount to provide health care services for each beneficiary enrolled in these plans . information on a beneficiary's age , sex , medicaid enrollment status , original reason for medicare entitlement ( i.e. , age or disability ) , and major medical conditions all factor into the calculation of the risk score . risk adjustment is important to ensure that payments to ma plans adequately account for differences in beneficiaries' health status and to maintain plans' financial incentive to enroll and care for beneficiaries regardless of their health status or the resources they are likely to consume . this appendix explains the scope and methodology that we used to address our objective that determines the extent to which differences , if any , in diagnostic coding between medicare advantage ( ma ) plans and medicare fee - for - service ( ffs ) affect risk scores and payments to ma plans in 2010 . for its 2011 and 2012 adjustments , the agency continued to use the same estimate of the impact of coding differences it used in 2010 , which likely resulted in excess payments to ma plans . risk adjustment helps ensure that a plan's financial incentive to enroll and care for beneficiaries is similar for all beneficiaries regardless of their health status or the resources they are likely to consume . the cms data we analyzed on medicare beneficiaries are collected from medicare providers and ma plans . we found that cms's 3.41 percent adjustment for coding differences in 2010 was too low , resulting in $1.2 billion to $3.1 billion in payments to ma plans for coding differences . for example , beneficiaries in poorer health are generally expected to use more health care services relative to beneficiaries in better health . if an adjustment for coding differences is too low , cms would pay ma plans more than it would pay providers in medicare ffs to provide health care for the same beneficiaries .
according to the energy information administration ( eia ) , the nation's approximately 130 million housing units account for about 23 percent of total energy consumption in the united states . our objectives for this report were to ( 1 ) identify states that have funded programs to replace older manufactured homes with more energy efficient models and describe these programs ; ( 2 ) identify challenges , if any , these states reported facing in implementing these programs ; and ( 3 ) determine the extent to which these programs resulted in energy savings sufficient to offset replacement costs . many of the occupants of these homes qualify for federal assistance to help pay their energy bills through the u.s. department of health and human services' ( hhs ) low income home energy assistance program ( liheap ) . in fiscal year 2013 , congress appropriated about $3 billion for liheap nationwide . approximately 2 million of these housing units are manufactured homes ( i.e. , mobile homes ) that were built before 1976 , when new standards for energy efficient construction went into effect . program officials cited less measureable benefits of replacement , including fewer trips to the doctor , greater physical security ; improved safety in the home , especially for vulnerable beneficiaries ; and strengthened community identity . state program officials we spoke with had not quantified these benefits . questions have been raised about whether improving the energy efficiency of older manufactured homes or replacing them with newer , more energy efficient models would save the federal government money by reducing federal spending on liheap . some states have conducted pilot programs to replace older manufactured homes ; however , liheap funds are statutorily prohibited from being used for new construction — which includes replacing existing homes . you asked us to identify and review state - based or other programs that have replaced older manufactured homes — particularly those built before 1976 – – with newer , more energy efficient models , and the extent to which these programs may be cost - effective based on reduced energy costs . liheap is a federal block grant program in which funds are provided to grantees , including states , territories , and tribes and tribal organizations , based on a number of factors , such as climate and income . state officials provided data spanning about 2 years of operation of these programs on funding sources , replacement program costs , and energy costs , to the extent that they collected these data . to identify which states had replacement programs , we surveyed liheap grantees from all 50 states and the district of columbia and received a 100 percent response rate . a portion of liheap funds can be used to improve the energy efficiency of these homes but , in many cases , because of the ways these homes were built , and their sometimes poor condition , improving their energy efficiency cannot be accomplished cost effectively . we determined early in the course of our work that these programs were not designed to save liheap funds , but we examined available information about the energy savings that resulted from these programs and the extent to which they offset replacement costs , which could inform deliberations about whether such programs could help reduce liheap costs .
however , it did not ( 1 ) identify funding necessary to achieve plan objectives or ( 2 ) establish monitoring mechanisms to determine progress and identify needed improvements . while federal efforts to combat nuclear smuggling have largely focused on established ports of entry , such as seaports and land border crossings , dndo has also been examining nuclear detection strategies along other potential pathways in the architecture , including ( 1 ) land border areas between ports of entry into the united states , ( 2 ) international general aviation , and ( 3 ) small maritime craft , such as recreational boats and commercial fishing vessels . this testimony discusses: ( 1 ) dhs's efforts to complete the deployment of radiation detection equipment to scan all cargo and conveyances entering the united states at ports of entry , ( 2 ) observations from our past work that may help dhs as it considers options for deploying new technologies to refurbish or replace existing portal monitors when they reach the end of their expected service lives , and ( 3 ) our assessment of the extent to which dhs has addressed our prior recommendations . i am pleased to be here today to discuss the efforts of the department of homeland security's ( dhs ) domestic nuclear detection office ( dndo ) to develop and deploy a global nuclear detection architecture ( gnda ) — an integrated system of radiation detection equipment and interdiction activities to combat nuclear smuggling in foreign countries , at the u.s. border , and inside the united states — and to provide an update on the deployment of radiation detection equipment at u.s. borders . it is also responsible for developing , acquiring , and deploying radiation detection equipment to support the efforts of dhs and other federal agencies . we stated that this plan should focus as we will discuss today , dhs has made meaningful progress in deploying radiation detection equipment at u.s. border crossings and seaports ; however , as deployed portal monitors begin to reach the end of their expected service lives , dhs will soon need to make decisions about whether to refurbish or replace them . gao , customs service: acquisition and deployment of radiation detection equipment , gao - 03-235t ( washington , d.c.: oct. 17 , 2002 ) . we reported , in july 2011 , that the gnda strategic plan addressed several of the aspects of our prior recommendations but did not ( 1 ) identify funding necessary to achieve plan objectives or ( 2 ) employ monitoring mechanisms to determine progress and identify needed improvements . among other things , in july 2008 , we recommended that dhs develop an overarching strategic plan for the gnda that ( 1 ) clearly defines the objectives to be accomplished , ( 2 ) identifies the roles and responsibilities for meeting each objective , ( 3 ) identifies the funding necessary to achieve those objectives , and ( 4 ) employs monitoring mechanisms to determine programmatic progress and identify needed improvements . to do so , we met with dhs , dndo , and customs and border protection ( cbp ) officials and reviewed dhs documents including the gnda strategic plan , the 2011 gnda joint annual interagency review , and the gnda implementation plan issued in april 2012 .
my statement today focuses on initial observations from our ongoing review for this subcommittee and examines the status and management of ssa's efforts to ( 1 ) update its medical listings to reflect current medical knowledge and ( 2 ) develop its own occupational information system ( ois ) to reflect labor market changes . in the last 20 years , ssa disability benefit payments to beneficiaries and their dependents have increased almost fivefold , from $35 billion in 1990 to over $164 billion in 2010 . in addition , the ois should ( 1 ) meet ssa's legal , program , and data requirements ; ( 2 ) be flexible enough to incorporate changes in ssa's policies and processes ; and ( 3 ) be able to be updated to reflect the evolving workplace environment . given the extensive size and cost of its disability programs , ssa must have current and appropriate criteria by which to assess whether an applicant's medical conditions affect his or her ability to perform work in the national economy . gao has designated ssa's federal disability program as a high - risk area ; in 2008 , we reported that the agency's medical criteria did not fully reflect medical and technological advances , and the occupational criteria it used from the department of labor ( labor ) had not been updated since 1991 , despite the trend away from manual labor jobs and towards service - and knowledge - based jobs . the number of working - age beneficiaries also grew from about 9 million in 2000 to almost 12 million in 2010 , and , as more baby boomers enter their disability - prone years , ssa expects the number of claims to grow . we will also identify any mitigation strategies the agency may have to address project risks , such as the risk of the agency not receiving full funding . to examine these issues we reviewed prior gao and ssa office of inspector general reports ; relevant federal laws and regulations ; program documentation including policies , procedures , strategic goals , and supporting project plans and cost estimates ; and position papers and testimonies from disability groups and commissions . i am pleased to be here today to discuss our preliminary observations on efforts by the social security administration ( ssa ) to modernize its disability criteria . ssa administers two of the largest disability programs: the disability insurance ( di ) program , enacted in 1956 , and the supplemental security income ( ssi ) program , enacted in 1972 . ssa continues to face delays in completing both comprehensive and other ongoing updates . we will also review more broadly other steps ssa is taking to incorporate modern concepts of disability into its programs . for example , ssa contracted with the institute of medicine to study its medical criteria for determining disability and to make recommendations for improving the timeliness and accuracy of its disability decisions , resulting in a 2007 report with recommendations and a symposium of experts in 2010 . two of the remaining six body system listings — mental and neurological disorders , which are among those ssa uses most frequently in its eligibility determination process — have not been comprehensively revised for 27 years.to expire in 2012 .
gsa provided the results of its study to the house and senate committees on appropriations in november 2010 and also reported on its efforts to implement the federal strategic sourcing initiative — office supplies ii ( os ii ) , an initiative focused on leveraging the government's buying power to realize savings . the conferees also directed gao to assess the gsa study , with particular attention to the potential for savings . to conduct our work , we analyzed the data gsa used for its study ; met with and obtained documentation from officials at gsa and the departments of homeland security , air force , navy , and army , which were among the 10 agencies in gsa's study ; and reviewed contract documentation associated with the os ii initiative . concerned that federal agencies may not be getting the best prices available , the conferees on the consolidated appropriation act , 2010 , directed gsa to conduct a study of the office supply purchases made by the top 10 largest federal agencies . i am pleased to be here today to discuss the general services administration's ( gsa ) efforts to reduce prices that federal agencies pay for office supplies . my statement is based on a report we issued last year for the subcommittees on financial services and general government of the senate and house committees on appropriations . since purchasing of office supplies is highly decentralized , gsa obtained data for its study from multiple disparate sources , such as the federal procurement data system - next generation , the department of defense ( dod ) electronic mall , and purchase card data from commercial banks . for purposes of this hearing , we updated gsa's savings estimates for the os ii initiative . we also identified additional data and other limitations in gsa's study , including: gsa may not have been able to properly control for purchases of different quantities of the same item . several new business practices have been incorporated in the os ii program to meet the goals . as part of the overall strategy , a gsa commodity council identified five overarching goals , in addition to savings , for the os ii initiative . while the gsa report acknowledged some limitations with the data , we identified additional data and other limitations that lead us to question the magnitude of some of gsa's reported price premiums . to determine the amount of funds spent on office supplies and to conduct related analyses , gsa had to sort through about 7 million purchase transactions involving over 12 million items . gsa is using a combination of agency and vendor involvement to identify key requirements and cost drivers , increase the ease of use , and obtain the data necessary to manage the program . we were not able to fully quantify the impact of these limitations . gsa has incorporated a range of activities representative of a strategic procurement approach into the os ii initiative . for example , gsa set up a commodity council for the federal strategic sourcing initiative second generation domestic delivery services ii program . for example , to meet the capture data goal , gsa is collecting data on purchases and vendor performance that are assimilated and tracked through dashboards , which are high - level indicators of overall program performance .
my statement today discusses ( 1 ) the role of the nextgen test facilities in the development of nextgen technologies and how private industry and partner agencies participate in projects at the nextgen test facilities , and ( 2 ) our previous findings on nextgen technology transfer and faa's efforts to improve the transfer and implementation of nextgen - related technologies . transforming the nation's air transportation system affects and involves the activities and missions of several federal agencies , though the federal aviation administration ( faa ) is the lead implementer . these test facilities provide access to the systems currently used in the national air space ( nas ) and house various types of hardware , simulators , and other equipment to allow for demonstrations of new technologies . i appreciate the opportunity to testify before you today on the use of test facilities as a means of leveraging public , private , and academic resources to deliver technologies for the next generation air transportation system ( nextgen ) . nextgen will affect nearly every aspect of air transportation and will transform the way in which the air transportation system operates today . lack of coordination between faa and dod and faa and dhs could result in duplicative research and inefficient use of resources at both agencies . the result will be an air transportation system that relies on satellite - based surveillance and navigation , data communications , and improved collaborative decision making . faa has taken a number of actions to improve its ability to implement new technologies and increase partner agencies' and private sector participants' involvement in seeing the development of selected technologies through to successful implementation — including restructuring the organization responsible for implementing nextgen and linking the test facilities and improving their capabilities . differences in mission priorities , however , particularly between faa and the department of homeland security ( dhs ) , and between faa and the department of defense ( dod ) , pose a challenge to coordination with those agencies . three nextgen test facilities , collectively referred to as the nextgen test bed , are designed to foster the research and development of nextgen - related technologies and to evaluate integrated technologies and procedures for nationwide nextgen deployment . in addition , nextgen was designed and planned to be developed in collaboration with aviation stakeholders — airlines and other airspace users , air traffic controllers , and avionics , aircraft , and automation systems manufacturers — in order to facilitate coordinated research activities , transfer technologies from faa and partner agencies to the private sector , and take advantage of research and technology developed by the private sector that could meet nextgen needs , as appropriate . it is a complex undertaking that requires new technologies — including new integrated ground and aircraft systems — as well as new procedures , processes , and supporting infrastructure . faa has also used research transition teams to coordinate research and transfer technologies from nasa and overcome technology transfer challenges . dod has not completed an inventory of its research and development portfolio related to nextgen , impeding faa's ability to identify and leverage potentially useful research , technology , or expertise from dod . across the test facilities private and public sector stakeholders contribute personnel , equipment , and funding to develop and integrate technologies .
since the early 1970s , dod has identified the remains of and accounted for approximately 1,910 persons . the department of defense ( dod ) reports that more than 83,000 persons remain missing from past conflicts in vietnam , korea , the cold war , the persian gulf , and world war ii . this report assesses dod's capability and capacity to accomplish its missing persons accounting mission . we compared the results of these analyses with consideration of several practices gao has identified in prior work that can benefit collaborating agencies , including ( 1 ) having overarching plans to align activities and resources ; ( 2 ) clearly defining roles and responsibilities ; ( 3 ) articulating agreements in formal documents ; ( 4 ) communicating frequently ; and ( 5 ) having a single designated leader . in 2012 , in a committee report to accompany a proposed bill for the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2013 , the house armed services committee mandated us to review dod's efforts to increase its capability and capacity to account for missing persons , and to report to the senate armed services committee and house armed services committee . while efforts have been made to improve communication among the accounting community members , some communication efforts have not been incorporated in dod guidance and the accounting community has not developed personnel files to share information , as required by statute . to help avert unexpected operational or diplomatic issues that might hinder missing persons operations , direct the commander , u.s. pacific command , and commander , joint prisoner of war / missing in action accounting command , or the appropriate department entities in light of any reorganization , to develop memoranda of agreement or other appropriate mechanisms with the other combatant commands in whose area of responsibility jpac is likely to operate . several dod components and organizations , collectively known as the missing persons accounting community , have a role in accounting for missing persons . to assess dod's capability and capacity to accomplish the missing persons accounting mission , we reviewed relevant legislation related to dod's missing persons accounting program , as well as dod directives , instructions , memoranda of agreement , standard operating procedures , and other guidance . more than 3 years have passed since congress directed dod to increase its capability and capacity to account for missing persons and established the accounting - for goal , but the department has yet to establish a community - wide plan to meet these goals in a unified manner by 2015 . while dod has made some progress in drafting a community - wide plan to increase its capability and capacity , as of june 2013 dod had not completed a community - wide plan . ensure that dpmo , in coordination with all members of the accounting community , develop personnel files for all unaccounted for persons as required by statute , in order to help avoid potential overlap or unnecessary duplication of effort and to ensure better communication among community members with respect to missing persons cases . concerns have risen over the years , both within and outside of dod , with regard to whether dod's missing persons accounting community's current organizational structure enables it to most effectively meet its mission .
our objectives were to examine ( 1 ) the extent to which the forest service is meeting trail maintenance needs , and effects associated with any maintenance not done ; ( 2 ) resources , including funding and labor , that the agency employs to maintain its trails ; ( 3 ) factors , if any , complicating agency efforts to maintain its trails ; and ( 4 ) options , if any , that could improve the agency's trail maintenance efforts . this report examines ( 1 ) the extent to which the forest service is meeting trail maintenance needs , and effects associated with any maintenance not done ; ( 2 ) resources , including funding and labor , that the agency employs to maintain its trails ; ( 3 ) factors , if any , complicating agency efforts to maintain its trails ; and ( 4 ) options , if any , that could improve the agency's trail maintenance efforts . in line with the framework's emphasis on sustainability , and to enhance trail sustainability over the long term , ( 1 ) improve guidance and increase training on sustainable trail design and ( 2 ) when appropriate , begin systematic , unit - level trail assessments that reevaluate trails with long - term sustainability as a goal . to improve agency management of its trails program in the long term , particularly in light of the gap between program needs and available resources , the agency should take the following two actions consistent with the agency's framework for sustainable recreation: in line with the framework's emphasis on evaluating infrastructure investments and program costs , ( 1 ) ensure that the agency's management of its trails program includes an analysis of trails program needs and available resources and ( 2 ) develop options for narrowing the gap between program needs and resources . to improve the agency's ability to keep up with its maintenance goals in the short term and reduce its maintenance backlog , the agency should take the following two actions: take steps to improve policies and procedures related to trail maintenance . growing populations , expanding development , and the lure of the outdoors for people living near public lands have increased demand for recreational opportunities in national forests and grasslands , including demand for trails . the forest service emphasized its commitment to implementing its framework for sustainable recreation , including improved guidance and training on sustainable trail design . they could also include , for example , changing policies and practices to improve recruitment and retention of employees with trail expertise . it also stated its commitment to improving policies and procedures related to trail maintenance , including implementing electronic collection of trail condition data , exploring options to improve recruitment and retention of employees with trails expertise , and improving collaboration with and management of volunteers . in light of these and other factors affecting trail maintenance , along with constrained federal budgets , trail users and others have remained concerned about the forest service's ability to adequately maintain its trail system . recreation enthusiasts contend that trails enhance quality of life , and , according to the outdoor industry association , the use of trails contributes over $80 billion annually to the u.s. economy .
our prior work has highlighted problems with the cost , management , and oversight of the coast guard's acquisition portfolio that have led to delivery delays and other operational challenges . the coast guard is managing a multi - billion dollar acquisition portfolio as it seeks to modernize its aging assets , including ships , planes , and information technology . since 2001 , we have reviewed the coast guard's acquisition programs and reported to congress on the risks and uncertainties in its acquisition portfolio . we reviewed ( 1 ) how selected assets are performing operationally and to what extent they are achieving desired performance levels in testing ; ( 2 ) the current cost of the coast guard's acquisition portfolio as well as plans to fund its assets ; and ( 3 ) the extent to which the coast guard is experiencing capability gaps , if any , given known affordability issues . overall , we concluded that the coast guard had made strides in its efforts to improve its acquisition management capabilities , and the department of homeland security ( dhs ) agreed with our recommendations to conduct a portfolio review and to identify the executive oversight council as the body to oversee the coast guard's portfolio management approach . the plan should also consider trade - offs if the fiscal resources needed to execute the plan are not consistent with annual budgets . for example , in a report issued in september 2012 , we found that the cost and schedule of the coast guard's acquisition portfolio remains unknown because of outdated baselines and uncertainty surrounding affordability . a long term plan of this nature is particularly critical in light of the looming offshore patrol cutter procurement , which is currently estimated to account for about two - thirds of the acquisition budget . we also found that opportunities exist to address affordability through the requirements process . clarify the performance data that should be used to assess whether or not minimum performance criteria have been met , prior to full - rate production , to determine whether a performance breach has occurred . to ensure that the coast guard's c4isr system meets mission needs , we recommend that the commandant of the coast guard take the following action: assess the operational effectiveness and suitability of the c4isr system by fully integrating this assessment into other assets' operational test plans or by testing the c4isr program on its own . a pressing concern the coast guard faces is that the growing affordability gap for its major acquisitions will be exacerbated by impending requirements and capability needs . thus , its ability to meet future needs is uncertain . to assess what , if any , capability gaps exist given the coast guard's affordability issues , we reviewed funding needs , mission needs , future plans , and performance data and reviewed the coast guard's fiscal year 2014 and 2015 budgets . we reviewed the coast guard's estimates of its overall fleet performance in key areas and also reviewed any current or potential performance gaps . these capability gaps may persist as funding replacement assets will remain difficult at current funding levels . to help the coast guard improve the long - term outlook of its portfolio , we recommend that the commandant of the coast guard take the following action: develop a 20-year fleet modernization plan that identifies all acquisitions needed to maintain the current level of service and the fiscal resources necessary to build the identified assets .
the department of justice's ( doj ) federal bureau of prisons ( bop ) requested about $6.9 billion in fiscal year 2014 to provide for the custody and care of an inmate population that has increased from about 24,000 in fiscal year 1980 to over 216,000 in july 2014 . to better address obstacles that occur during the activation process and to help ensure that institutions are activated within estimated timeframes , including those institutions that do not currently have inmates , such as administrative usp thomson and usp yazoo city , we recommend that the director of the bureau of prisons take the following three actions: direct the central office to analyze staffing data at individual institutions in the activation process to assess their progress toward reaching authorized staffing levels and use that assessment to develop effective , tailored strategies to mitigate those challenges ; develop and implement a comprehensive activation policy that incorporates the knowledge of staff with experience activating institutions ; and develop and implement an activation schedule that incorporates the four characteristics of scheduling best practices . taking action to address challenges that bop can control will help mitigate obstacles in ongoing and future activation of new institutions . according to doj , as of july 2014 , bop - operated institutions are about 31 percent overcrowded , which occurs when institutions house more inmates than they are designed to hold . to ensure that the challenges that bop faces activating new institutions are clearly conveyed to decision makers , we recommend that , in future activations , the attorney general use doj's annual congressional budget justification for bop to communicate to congress factors that might delay activations , such as challenges hiring staff and placing inmates associated with the locations of new institutions . each of the federal bureau of prisons' ( bop ) institutions in the activation process has had schedule slippages due to delays in receiving congressionally directed activation funding . bop considers reducing crowding rates system - wide to be a strategic goal and has spent over $1.3 billion on the construction and acquisition of six new federal institutions to help alleviate crowding across the prison system . we also analyzed data from the office of personnel management's ( opm ) human resources database , enterprise human resources integration ( ehri ) statistical data mart , for fiscal years 2010 through 2013 to determine the extent to which staffing challenges identified by institutions in the activation process affected bop's ability to meet estimated time frames related to activation . while the success of new institution activations relies heavily on congressional direction regarding activation funding , bop ultimately is responsible for the taxpayer dollars it spends on construction , acquisition , and activation of new institutions . additionally , over the past 2 years , members of congress have introduced at least five bills to date that seek to modify federal sentencing requirements in order to reduce the length of incarceration of inmates convicted of nonviolent drug - related offenses . our analysis compared crowding rates with and without the addition of new beds provided by the six institutions and examined the effect of that additional capacity across ( 1 ) all bop institutions , ( 2 ) respective security levels of each institution , and ( 3 ) gender .
within the department of homeland security ( dhs ) , the office of intelligence and analysis ( i&a ) has a lead role in analyzing and sharing law enforcement , intelligence , and other information in support of the department's missions and responsibilities . to help ensure that i&a maintains critical skills and competencies , when planning for and implementing current and future workforce actions , we recommend that the secretary of homeland security establish mechanisms to monitor and evaluate workforce initiatives and use results to determine any needed changes . other dhs components also have their own intelligence analysis capabilities and are part of the dhs intelligence enterprise ( the enterprise ) . established by the homeland security act of 2002 in response to the terrorist attacks of september 11 , 2001 , dhs has a primary mission that includes preventing terrorist attacks within the united states and reducing the vulnerability of the united states to terrorism . i&a officials added that the priority order of customer groups is ( 1 ) departmental leadership ; ( 2 ) state , local , tribal , and territorial partners ; ( 3 ) dhs operational components ; ( 4 ) intelligence community members ; and ( 5 ) private critical infrastructure sectors . in an effort to promote the understanding of threats , members of the enterprise are to deliver intelligence analysis and information to dhs leadership ; state , local , tribal , and territorial partners ; dhs components ; the intelligence community ; and private sector partners . however , these officials agreed that such mechanisms could help ensure that its efforts are helping to address the challenges of its analytic intelligence workforce . the bombings at the boston marathon in april 2013 underscore the importance of ensuring that intelligence is analyzed and shared with stakeholders across all levels of government in an effective and timely manner . citizenship and immigration services ( uscis ) . to help ensure that the intelligence analysis activities and resources throughout the enterprise align to an integrated set of strategic departmental intelligence priorities , we recommend that the under secretary for intelligence and analysis , homeland security take the following two actions: establish strategic departmental intelligence priorities in the homeland security intelligence priorities framework that can be used to guide annual enterprise planning efforts , including intelligence analysis and resource management and ensure that once strategic departmental intelligence priorities are established , the framework is used to inform the planned analytic activities of the dhs intelligence enterprise , as articulated in the program of analysis . by not monitoring and evaluating the effect of these actions , i&a cannot be confident that it is making progress in improving its ability to build and maintain the workforce it needs to effectively and efficiently analyze possible threats to the homeland . furthermore , i&a lacks the information essential to know whether additional changes are needed to its workforce improvement activities and the strategies that underlie those activities . to assist in the deterrence , prevention , preemption of , or response to , terrorist attacks against the united states , the under secretary is to , as appropriate , disseminate dhs - analyzed information within the department ; to other federal , state , and local agencies , and to private sector entities , with responsibilities relating to homeland security .
this report identifies ( 1 ) how rogue internet pharmacies are selling prescription drugs in violation of federal or state law or established industry standards , ( 2 ) challenges associated with federal investigations and prosecutions of rogue internet pharmacies , ( 3 ) efforts to combat rogue internet pharmacies , and ( 4 ) efforts to educate consumers about the risks of rogue internet pharmacies and how to recognize legitimate online pharmacies . while educational efforts attempt to overcome these challenges , their success thus far is unknown — in part , because the volume of drugs purchased from rogue internet pharmacies is unknown , making it difficult to assess whether educational efforts have been effective at reducing such purchases . the department of homeland security's ( dhs ) u.s. customs and border protection ( cbp ) is responsible for enforcing laws prohibiting the illegal importation of goods into the united states , including prescription drugs that have not been approved for marketing in the united states by fda , and its u.s. immigration and customs enforcement ( ice ) conducts investigations related to violations of these laws , including illegally importing prescription drugs and trafficking in counterfeit goods . some internet pharmacies are legitimate businesses that offer a safe and cost - effective way for consumers to obtain medications . it regularly scans the internet and , using nabp's standards , classifies internet pharmacies into one of four categories: ( 1 ) legitimate , ( 2 ) not recommended , ( 3 ) rogue , or ( 4 ) pending review . many consumers mistakenly believe that if a drug may be prescribed for medical use , it is safe to consume regardless in addition , of whether they have a prescription for that particular drug.other pressures , including consumers' desire to self - medicate , their wish for privacy related to obtaining lifestyle medications ( such as drugs for sexual dysfunction ) , and relatively high out - of - pocket costs for brand - name drugs may fuel a demand among consumers to purchase prescription drugs from rogue internet pharmacies . for example , fda is responsible for ensuring the safety and effectiveness of prescription drugs , and fda approval is required prior to marketing prescription drugs in the united states . to identify how rogue internet pharmacies are selling prescription drugs in violation of federal or state laws or established industry standards , we interviewed officials from federal agencies such as fda , cbp , ice , uspis , and doj , reviewed federal laws and regulations , and examined agency documents , including those that presented information about federal indictments and prosecutions related to internet pharmacy crimes . the food and drug administration safety and innovation act enacted in 2012 required that we report on problems posed by rogue internet pharmacies . to identify challenges involved in investigating and prosecuting rogue internet pharmacies , as well as efforts to combat rogue internet pharmacies , we interviewed officials from federal agencies such as fda , cbp , ice , and doj . a number of federal and state agencies share responsibility for regulating prescription drugs that are marketed and sold to u.s. consumers , including by internet pharmacies . to obtain additional information , we interviewed a variety of knowledgeable stakeholders , including the national association of boards of pharmacy ( nabp ) and legitscript , an online pharmacy verification service , both of which routinely review internet pharmacy websites to determine compliance with federal and state laws , and reviewed stakeholders' publications on rogue internet pharmacies .
specifically , this report addresses ( 1 ) agency responsibilities related to the use of virtual currencies and the emerging challenges these currencies pose to the agencies ; and ( 2 ) actions the agencies have taken in response to the emergence of virtual currencies , including interagency collaborative efforts . further , we interviewed officials from the following federal financial regulatory and law enforcement agencies: the board of governors of the federal reserve system ( federal the bureau of consumer financial protection ( also known as the consumer financial protection bureau or cfpb ) ; the commodity futures trading commission ( cftc ) ; the department of homeland security ( dhs ) , including u.s. immigration and customs enforcement – homeland security investigations ( ice - hsi ) and the u.s. secret service ( secret service ) ; the department of justice ( doj ) , including the criminal division and two of its components — the asset forfeiture and money laundering section and computer crime and intellectual property section — and the federal bureau of investigation ( fbi ) ; the department of the treasury ( treasury ) , including the financial crimes enforcement network ( fincen ) and the office of the comptroller of the currency ( occ ) ; the federal deposit insurance corporation ( fdic ) ; the national credit union administration ( ncua ) ; and the securities and exchange commission ( sec ) . this report focuses on the federal financial regulatory agencies and selected federal law enforcement agencies that have a role in protecting the u.s. financial system and investigating financial crimes . to help ensure that federal interagency collaboration on virtual currencies addresses emerging consumer protection issues , we recommend that the director of cfpb ( 1 ) identify which interagency working groups could help cfpb maintain awareness of these issues or would benefit from cfpb's participation ; and ( 2 ) decide , in coordination with the agencies already participating in these efforts , which ones cfpb should participate in . we selected the law enforcement agencies included in our review based on their involvement in investigating virtual - currency - related crimes and participation in interagency collaborative efforts and congressional hearings on virtual currency issues . because some virtual currency transactions provide greater anonymity than transactions using traditional payment systems , law enforcement and financial regulators have raised concerns about the use of virtual currencies for illegal activities . additionally , recent cases involving the loss of funds from virtual currency exchanges have highlighted potential consumer protection issues . virtual currencies operate over the internet and , in some cases , may be used to buy real goods and services and exchanged for traditional currencies . while not widely used or accepted , virtual currencies , such as bitcoin , have grown in popularity in recent years and have emerged for some as potential alternatives to traditional currencies issued by governments . they offer potential benefits over traditional currencies , including lower transaction costs and faster funds transfers . you asked us to examine potential policy issues related to virtual currencies and the status of federal agency collaboration in this area . we also reviewed prior gao reports , congressional research service reports , and relevant laws and regulations , including the bank secrecy act ( bsa ) and related anti - money laundering provisions such as title iii of the usa patriot act , to gain an understanding of agencies' responsibilities in administering and enforcing anti - money - laundering laws and regulations , as well as in investigating and prosecuting financial and other crimes.reviewed academic articles and papers from industry stakeholders .
we examined ( 1 ) the effects of usaid's prepositioning on delivery time frames for emergency food aid shipments , ( 2 ) the effects of prepositioning on the costs of emergency food aid , and ( 3 ) the extent to which the agency monitors prepositioning to manage program resources effectively . this report examines the ( 1 ) effects of usaid's prepositioning on delivery time frames for emergency food aid shipments , ( 2 ) the effects of prepositioning on the costs of emergency food aid , and ( 3 ) the extent to which the agency monitors prepositioning to maximize time savings and cost effectiveness . to strengthen usaid's ability to help ensure that its food aid prepositioning program meets the goal of reducing delivery time frames in a cost - effective manner , we recommend that the usaid administrator take the following three steps to systematically 1. collect , and ensure the reliability and validity of , data on delivery time frames for all emergency food aid shipments , including prepositioned food aid shipments ; 2. monitor and assess data on delivery time frames for prepositioned food aid shipments ; and 3. monitor and assess costs associated with commodity procurement , shipping , and storage for prepositioned food aid shipments . in fiscal years 2007 to 2012 , the united states donated about $9.2 billion in emergency food aid to recipient countries under title ii of the food for peace act ( title ii ) . u.s. international emergency food aid assists nations affected by severe ongoing crises , such as the long - term food shortage in ethiopia , as well as unanticipated crises , such as the 2010 earthquake in haiti . the u.s. agency for international development's ( usaid ) office of food for peace , which is responsible for managing the u.s. emergency food aid program , delivers this assistance through cooperating sponsors such as the world food program ( wfp ) , catholic relief services , and save the children . furthermore , although cost savings are not usaid's primary goal for the prepositioning program , without systematic monitoring of the total cost of prepositioning the agency has limited ability to maximize the resources available for addressing emergency food crises . to determine the extent to which usaid has monitored prepositioning , we reviewed agency documents to assess whether usaid's monitoring was consistent with its policy and regulations . such data could also help usaid assess the tradeoffs between prepositioning's timeliness and its additional warehouse , shipping , and commodity costs . to determine the effects of usaid's prepositioning on the delivery time frames and costs of emergency food aid , we analyzed data for 3,785 emergency food aid shipments in fiscal years 2007 through 2012 . further , usaid does not systematically monitor the costs of prepositioning to maximize the program's cost - effectiveness . in addition , some emergency food aid data that are currently available from wfp and usaid's other cooperating sponsors have limitations that constrain their usefulness for monitoring delivery time frames . as a result , usaid lacks the ability to determine whether prepositioning is achieving its primary goal of shortening response times or to identify possible time savings relative to standard emergency food aid shipments .
this report ( 1 ) analyzes how the goals - engagement - accountability - results ( gear ) framework addresses key practices for effective performance management and identifies opportunities , if any , to improve gear implementation government - wide ; ( 2 ) describes the status of each pilot agency's gear implementation and any lessons learned to date ; and ( 3 ) assesses the extent to which each agency's gear implementation plan includes selected best practices for project planning . five federal agencies are piloting gear , either agency - wide or in single units: the department of energy ( doe ) , the department of housing and urban development ( hud ) , the department of homeland security / united states coast guard ( dhs / coast guard ) , the department of veterans affairs / national cemetery administration ( va / nca ) , and the office of personnel management ( opm ) . this report ( 1 ) analyzes how the gear framework addresses key practices for effective performance management and identifies opportunities , if any , to improve gear implementation government - wide ; ( 2 ) describes the status of each pilot agency's gear implementation and any lessons learned to date ; and ( 3 ) assesses the extent to which each agency's gear implementation plan includes selected best practices for project planning . in addition , to improve agencies' gear implementation plans , we recommend that: the secretary of homeland security direct the commandant of the coast guard take the following two actions to update the agency's gear implementation plan to include: ( 1 ) performance measures that permit comparison between desired outcomes and actual results and ( 2 ) additional information on schedules that are linked to specific actions ; the secretary of housing and urban development take the following two actions to update the agency's gear implementation plan to: ( 1 ) include objectives describing the goals the agency plans to achieve and ( 2 ) identify roles and responsibilities for specific actions and stakeholders ; the secretary of veterans affairs direct the under secretary for memorial affairs take the following three actions to update the national cemetery administration's gear implementation plan to include: ( 1 ) performance measures that permit comparison between desired outcomes and actual results , ( 2 ) additional information on roles and responsibilities for specific actions and stakeholders , and ( 3 ) additional information on schedules that are linked to specific actions ; and the acting director of opm to take the following two actions to update the agency's gear implementation plan to: ( 1 ) include objectives describing the goals the agency plans to achieve and ( 2 ) identify roles and responsibilities for specific actions and stakeholders . in 2011 , representatives of various federal agencies , labor unions , and management organizations were brought together by the national council on federal labor - management relations ( lmr council ) , in conjunction with the chief human capital officers council ( chco council ) , to identify ways to reform and improve employee performance management in the federal government . in our past work we have noted how current budget and long - term fiscal pressures , combined with a potential wave of employee retirements , could produce gaps in leadership and institutional knowledge that could impair the ability of federal agencies to carry out their complex and evolving missions .
the transportation security administration ( tsa ) , a component of the department of homeland security ( dhs ) , accelerated the deployment of advanced imaging technology ( ait ) systems , commonly referred to as full - body scanners , in response to the december 25 , 2009 , attempted terrorist attack on northwest airlines flight 253 . to help ensure that tsa invests in screening technology that meets mission needs , the administrator of the transportation security administration should ensure that the following two actions are taken before procuring ait - 2 systems: measure system effectiveness based on the performance of the ait - 2 technology and screening officers who operate the technology , while taking into account current processes and deployment strategies , and use scientific evidence and information from dhs's science and technology directorate , and the national laboratories , as well as information and data provided by vendors to develop a realistic schedule with achievable milestones that outlines the technological advancements , estimated time , and resources needed to achieve tsa's tier iv end state . tsa would have more assurance that its $3.5 billion investment in ait provides effective security benefits by ( 1 ) measuring system effectiveness based on the performance of the ait - 2 technology and sos who operate the technology , while taking into account current processes and deployment strategies and ( 2 ) using scientific evidence and information from dhs's science and technology directorate , and the national laboratories , as well as information and data provided by vendors , to develop a realistic schedule with achievable milestones that outlines the technological advancements , estimated time , and resources needed to achieve tsa's tier iv end state . to mitigate those concerns , tsa began installing automated target recognition ( atr ) software on deployed ait systems in july 2011 . according to tsa officials , ait systems provide enhanced security benefits compared with those of walk - through metal detectors by identifying nonmetallic threat objects and liquids . gao , homeland security: dhs requires more disciplined investment management to help meet mission needs , gao - 12-833 ( washington , d.c.: sept. 18 , 2012 ) . as an update to our prior work , you asked us to evaluate tsa's efforts to enhance effectiveness of ait systems . to help ensure that tsa improves so performance on ait - atr systems and uses resources effectively , the administrator of the transportation security administration should take the following two actions: clarify which office is responsible for overseeing tsa's ied screening checkpoint drills operational directive , direct the office to ensure enforcement of the directive in conducting these drills , and analyze the data to identify any potential weaknesses in the screening process , and establish protocols that facilitate the capturing of operational data on secondary screening of passengers at the checkpoint to determine the extent to which ait - atr system false alarm rates affect operational costs once ait - atr systems are networked together . in january 2012 , we concluded that tsa had acquired advanced imaging technology ( ait ) systems that were not being used on a regular basis and thus were not providing a security benefit .
to enhance dod's ability to determine whether the regional centers are achieving departmental priorities , we recommend that the secretary of defense direct the under secretary of defense for policy to develop an approach to assess the regional centers' progress in achieving dod priorities , including identifying measurable goals and objectives , metrics , or other indicators of performance , and develop a methodology for using performance information , to include defining the role of the governance board in the process . moreover , dod's ability to assess the regional centers' performance would provide congress with the information it needs as it evaluates current and similar programs and considers future funding levels . in recent years , the department of defense ( dod ) has emphasized security cooperation approaches to build the defense capacity of foreign partners and advance the u.s. objective of international peace and cooperation . until measurable program goals and objectives linked with performance metrics are implemented , dod cannot fully assess or adequately oversee the regional centers . while dod has taken positive steps by establishing a new governance body and updating dod guidance applying to the regional centers for fiscal year 2013 , dod does not yet have a process to assess the regional centers' progress . conducting routine assessments using measurable goals and objectives , with metrics to evaluate progress , and a methodology for using performance information to include defining the role of the governance board , would provide dod a sounder basis for assessing the regional centers' progress in achieving results and better determining the allocation of resources . 112-239 ) mandated us to conduct a study of dod's regional centers . while dod has expressed challenges entailed in establishing metrics to capture the effects of a program premised on relationship - building and has taken steps to study the matter , it has yet to establish an initial set of metrics . ousd policy has not established a methodology for assessing the regional centers' progress in achieving dod priorities , to include clarifying how it will use performance data provided by the regional centers and clearly identifying the role of its governance board in the assessment process . however , dod has not yet established an initial set of metrics . in this report , we ( 1 ) describe how the regional centers' activities compare with those of other dod training and education organizations , and ( 2 ) evaluate the extent to which dod has developed and implemented an approach to oversee and assess the regional centers' progress in achieving dod priorities . effective management of efforts to build the defense capacity of foreign partners will help dod steward its resources to achieve its strategic priorities and will likely better position the u.s. government to respond to changing conditions and future uncertainties around the world . specifically , we have found instances in which dod had not consistently defined measures to evaluate progress , and in which reporting on the progress and effectiveness of some defense capacity - building activities had been limited . as part of the department's efforts to build partner capacity , dod relies on its regional centers for security studies ( regional centers ) to coordinate with the geographic combatant commands in developing training and educational programs around the globe to enhance security , deepen foreign officials' understanding of the united states , and foster bilateral and multilateral partnerships .
to determine the extent to which the department of defense ( dod ) has developed procedures for managing the technical corrosion collaboration ( tcc ) program , we reviewed dod's guidance — the 2014 dod corrosion prevention and mitigation strategic plan . in 2013 , the department of defense ( dod ) reported spending an estimated $20.8 billion annually to prevent and mitigate corrosion of all of its assets , including military equipment , weapons , facilities , and other infrastructure . this report addresses to what extent dod ( 1 ) has established procedures for managing the tcc program , ( 2 ) can provide information on the amount of funds spent on the program since inception , and ( 3 ) has established goals for the tcc program and transitioned demonstrated results from projects to the military departments . congress has taken a series of legislative actions aimed at enhancing dod's ability to effectively address corrosion prevention and mitigation , and to provide congress with greater transparency over the department's corrosion - prevention and mitigation efforts . dod implements several programs to help prevent and mitigate the costs of corrosion . to help identify technology or methods to prevent or mitigate corrosion , and educate personnel about corrosion prevention and mitigation , dod funds research by universities and military research labs that participate in dod's technical corrosion collaboration ( tcc ) program , a research and development program . to determine the extent to which dod has developed procedures for managing the tcc program , we reviewed dod's guidance — the 2014 dod corrosion prevention and mitigation strategic plan . corrosion is defined in section 2228 of title 10 of the united states code as the deterioration of a material or its properties due to a reaction of that material with its chemical environment . to better ensure that dod can demonstrate the success of the tcc program and the extent to which tcc results will help to prevent or mitigate corrosion , we recommend that the under secretary of defense for acquisition , technology and logistics require the director , corrosion policy and oversight office , to establish a process for transitioning demonstrated results of tcc projects to the military departments as required by the section 2228 of title 10 of the united states code . corrosion affects military readiness by taking critical systems out of action and creating safety hazards . to enhance dod's ability to make consistent and informed decisions in its management of the tcc program in accordance with internal control standards , we recommend that the under secretary of defense for acquisition , technology and logistics require the director , corrosion policy and oversight office , to document the procedures for approving projects within the tcc program for civilian institutions ; document the procedures for selecting and approving projects within the tcc program for military academic institutions ; document the procedures for selecting and approving military research labs supporting civilian and military institutions in conducting projects within the tcc program ; and track and maintain accurate records that include amounts of funds used for the tcc program , and have them readily available for examination to ensure that funding data will be accurately accounted for and reported in future reports , such as the annual budget report to congress .
this report examines ( 1 ) the department of state's ( state ) process for ranking and promoting foreign service personnel , ( 2 ) procedural changes state has made to its foreign service promotion process in response to identified concerns , and ( 3 ) the extent to which updated procedures were consistently followed in 2011 and 2012 and whether any notable concerns about the promotion process remain . specifically , this report examines ( 1 ) state's process for ranking and promoting foreign service personnel , ( 2 ) procedural changes state has made to its foreign service promotion process in response to identified concerns , and ( 3 ) the extent to which updated procedures were consistently followed in 2011 and 2012 and whether any notable concerns about the promotion process remain . the department of state ( state ) assessed more than 8,500 foreign service personnel performance files for the 2012 promotion process . to improve and better document state's compliance with key safeguards governing the foreign service promotion process , we recommend that the secretary of state instruct the director general of the foreign service and director of the human resources office of performance evaluation to take steps to ensure that selection board , performance standards board , and reconstituted board reports are complete and fully document compliance with internal controls , including but not limited to signed oaths and recusal memos . for example , more than half of the 41 boards made observations and recommendations concerning the following: completeness , accuracy , or accessibility of the official performance folder ; promotion criteria , policies , or related practices ; and technological issues affecting board operations . nonetheless , the oig identified areas of concern and made recommendations to strengthen the process , which state agreed to implement . subsequent to previous allegations of improprieties in the process , state's office of inspector general ( oig ) reviewed state's foreign service promotion process and concluded , in march 2010 , that it was fundamentally fair and trustworthy . state concurred with our recommendation to ensure board reports are complete and fully documented . to review state's process for ranking and promoting foreign service personnel , we reviewed relevant laws , regulations , and procedures governing state's promotion and grievance processes , and interviewed officials from state's bureau of human resources ( hr ) . to examine the procedural changes state has made to its foreign service promotion process , we reviewed concerns identified by the oig and state's foreign service grievance board and whether they had been addressed . in addition , more than a third of the 41 boards made observations and recommendations concerning the following: uncertainty over how to interpret some performance appraisal information ; and sufficiency or quality of promotion process guidance and training . this report addresses actions taken by state since march 2010 to help ensure the foreign service promotion process operates with fairness and integrity . to learn about state's procedural changes developed in response to the oig's recommendations , we reviewed state and oig documents showing actions taken by state to comply with the oig's recommendations . we determined whether state's responses had been incorporated into its operating procedures , policies , and supporting documentation by reviewing relevant agency documents .
this report addresses ( 1 ) dhs's efforts to review records that are maintained in its databases to identify potential overstays , ( 2 ) the extent to which dhs's changes in its systems or processes have improved data on potential overstays and dhs's ability to report overstay rates , and ( 3 ) the extent to which dhs has made progress in developing and implementing a biometric exit system . to provide reasonable assurance of when dhs will be able provide an assessment of the benefits and costs of biometric air exit options to congress , we recommend that the secretary of homeland security establish time frames and milestones for developing and implementing an evaluation framework to be used in conducting the department's assessment of biometric air exit options . to help improve confidence in the quality of overstay data that dhs plans to report in december 2013 in accordance with statutory reporting requirements , we recommend that the secretary of homeland security direct relevant dhs components to assess and document the extent to which the reliability of the data used to develop any overstay estimates has improved and any remaining limitations in how the data can be used . however , overstays could pose homeland security the department of homeland security ( dhs ) has primary responsibility for identifying and taking enforcement action to address overstays . u.s. immigration and customs enforcement ( ice ) is the lead agency for enforcing immigration law in the interior of the united states and is primarily responsible for overstay enforcement . furthermore , any delays in providing this information to congress could further affect possible implementation of a biometric exit system to address statutory requirements . in addition to taking actions in response to the recommendations we have made , since april 2011 , dhs has reported taking other actions to strengthen its processes for identifying and taking enforcement action against overstays , such as enhancing its use of biographic data to identify overstays and developing plans to capture biometric data as part of departure records to comply with federal law . within dhs , u.s. customs and border protection ( cbp ) is tasked with , among other duties , inspecting all people applying for entry to the united states to determine their admissibility to the country and screening visa waiver program applicants to determine their eligibility to travel to the united states under the program . dhs plans to provide congress with an assessment of the benefits and costs of various options for pursuing a biometric exit system at airports , but without robust planning that includes time frames and milestones to develop and implement an evaluation framework for this assessment , dhs lacks reasonable assurance that it will be able to provide this assessment to congress for the fiscal year 2016 budget cycle as planned . regarding our second recommendation , that dhs establish time frames and milestones for developing and implementing an evaluation framework to be used in conducting the department's assessment of biometric air exit options , dhs indicated that cbp and s&t will finalize the goals and objectives for biometric air exit by january 31 , 2014 , and that these goals and objectives will be used in the development of an evaluation framework that dhs expects to have completed by june 30 , 2014 .
this third report examines ( 1 ) the status of sblf ; ( 2 ) identified reasons for variation in growth of qualified small business lending at sblf banks ; and ( 3 ) actions treasury has taken to evaluate sblf participant lending patterns . our objectives were to examine ( 1 ) the status of the small business lending fund ( sblf ) ; ( 2 ) identify reasons for variation in growth of qualified small business lending at sblf banks ; and ( 3 ) actions the department of the treasury ( treasury ) has taken to evaluate sblf participant lending patterns . in response to concerns about challenges faced by small businesses in recent years , congress enacted the small business jobs act of 2010 , which authorized the secretary of the department of the treasury ( treasury ) to make up to $30 billion of capital available and offered incentives to financial institutions to increase small business lending . among other things , the law aimed to stimulate job growth by establishing the small business lending fund ( sblf ) to encourage financial institutions with assets of less than $10 billion to increase their lending to small businesses with up to $50 million in annual revenues . of this $4 billion , $3.9 billion went to 281 banks and $104 million to 51 community development loan funds ( cdlf ) . to examine the process for exiting the program and participants' reasons for exiting , we collected documents and interviewed officials from treasury and three bank regulatory agencies: the office of the comptroller of the currency ( occ ) , the board of governors of the federal reserve system ( federal reserve ) , and the federal deposit insurance corporation ( fdic ) . to examine program status , including participants' lending , and dividend and interest payments , we reviewed treasury data as of june 30 , 2013 , and treasury's july and october 2013 lending growth reports . in 2011 , 935 financial institutions applied to the program for a combined funding request of $11.7 billion . in such an evaluation , treasury should ensure that the analytical approaches identified by its contractor will isolate the role of sblf from other factors that could affect small business lending to show the net impact of the program . by september 2011 , treasury had approved $4 billion for 332 institutions through treasury purchases of preferred stock or debt instruments . in our first and second reports , we reviewed the implementation of sblf and made recommendations to improve the program's management oversight , program evaluation , and performance reporting . however , these techniques can improve confidence in whether or not observed results are attributable to sblf . treasury has continued to develop and refine its approach to assessing the performance of sblf and measuring the extent to which sblf participants have increased small business lending . treasury has taken steps to assess sblf program performance ( participants' lending patterns ) by including a peer - group analysis in the lending growth reports and collecting additional performance information through annual surveys of program participants . the 2010 small business jobs act mandates us to conduct an annual audit of the sblf program .
the objectives of our review were to determine ( 1 ) what is known about the effectiveness of ignition interlocks in reducing alcohol - impaired driving and ( 2 ) the extent to which the national highway traffic safety administration ( nhtsa ) has assisted states in implementing ignition - interlock programs , including the moving ahead for progress in the 21st century act ( map - 21 ) ignition - interlock grant program . this report discusses ( 1 ) what is known about the effectiveness of ignition interlocks in reducing alcohol - impaired driving and ( 2 ) the extent to which nhtsa has assisted states in implementing ignition - interlock programs , including the map - 21 ignition - interlock grant program . for such states , the incentive and relatively limited funding offered by the grant is not likely to outweigh the challenges of changing state ignition - interlock laws to eliminate exemptions . according to the national highway traffic safety administration ( nhtsa ) , all states have enacted legislation requiring or permitting the use of ignition interlocks . most recently , the 2012 surface transportation reauthorization act — moving ahead for progress in the 21st century act ( map - 21 ) — also included funding for a new grant program for states with laws mandating that all drivers convicted of dwi be allowed to drive only vehicles equipped with an ignition interlock . historically , congress has provided funds for state programs to reduce alcohol - impaired driving . in light of the toll alcohol - impaired driving takes , you asked us to review the effectiveness of ignition interlocks and nhtsa's implementation of the map - 21 ignition - interlock program . while the number of such fatalities has dropped by 21 percent over the last 10 years , almost one third of all traffic fatalities annually resulted from crashes involving an alcohol - impaired driver over the same period . this recommendation was intended to provide congress with more complete information as it considers reauthorizing surface transportation programs , including the ignition - interlock grant program . nhtsa assists states in implementing these programs and , in addition to other safety organizations , has funded research examining the effectiveness of ignition - interlock programs . specifically , dot provided the digest of impaired driving and selected beverage control laws , which is a compilation of comprehensive information on states' impaired - driving laws . included in the draft report was a recommendation that the secretary of transportation provide congress with information about the extent to which states' ignition interlock laws allow exemptions . california first piloted the use of ignition interlocks in 1986 for drivers convicted of driving while intoxicated ( dwi ) . nhtsa administers safety - incentive grant programs to assist states in their efforts to reduce traffic - related fatalities , including alcohol - impaired fatalities . to identify the types of assistance that nhtsa provides to states to help them establish and implement their ignition - interlock programs , we interviewed nhtsa officials about their activities and reviewed reports describing nhtsa's ignition - interlock - related research , technical assistance , and conferences . to identify what is known about the effectiveness of ignition interlocks , we reviewed 25 studies conducted between 1990 and 2013 that analyzed relationships between ignition interlock devices or programs and alcohol - impaired driving outcomes , including dwi arrests and dwi fatalities .
our objectives for this engagement were to ( 1 ) characterize the cio ratings for selected federal agencies' it investments as reported on the dashboard over time , ( 2 ) determine the extent to which selected agencies' cio ratings are consistent with reported investment risk , and ( 3 ) determine the extent to which selected agencies are addressing at - risk investments . the dashboard is to provide transparency for these investments in order to facilitate public monitoring of government operations and accountability for investment performance by the federal chief information officers ( cio ) who oversee them . in accordance with its responsibilities set forth in law , the office of management and budget ( omb ) launched the federal information technology ( it ) dashboard in june 2009 as a public web site that reports performance and supporting data for major it investments — on which the federal government plans to invest over $38 billion in fiscal year 2014 . our objectives for this engagement were to ( 1 ) characterize the chief information officer ( cio ) ratings for selected federal agencies' information technology ( it ) investments as reported on the dashboard over time , ( 2 ) determine the extent to which selected agencies' cio ratings are consistent with reported investment risk , and ( 3 ) determine the extent to which selected agencies are addressing at - risk investments . these investments became the focus of joint omb - agency techstat accountability sessions ( techstats ) — evidence - based reviews intended to improve investment performance through concrete actions . the eight agencies are the departments of agriculture ( agriculture ) , commerce ( commerce ) , energy ( energy ) , justice ( justice ) , transportation ( transportation ) , the treasury ( treasury ) , and veterans affairs ( va ) , and the social security administration ( ssa ) . secondly , omb stated that it began using the it dashboard to help identify at - risk investments starting with its launch in june 2009 , rather than 2010 . to address our first objective , we selected the eight agencies with the most reported major it spending in fiscal year 2012 , after excluding agencies reviewed in our most recent report on the dashboard.reviewed publicly available data from the dashboard from its inception in june 2009 through august 2013 . according to omb , it began using the dashboard to identify at - risk investments with its launch in june 2009 . omb neither agreed nor disagreed with our recommendation ; agriculture agreed with the report's findings ; commerce disagreed with our recommendation ; energy concurred with our recommendation with one exception related to supercomputers ; justice , treasury , and transportation neither agreed nor disagreed with the report's findings ; va agreed with the report's findings ; and ssa agreed with our recommendation . we support omb in its efforts to increase public transparency and accountability . omb believes that the existing guidance is appropriate and does not have plans to review it . while we acknowledge that omb and federal agencies continue to have access to the dashboard during the budget process , the public display of these data is intended to allow other oversight bodies , including congress and the general public , to hold government agencies accountable for progress and results .
in fiscal year 2012 , the department of defense ( dod ) provided health care to nearly 9.7 million servicemembers , retirees , and their families through its tricare program . in this report we examine: ( 1 ) tma's acquisition process to award tricare's third generation mcscs ; ( 2 ) the extent to which issues were raised in the bid protests involving tricare's third generation mcscs , including the identification of any common themes ; and ( 3 ) lessons learned , if any , from the acquisition of tricare's third generation mcscs and how , if at all , dha plans to use these lessons in future contracting activities . dod uses private sector contractors to develop and maintain the health care provider networks that make up tricare's purchased care system , which complements the health care provided by the u.s. military's health care system — a direct care system of military treatment facilities . as of october 1 , 2013 , dod's defense health agency ( dha ) is responsible for awarding , administering , and overseeing tricare's managed care support contracts ( mcsc ) . tricare is a regionally structured program that provides health care services and support to beneficiaries in three u.s. regions: north , south , and west . to describe tma's acquisition process for awarding tricare's third generation mcscs , we reviewed relevant statutes and federal regulations , including the federal acquisition regulation ( far ) and defense federal acquisition regulation supplement ( dfars ) .obtained and reviewed dod and tricare policy documents as well as contract documentation specific to tricare's third generation mcsc acquisition process . dod's health care costs have more than doubled from $19 billion in fiscal year 2001 to its fiscal year 2014 budget request of $49.4 billion . according to tricare acquisition officials , preliminary lessons learned from the third generation acquisition process and resulting bid protests include ( 1 ) improvements in communication and documentation to increase transparency during the evaluation of the proposals and ( 2 ) increases to the length of the acquisition process to allow for additional time to evaluate proposals and for the transition from one mcsc to another . the report raised concerns regarding the growth in dod's health care costs and identified health care contracts with private sector companies under its tricare program as an area for potential savings and efficiencies . the evaluation factors , in descending order of importance , were: ( 1 ) technical approach , ( 2 ) past performance , and ( 3 ) price / cost . communication: to more clearly communicate how tma would evaluate proposals , tma issued an amended rfp for the south and west regions and allowed offerors to submit proposal revisions . gao was directed to review dod's process for awarding tricare contracts , including the mcscs , and the degree to which this process is transparent . dod's fiscal year budget request of $49.4 billion includes funds for its defense health program , military medical personnel , military construction , as well as funds set aside for the medicare - eligible retiree health care fund . congressional budget office reported that dod's health care costs are projected to reach $59 billion by 2016 and nearly $92 billion by 2030 .
in this third report , we ( 1 ) evaluate program progress toward cost , schedule , and performance goals ; ( 2 ) identify program development challenges , if any , and steps to address these challenges ; and ( 3 ) assess progress in manufacturing aircraft . these activities include ( 1 ) identifying key system characteristics and critical manufacturing processes ; ( 2 ) establishing a reliability growth plan and goals ; ( 3 ) conducting failure modes and effects analysis ; ( 4 ) conducting reliability growth testing ; and ( 5 ) determining whether processes are in control and capable . specifically , we examined ( 1 ) progress toward cost , schedule , and performance goals ; ( 2 ) development challenges , if any , and steps to address them ; and ( 3 ) progress in manufacturing the aircraft . due to existing schedule risks and the fact that the program is entering a challenging phase of testing , we recommend that the secretary of defense direct the air force to study the likelihood and potential effect of delays on total development costs , and develop mitigation plans , as needed , related to potential delays . the kc - 46 tanker modernization program , valued at $51 billion , is the air force's highest acquisition priority . to conduct work for our current review , we analyzed financial management documents ; program budgets ; risk assessments ; technical performance indicators ; flight test and manufacturing plans ; and software development plan and metrics . this report examines the air force's continued development of the kc - 46 tanker program . the program recently completed its third year in development to convert an aircraft designed for commercial use into an aerial refueling tanker . dod has since reviewed the use of management reserves and is conducting schedule risk assessments . in our first report , we recommended that the department of defense ( dod ) track lessons learned , since the kc - 46 is one of the few major programs to award a fixed price incentive ( firm target ) development contract in recent years . the kc - 46 program office conducts an annual analysis of cost and schedule risks to quantify the potential effect of delays on program costs and officials told us they will consider the risks we identified in that analysis . in our second report , we recommended that dod analyze the root causes for the rapid allocation of management reserves ( funds set aside to address development risks ) and improve the kc - 46 master schedule to comply with best practices . we have not yet assessed testing results and plans to correct identified deficiencies because flight testing has not officially begun . this force is now over 50 years old on average and costs increasingly more to maintain and support , with additional concerns that age - related problems could potentially ground the fleet . aerial refueling — the transfer of fuel from airborne tankers to combat and airlift forces — is critical to the u.s. military's ability to project power overseas and to effectively operate within a combat theater . we also interviewed program officials to determine the status of department of defense ( dod ) efforts to implement our prior recommendations aimed at improving the program's integrated master schedule .
the public works and economic development act of 1965 ( pweda ) authorized the creation of the economic development administration ( eda ) within the department of commerce ( commerce ) . this report examines ( 1 ) the extent to which eda documented grant selection decisions ; ( 2 ) the indicators of economic distress for counties with eda - funded projects and how these funds have been distributed to rural and nonrural areas ; and ( 3 ) the types of projects that have been funded by these programs . the two largest programs eda uses to accomplish its mission are the public works and economic development ( public works ) program and the economic adjustment assistance ( eaa ) program . in fiscal year 2012 , public works projects comprised 48 percent ( $129.2 million ) of eda's total grant investment dollars , while eaa projects comprised 14 percent ( $38.5 million ) of eda's total grant investment dollars . pweda , as amended , authorizes eda to provide financial assistance through grants to rural and urban communities experiencing substantial and persistent economic distress . this report examines , for the economic development administration's ( eda ) public works and economic development ( public works ) and economic adjustment assistance ( eaa ) programs , ( 1 ) the extent to which eda documented grant selection decisions ; ( 2 ) the indicators of economic distress for counties with eda - funded projects and how these funds have been distributed to rural and nonrural areas ; and ( 3 ) the types of projects that have been funded by these programs . to increase transparency in the award selection process , the secretary of commerce should direct the deputy assistant secretary for economic development to develop and implement procedures to ensure that eda regional offices consistently complete the required investment review committee record template for each proposed project considered for funding . eda awarded more than 1,500 grants under the public works and eaa grant programs in fiscal years 2006 through 2012 ( the period of interest in the congressional mandate ) . because eda officials have not ensured that its regional offices fully and consistently document their irc discussions in the template , eda may not have adequate assurance that its funding decisions are consistent and transparent . eda guidance notes that the irc should address several items using the template , including the ( 1 ) pros and cons of each project ; ( 2 ) environmental / legal issues , if any ; ( 3 ) project's fit with the agency's investment priorities ; ( 4 ) notes on the reasonableness of reported outcome data on jobs and private investment ; and ( 5 ) recommendations for further action . business development ( projects that support entrepreneurial efforts , help businesses get started , and promote the development of new markets for existing products ) ; and plans and research ( planning and strategy development efforts for job creation and retention and projects that support research of practices , principles , and innovations that foster effective economic development strategies ) . we provided a draft of this report to the department of commerce ( commerce ) for review and comment .
to ensure a stable future supply of lithium - 7 , we recommend that the secretary of energy direct the isotope program , consistent with the program's mission to manage isotopes in short supply , to take on the stewardship role by fully assessing supply risks ; communicating risks , as needed , to stakeholders ; ensuring risks are appropriately managed ; and fully and accurately determining domestic demand . this report examines ( 1 ) what is known about the supply and domestic demand for lithium - 7 ; ( 2 ) the responsibilities of doe , nrc , and other entities in assessing risks to the lithium - 7 supply , and what , if anything , has been done to mitigate a potential supply disruption of lithium - 7 ; and ( 3 ) additional options , if any , identified by government officials and industry representatives for mitigating a potential lithium - 7 shortage . about 13 percent of our nation's electricity is produced by 65 nuclear power reactors that rely on enriched lithium hydroxide — a chemical that is produced and exported only by china and russia . of the 100 commercial nuclear power reactors in the united states , these 65 are pressurized water reactors , a type of reactor that requires lithium hydroxide to be added to the water that cools it . all commercial nuclear power reactors in the united states , including the 65 pressurized water reactors , are regulated by the nuclear regulatory commission ( nrc ) through licensing , inspection , and enforcement of its requirements . the lithium hydroxide is used in pressurized water reactors to prevent the cooling water from becoming acidic due to the addition of other chemicals that are critical to managing the nuclear reaction . today , industry relies on china and russia for its supply of lithium - 7 has not been produced in the united states since 1963 , but a portion of the low - enriched lithium - 7 was further enriched and is stored by the national nuclear security administration ( nnsa ) , a semiautonomous agency within doe . without the lithium hydroxide , the cooling water's acidity would increase the rate of corrosion of pipes and other infrastructure in the reactor — possibly causing them to fail . in light of the risk of relying on two suppliers for a critical component used in most of the nation's commercial nuclear power reactors , you asked us to review lithium - 7 supply and demand in the united states . doe has studied lithium - 7 supply and demand to guide its decisions related to lithium - 7 . similarly , nnsa makes other isotopes available to the isotope program to sell , including helium - 3 , on which we previously reported.pronged mission is to: ( 1 ) produce or distribute isotopes in short supply , their associated by - products and surplus materials , and deliver isotope - related services ; ( 2 ) maintain the infrastructure required to produce and supply isotopes and related services ; and ( 3 ) investigate and develop according to doe , the isotope program's three - new or improved isotope production and processing techniques that can make new isotopes available for research and other applications .
these elements include ( 1 ) proposals to enhance training range capabilities and address any shortfalls , ( 2 ) goals and milestones for tracking progress implementing dod's sustainment plan , and ( 3 ) projected funding requirements for implementing planned actions , among others . to determine whether the department of defense's ( dod ) 2013 sustainable ranges report met the reporting requirements specified in section 366 ( a ) of the bob stump national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2003 , as amended , we reviewed the report and compared it with those requirements . in this review , we determined ( 1 ) whether dod's 2013 sustainable ranges report met the legislative requirements ; and ( 2 ) whether dod acted on gao recommendations to improve its report submissions , and what opportunities , if any , exist for dod to improve future reporting . these elements included ( 1 ) proposals to enhance training range capabilities and address any shortfalls in resources , ( 2 ) goals and milestones for tracking planned actions and measuring progress , and ( 3 ) projected funding requirements for implementing planned actions , among others . these goals are as follows: to mitigate encroachment pressures on training activities from competing operating space ; to mitigate frequency spectrum competition ; to meet military airspace challenges ; to manage increasing military demand for range space ; to address impacts from new energy infrastructure and renewable energy impacts ; to anticipate climate change impacts ; and to sustain excellence in environmental stewardship . to respond to these challenges and increase the long - term sustainability of its military range resources , dod has launched a number of efforts aimed both at preserving its training ranges and addressing the effects of its training activities on the environment and on local communities through the issuance of policy , establishment of programs , and proactive partnering at the federal , state , and local levels . the department of defense ( dod ) relies on access to military land , airspace , sea space , and frequency spectrum to provide its forces a realistic training environment that will prepare them to face combat or complex missions around the globe . dod has delineated four funding categories to be used by the services to project their range sustainment efforts: modernization and investment , operations and maintenance , environmental , and encroachment . to determine whether dod acted on gao recommendations to improve its report submissions and what opportunities , if any , exist for dod to improve future reporting , we identified prior gao recommendations and reviewed the status of dod's actions to implement those recommendations in its reporting submissions on sustainable ranges . competition for access to live training resources may worsen because of domain shortfalls and growing encroachment challenges . these recommendations were to: ( 1 ) develop an integrated training range database that identifies available training resources , specific capacities and capabilities , and training constraints caused by limitations on the use of training ranges , which could be continuously updated and shared among the services at all command levels , regardless of service ownership ; and ( 2 ) develop a readiness reporting system to reflect the impact on readiness caused by training constraints due to limitations on the use of training ranges .
direct the secretary of the navy to update its cost estimates and in doing so: include in its sensitivity analysis an assessment of the range of possible costs for extending the service life of other nonstructural components that are becoming obsolete and capability upgrades that may be required for some of the 150 aircraft , and obtain an independent review of the updated cost estimates . considering that further slips in the f - 35 program may occur and could increase the scope and cost of the services' plans for upgrading and extending the service life of current aircraft , you asked us to ( 1 ) describe the air force and navy plans to upgrade and extend the service life of selected f - 16 and f / a - 18 aircraft , and ( 2 ) assess the extent to which cost estimates for these programs exhibit characteristics of a high - quality cost estimate . to improve future updates of air force and navy cost estimates for upgrading and extending the service life of selected f - 16s and f / a - 18s and to improve the ability of decision - makers to assess the potential total costs , we recommend that the secretary of defense take the following four actions: direct the secretary of the air force to update its cost estimates , and in doing so: include in its sensitivity analysis an assessment of the range of possible costs if the capability - upgrade and service - life extension programs are expanded to more than 300 aircraft including up to the maximum of 650 aircraft , and obtain an independent review of the updated cost estimates . overall , the air force and navy have about 3,500 fighter aircraft in inventory as of fiscal year 2012 , including about 1,020 air force f - 16s many of the department of defense's and about 624 navy f / a - 18 a - ds .  ( dod ) current fighter aircraft are more than 20 years old on average , and although dod plans to replace much of the existing inventory by procuring 2,443 new f - 35s , the department has experienced numerous delays and cost increases in the f - 35 program . without fully credible cost estimates , service and congressional decision - makers will not have reasonable confidence of knowing the potential range of costs to upgrade and extend the service life of selected f - 16 and f / a - 18 aircraft as they make resource and trade - off decisions , develop and review budget requests , and assess the programs' affordability . these programs are estimated to cost several billion dollars at a time when dod is simultaneously facing the competing demands of developing and procuring f - 35s at a cost approaching $400 billion , supporting ongoing operations , and implementing $487 billion of reductions over the next 10 years , which the department has estimated that it needs to cut in order to comply with the budget control act of 2011 . these aircraft operate during the first days of a conflict to penetrate enemy air space and defeat air defenses , which allows follow - on forces freedom to operate .
this testimony provides our preliminary observations from our ongoing work , being performed at the request of this committee and other members of the senate , regarding: ( 1 ) fra's framework for safety oversight , ( 2 ) existing and emerging challenges to rail safety , and ( 3 ) ptc implementation . we appreciate the opportunity to participate in this hearing to discuss the federal railroad administration's ( fra ) rail safety oversight activities . my statement will discuss our ongoing reviews of fra's rail safety oversight and the implementation of positive train control , a communications - based system designed to prevent train accidents caused by human factors . the rail network is one of america's safest modes of transportation , although several recent rail accidents , including the metro - north commuter rail accident in bridgeport , connecticut , the collision of bnsf and up trains in chaffee , missouri , and the collision of a csx train and a truck in rosedale , maryland , have reinforced the need for constant effort from both the private and public sectors to ensure that rail transportation remains safe for passengers , the public , and railroad employees . our preliminary assessments of fra's rail safety framework and the quantitative tools fra uses to implement that framework are based on our reviews of fra documentation and interviews with fra headquarters and regional officials . we selected the railroads based on the class of railroad ( as a proxy for size ) , types of railroads ( long distance versus local service or a railroad that serves a small area such as a port or rail yard ) , and type of ownership ( publicly held , privately held , or owned by a public agency ) to get a range of different kinds of freight railroads . we also selected ptc suppliers and independent ptc experts based on their involvement with ptc and recommendations from fra , industry associations , and others . for our assessment of ptc implementation , we reviewed documents and interviewed officials from fra and railroad associations , the four largest freight railroads , commuter railroads that were selected based on ptc implementation status and ridership levels ( among other things ) , and amtrak . accordingly , fra has requested authorities that could provide railroads the flexibility they need to successfully implement ptc . railroads and fra both report continuing to search for ways to speed progress while maintaining safe rail operations in order to achieve complete deployment as soon as possible . nonetheless , given the state of ptc technology and the myriad of ptc components that are required to work seamlessly in order for ptc to work reliably , concerns regarding the potential risks railroads may be taking in attempting to meet the deadline should be considered . in addition , we interviewed state rail safety officials and freight railroad officials from selected class i , ii , and iii railroads . our work to date indicates that most railroads will not complete ptc implementation by the 2015 deadline due to numerous , interrelated challenges caused by the breadth and complexity of ptc . in 2006 , fra implemented a risk - based approach , using its national inspection plan ( nip ) , to allocate its limited inspection resources to ensure rail safety .
in response , the office of management and budget's ( omb ) federal chief information officer ( cio ) launched the federal data center consolidation initiative ( fdcci ) in 2010 . as federal agencies have modernized their information technology ( it ) operations , put more of their services online , and increased their information security profiles , their need for computing power and data storage resources has resulted in a dramatic increase in the federal data centers and a corresponding increase in operational costs . for example , in july 2012 , we reported on the progress the 24 participating federal departments and agenciesmaking on this initiative and found that , while progress had been made , nearly all of the agencies had not yet completed a data center inventory or the consolidation plans needed to implement their consolidation initiatives . over the past few years , we have reported and testified on federal data center consolidation , noting that , while the initiative has the potential to provide billions of dollars in savings , improvements in the oversight of agencies' efforts are needed . were you asked us to testify on our report being released today that evaluated agencies' reported progress against omb's planned consolidation and cost savings goals and assessed the extent to which the oversight organizations put in place by omb for fdcci are adequately performing oversight of agencies' efforts to meet these goals . omb has not reported on agencies' progress against its key performance goal of achieving $3 billion in cost savings by the end of 2015 . i am pleased to be here today to discuss federal agencies' continuing efforts to consolidate their data centers . the lack of a new cost savings goal will further limit omb's ability to determine whether or not the new combined initiative is on course toward achieving its planned objectives . further , omb's march 2013 memorandum does not address whether the task force and gsa's program management office will continue their oversight roles , which does not help to mitigate this risk . we have previously reported that oversight and governance of major it initiatives help to ensure that the initiatives meet their objectives and performance goals . improved oversight could better position omb to assess progress against its cost savings goal and minimize agencies' risk of not realizing anticipated cost savings . until omb tracks cost savings data , the agency will be limited in its ability to determine whether or not fdcci is on course toward achieving planned performance goals . further compounding this lack of clarity , total cost savings to date from data center consolidation efforts have not been determined , creating uncertainty as to whether omb will be able to meet its original cost savings goal of $3 billion by the end of 2015 . however , most notably , 21 agencies did not fully report their expected cost savings ; of those , 13 agencies provided partial cost savings information and 8 provided none . we further reported that , to assist agencies with their data center consolidation efforts , omb had sponsored the development of a fdcci total cost of ownership model that was intended to help agencies refine their estimated costs for consolidation ; however , agencies were not required to use the cost model as part of their cost estimating efforts .
we are pleased to be here to discuss the results of our september 2013 report , which the subcommittee is releasing today , and the efforts of the department of homeland security's ( dhs ) federal protective service ( fps ) to protect the nearly 9,600 federal facilities that are under the control and custody of the general services administration ( gsa ) . fps is authorized ( 1 ) to protect the buildings , grounds , and property that are under the control and custody of gsa , as well as the persons on the property ; ( 2 ) to enforce federal laws and regulations aimed at protecting such property and persons on the property ; and ( 3 ) to investigate fps conducts its mission offenses against these buildings and persons . testimony discusses ( 1 ) challenges fps faces in ensuring contract security guards deployed to federal facilities are properly trained and certified and ( 2 ) the extent to which fps and select federal agencies' facility risk assessment methodologies align with federal risk assessment standards issued by the interagency security committee ( isc ) . the 2012 shooting at the anderson federal building in long beach , california , and the results of our 2009 covert testing and fps's ongoing penetration testing demonstrate the continued vulnerability of federal facilities . the nine selected agencies include: department of energy , office of health , safety , and security ; department of interior ; department of justice , justice protective service ; department of state , diplomatic security ; department of veterans affairs ; federal emergency management agency ; federal protective service ; nuclear regulatory commission ; and office of personnel management . risk assessments help decision - makers identify and evaluate security risks and implement protective measures to mitigate the potential undesirable effects of these risks . gao , federal protective service: challenges with oversight of contract guard program still exist , and additional management controls are needed , gao - 13-694 ( washington , d.c.: september 2013 ) . moreover , the challenge of protecting federal facilities is one of the major reasons why we have designated federal real property management as a high - risk area . by providing security services through two types of activities: ( 1 ) physical security activities — conducting security assessments and recommending countermeasures aimed at preventing incidents — and ( 2 ) law enforcement activities — proactively patrolling facilities , responding to incidents , conducting criminal investigations , and exercising arrest authority . for instance , in 2012 , we reported that fps's ability to protect and secure federal facilities has been hampered by the absence of a risk assessment program that is consistent with federal standards . to identify the management controls and processes fps and the guard companies use to ensure compliance with training , certification , and qualification requirements , we reviewed fps's procedures for ( 1 ) conducting monthly guard file reviews ; ( 2 ) documenting compliance with guard training , certification , and qualification requirements ; and ( 3 ) monitoring performance . isc's risk assessment standards state that agencies' facility risk assessment methodologies must: consider all of the undesirable events identified by isc as possible risks to federal facilities , and assess the threat , vulnerability , and consequence of specific undesirable events .
my testimony is based on several previously published gao reports on stem education , including our january 2012 report entitled science , technology , engineering , and mathematics education: strategic planning needed to better manage overlapping programs across multiple agencies and also addresses actions taken by the administration to better plan and coordinate federal stem education programs since our 2012 report was issued.agencies and programs that provided funding for stem education programs in fiscal year 2010 ; ( 2 ) the extent to which these stem programs overlap ; and ( 3 ) the extent to which federal stem education programs have measured their effectiveness and were aligned to a governmentwide strategy . the lack of performance outcome measures may hinder decision makers' ability to assess how agencies' stem education efforts contribute to agencywide performance goals and the overall federal stem effort . in addition to the federal effort , state and local governments , universities and colleges , and the private sector have also developed programs that provide opportunities for students to pursue stem education and occupations . we interviewed officials from the office of management and budget ( omb ) and ostp , and officials from other federal agencies that administer stem education programs . these programs can serve an important role both by helping to prepare students for careers in stem fields and by enhancing the nation's global competitiveness . over the decades , congress and the executive branch have continued to create new stem education programs , even though , as we previously reported , there has been a general lack of assessment of how well stem programs are working . however , research shows that despite this investment , the united states lacks a strong pipeline of future workers in stem fields and that u.s. students continue to lag behind students in other highly technological nations in mathematics and science achievement . in conclusion , if nstc's 5-year strategic plan is not developed in a way that aligns agencies' efforts to achieve governmentwide goals , enhances the federal government's ability to assess what works , and concentrates resources on those programs that advance the strategy , the federal government may spend limited funds in an inefficient and ineffective manner that does not best help to improve the nation's global competitiveness . i am pleased to be here today to discuss the findings from our prior work on fragmentation , overlap , and potential duplication in federally funded science , technology , engineering , and mathematics ( stem ) education programs . governmentwide strategic planning could help better align federal efforts in an efficient and effective manner . to conduct this work , we reviewed relevant federal laws and regulations as well as previous gao work on overlap , duplication , and fragmentation . for our 2012 report , we reviewed fiscal year 2010 annual performance plans and reports of the 13 agencies with stem programs and found that most agencies did not connect stem education activities to agency goals or measure and report on the progress of those activities . a framework for monitoring agency progress towards nstc's strategic plan is necessary to improve transparency and strengthen accountability of nstc's strategic planning and coordination efforts . overlap among stem education programs is not new .
specifically , this testimony discusses ( 1 ) the extent of overlap , fragmentation , and duplication among these programs and the extent to which programs collaborate and ( 2 ) the extent to which agencies collect information necessary to track program activities and whether these programs , have met their performance goals and have been evaluated . in august 2012 , we reported information on 52 programs at the departments of commerce ( commerce ) , housing and urban development ( hud ) , and agriculture ( usda ) , and the small business administration ( sba ) that support entrepreneurs . in january 2011 , congress updated the government performance and results act of 1993 ( gpra ) with the gpra modernization act of 2010 ( gprama ) . entrepreneurs play a vital role in the u.s. economy , and the federal government provides a variety of support and assistance to them . in october 2012 , commerce's economic development administration ( eda ) noted that it had recently partnered with two universities to develop a comprehensive set of performance measures that can be used to evaluate the effectiveness of its programs . among other things , gprama requires the office of management and budget ( omb ) to coordinate with agencies to establish outcome - oriented federal government priority goals covering a limited number of policy areas , as well as goals to improve management across the federal government . these inefficiencies could compromise the government's ability to effectively provide the needed services and meet the shared goals of the programs . for our august 2012 report , we reviewed statutory and regulatory authority on the activities and services the agencies can conduct to administer each of the programs , and we found significant overlap and fragmentation among programs that provide financial assistance . in addition , the president's 2013 budget submission established cross - agency priority goals , including one to increase federal services to entrepreneurs and small businesses , with an emphasis on start - ups , growing firms , and underserved markets . according to agency officials , these programs , which typically fund a variety of activities in addition to supporting entrepreneurs , spent an estimated $2 billion on economic development efforts in fiscal year 2011 . economic development programs that effectively provide assistance to entrepreneurs , in conjunction with state and local government and private sector economic development initiatives , may help businesses develop and expand . however , we have found that the ways that these programs have been administered , and the lack of data collection and program evaluations , could lead to inefficient delivery of services . we will report on the actions taken by the agencies as we do for other areas included in our mandated work addressing federal programs with fragmentation , overlap , and duplication . we look forward to continuing to work with the agencies as well as this and other congressional committees in addressing ways to assist entrepreneurs in the most effective and efficient manner . gprama established a new framework aimed at taking a more crosscutting and integrated approach to focusing on results and improving government performance . gprama also highlighted the importance of program evaluation for federal agencies . of these 52 programs , 30 programs distributed across the four agencies can support entrepreneurs through financial assistance in the form of grants and loans .
within the department of homeland security ( dhs ) , tsa is the primary federal agency responsible for security of the nation's transportation system . my testimony today addresses the extent to which tsa has ( 1 ) regularly analyzed data to identify program trends and areas working well or in need of corrective action , and ( 2 ) comprehensively assessed the effectiveness of pscs , and coordinated with stakeholders to deploy psc teams to the highest - risk airports and utilize them as intended . i appreciate the opportunity to discuss our work on the transportation security administration's ( tsa ) national explosives detection canine team program ( nedctp ) . this statement is based on our january 2013 report and includes selected updates on the status of tsa's efforts to implement the recommendations in that report . 2135 , 2178 ( 2002 ) . since the terrorist attacks of september 11 , 2001 , tsa has implemented a multilayered system of security composed of people , processes , and technology to protect the transportation system . to update our work , we obtained related documentation from tsa from october 2013 through june 2014 , including reports used by nedctp to monitor canine team training minute requirements , results of psc effectiveness assessments , and psc deployment schedules . we recommended that tsa expand and complete testing , in conjunction with dhs s&t , to assess the effectiveness of pscs and conventional canines in all airport areas deemed appropriate prior to making additional psc deployments to help ( 1 ) determine whether pscs are effective at screening passengers , and resource expenditures for psc training are warranted , and ( 2 ) inform decisions regarding the type of canine team to deploy and where to optimally deploy such teams within airports . the homeland security act of 2002 subsequently transferred tsa to the newly established department of homeland security . short notice assessments ( covert tests ) : we found that when tsa was performing short notice assessments ( prior to their suspension in may 2012 ) , it was not analyzing the results beyond the pass and fail rates . however , in june 2012 , the dhs science and technology directorate ( s&t ) and tsa began conducting effectiveness assessments on the basis of to help demonstrate the effectiveness of psc teams.these assessments , dhs s&t and tsa's nedctp recommended that the assessment team conduct additional testing and that additional training and guidance be provided to canine teams . one of tsa's security layers is nedctp , composed of over 800 explosives detection canine teams — a canine paired with a handler — aimed at deterring and detecting the use of explosive devices in the u.s. transportation system . nedctp's mission is to deter and detect the introduction of explosive devices into the transportation system . enacted in november 2001 , the aviation and transportation security act established , within the department of transportation , tsa as the agency responsible for securing the nation's transportation systems . however , dhs s&t did not plan to assess the effectiveness of pscs on the public side , beyond the checkpoint , since tsa was not planning to deploy pscs to the public side of the airport when dhs s&t designed its test plan .
my statement today is based on these reports and addresses ( 1 ) opportunities for dhs to reduce fragmentation , overlap , and duplication in its programs ; save tax dollars ; and enhance revenue , and ( 2 ) opportunities for dhs to strengthen its management functions . since beginning operations in 2003 , dhs has become the third - largest federal department , with more than 224,000 employees and an annual budget of about $60 billion . over the past 10 years , dhs has implemented key homeland security operations and achieved important goals to create and strengthen a foundation to reach its potential . i am pleased to be here today to discuss our work on opportunities for the department of homeland security ( dhs ) to eliminate fragmentation , overlap , and duplication in its programs ; enhance revenue ; and improve management functions at the department . dhs has implemented more than 60 percent of these recommendations and has actions under way to address others . further , failure to effectively address dhs's management and mission risks could have serious consequences for u.s. national and economic security . since 2003 , we have made approximately 1,800 recommendations to dhs across more than 1,300 reports and congressional testimonies designed to strengthen program management , performance - measurement efforts , and management processes , and enhance coordination and information sharing , among other things . however , the department has more to do to ensure that it conducts its missions efficiently and effectively while simultaneously preparing to address future challenges that face the department and the nation . reducing or eliminating fragmentation , overlap , or duplication could potentially save billions of tax dollars annually and help agencies provide more efficient and effective services . moreover , in february 2013 , we reported on dhs's efforts to address the high - risk area of strengthening the department of homeland security management functions . we first designated this area as high - risk in 2003 because dhs had to consolidate 22 agencies — several with major management challenges — into one department . since 2011 , we have identified 162 areas across the federal government where congress or executive branch agencies , including dhs , could take action to reduce fragmentation , overlap , and duplication or achieve cost savings to address the rapidly building fiscal pressures facing our nation.we reported that fragmentation among government programs or activities can be a harbinger of potential overlap or duplication . on april 9 , 2013 , we issued our third report in response to the statutory requirement that we identify and report annually on federal programs , agencies , offices and initiatives that have duplicative goals or activities . for these past reports , among other things , we analyzed dhs documents , reviewed and updated our past reports issued since dhs began its operations in march 2003 , and , interviewed dhs officials . dhs has indeed made significant strides in protecting the homeland , but has yet to reach its full potential . we recommended that dhs modify acquisition policy to better reflect key program and portfolio management practices and ensure acquisition programs fully comply with dhs acquisition policy . further , dhs has taken steps to strengthen its management functions and integrate them across the department ; however , continued progress is needed to mitigate the risks that management weaknesses pose to mission accomplishment and the efficient and effective use of the department's resources .
among other things , our report identified ( 1 ) how rogue internet pharmacies are selling prescription drugs in violation of federal laws , ( 2 ) challenges associated with federal investigations and prosecutions of rogue internet pharmacies , ( 3 ) efforts to combat rogue internet pharmacies , and ( 4 ) efforts to educate consumers about the risks of rogue internet pharmacies and how to recognize legitimate online pharmacies . it regularly scans the internet and , using nabp's standards , classifies internet pharmacies into one of four categories: ( 1 ) legitimate , ( 2 ) not recommended , ( 3 ) rogue , or ( 4 ) pending review . u.s. customs and border protection ( cbp ) is responsible for enforcing laws prohibiting the illegal importation of goods , including prescription drugs that have not been approved for marketing in the united states by fda . the department of justice ( doj ) may investigate and prosecute an operator of an internet pharmacy that is suspected of violating federal laws . while some internet pharmacies are legitimate businesses that offer consumers a safe , convenient , and cost - effective way to obtain their medications , the food and drug administration ( fda ) and the national association of boards of pharmacy ( nabp ) have reported that thousands are fraudulent enterprises . u.s. immigration and customs enforcement ( ice ) is responsible for , among other things , investigating violations of customs and trade laws , including those related to trafficking in counterfeit goods . despite these actions of agencies and stakeholders , consumer education efforts face many challenges . for example , fda is responsible for ensuring the safety and effectiveness of prescription drugs , and fda approval is required prior to marketing prescription drugs in the united states . to identify efforts to educate consumers about the risks of rogue internet pharmacies and how to recognize legitimate online pharmacies , we interviewed officials from federal agencies and stakeholders to discuss their consumer education efforts . many rogue internet pharmacies seek to take advantage of this perception by purporting to be located in canada , or sell drugs manufactured or approved for sale in canada , when they are actually located elsewhere or selling drugs sourced from other countries . like brick - and - mortar pharmacies , internet pharmacies are subject to federal and state statutes and regulations that are designed to ensure the safety , efficacy , and proper administration of medications . despite fda warnings to consumers that the agency could not ensure the safety of drugs not approved for sale in the united states that are purchased from other countries , the prevalence of such programs may have contributed to a perception among u.s. consumers that they can readily save money and obtain safe prescription drugs by purchasing them from canada . in addition to counterfeit drugs , these “rogue” internet pharmacies often sell prescription drugs that have not been approved for sale in the united states , are substandard and have no therapeutic value , or are harmful to consumers . despite these challenges , federal agencies and others have taken actions to combat rogue internet pharmacies . instead , a number of federal and state agencies share responsibility for regulating prescription drugs that are marketed and sold to u.s. consumers , including by internet pharmacies .
visitor and immigrant status indicator technology ( us - visit ) program to develop a system to collect biographic data ( such as name and date of birth ) and biometric data ( such as fingerprints ) from foreign nationals at u.s. ports of entry . beginning in 1996 , federal law has required the implementation of an entry and exit data system to track foreign nationals entering and leaving the united states . i am pleased to be here today to discuss the status of the department of homeland security's ( dhs ) efforts to implement a biometric exit system . the intelligence reform and terrorism prevention act of 2004 required the secretary of homeland security to develop a plan to accelerate implementation of a biometric entry and exit data system that matches available information provided by foreign nationals upon their arrival in and departure from the united states . within dhs , u.s. customs and border protection ( cbp ) is tasked with , among other duties , inspecting all people applying for entry to the united states to determine their admissibility to the country . since 2004 , dhs has tracked foreign nationals' entries into the united states as part of an effort to comply with legislative requirements , and since december 2006 , a biometric entry capability has been fully operational at all air , sea , and land ports of entry . furthermore , dhs reported in may 2012 that significant questions remained regarding ( 1 ) the effectiveness of current biographic air exit processes and the error rates in collecting or matching data , ( 2 ) methods of cost - effectively integrating biometrics into the air departure processes ( e.g. , collecting biometric scans as passengers enter the jetway to board a plane ) , ( 3 ) the additional value biometric air exit would provide compared with the current biographic air exit process , and ( 4 ) the overall value and cost of a biometric air exit capability . we interviewed dhs office of policy and s&t officials regarding dhs's plans for addressing recommendations in the department's may 2012 report and other ongoing efforts to develop a biometric exit system . in 2003 , dhs initiated the u.s . dhs generally agreed with our recommendations and has taken action to implement a number of them . however , we have identified a range of management challenges that dhs has faced in its effort to fully deploy a corresponding biometric exit capability to track foreign nationals when they depart the country . most recently , in july 2013 , we reported on dhs's progress in developing and implementing a biometric exit system , as well as dhs's efforts to identify and address potential overstays — individuals who were admitted into the country legally on a temporary basis but then overstayed their authorized period of admission . furthermore , any delays in providing this information to congress could further affect possible implementation of a biometric exit system to address statutory requirements . dhs concurred with this recommendation and indicated that its component agencies plan to finalize the goals and objectives for biometric air exit by january 31 , 2014 , and that these goals and objectives will be used in the development of an evaluation framework that dhs expects to have completed by june 30 , 2014 .
this report examines ( 1 ) how selected pfs projects have been structured and what potential benefits these projects can provide ; ( 2 ) how selected pfs contracts have been structured to address potential project risks ; and ( 3 ) the potential roles for the federal government's involvement in pfs projects . we examined ( 1 ) how selected pfs projects have been structured and what potential benefits these projects can provide ; ( 2 ) how selected pfs contracts have been structured to address potential project risks ; and ( 3 ) the potential roles for the federal government's involvement in pfs projects . agencies at all levels of government can improve the lives of vulnerable populations and make effective use of available resources by allocating them to prevention programs that demonstrate the promise to innovatively solve intractable social challenges . federal , state , and local agencies play an important role in improving outcomes for our society's most vulnerable populations , who often face complex social or economic problems . a small number of foreign and u.s. state and local governments are employing a contracting mechanism known as a social impact bond ( sib ) or a pay for success ( pfs ) program to fund preventive efforts designed to more effectively serve vulnerable populations . this report responds to a request that we examine pay for success ( pfs ) to help congress gain a better understanding of how the mechanism has been defined in theory and practice and what is known about its implementation and results to date . these challenges include reducing recidivism rates of recently released prisoners , helping homeless individuals find stable accommodation , and expanding access to quality early childhood education for economically disadvantaged children . since fiscal year 2014 , the president's budgets have proposed a $300 million appropriation for a new pfs incentive fund in the department of the treasury to expand the role of the federal government and support state and local governments and other intermediaries seeking to establish pfs projects . members of congress have also introduced legislation during the 113th and 114th congresses on pfs to expand federal support for pfs projects . the departments of health and human services ( hhs ) and education ( education ) have been exploring opportunities to pursue the pfs concept . moreover , by defining and achieving prevention outcomes , agencies can potentially reduce future budgetary pressures by lessening the need for costly remediation programs . the president and members of congress have made proposals to expand federal support for pfs projects . the departments of labor ( dol ) , housing and urban development ( hud ) , and justice ( doj ) and the corporation for national and community service ( cncs ) have funded or plan to fund specific pfs projects . to date , four federal agencies have allocated resources to support pfs projects . in a 2013 memo , omb identified areas in which agencies could improve their use of evidence , including: ( 1 ) strengthening evaluation capacity and proposing new evaluations ; ( 2 ) developing high - quality , low - cost evaluations and rapid , iterative experimentation ; ( 3 ) using innovative outcome - focused design ; and ( 4 ) increasing agency capacity to use evidence .
to analyze consumption in retirement and how target replacement rates are defined and used to assess retirement readiness , we examined ( 1 ) whether and how spending patterns have varied by age ; ( 2 ) the key factors used to develop target replacement rates for how much income workers need to replace in retirement ; and ( 3 ) the usefulness of information on replacement rates provided to workers by the department of labor . this report assesses ( 1 ) whether and how spending patterns vary by age , ( 2 ) key factors used to develop target replacement rates , and ( 3 ) the usefulness of information on retirement replacement rates provided to workers by the department of labor . whether older americans will have adequate income in retirement has been a longstanding concern for several reasons including the decline in defined benefit pensions , the growing responsibility for individuals to save for retirement through employer - sponsored defined contribution plans or on their own , and the financial challenges facing social security . in recent years , numerous studies on the replacement rates that households should target have not resulted in a consensus recommendation , in part because estimates are heavily dependent on the underlying assumptions used to develop them . to better predict how much income americans will need once they leave the workforce , many researchers use target replacement rates — the percentage of pre - retirement income needed to maintain a certain standard of living in retirement . to accurately interpret the implications for retirement adequacy it is important for policy makers and individuals to better understand how these targets are developed . our analysis focused on total replacement rates — the ratio of all income in retirement ( including social security , pension benefits , and retirement savings ) to pre - retirement earnings . you asked us to review what consumption looks like in retirement and how replacement rates are defined , calculated , and used to assess retirement preparedness . to help workers make appropriate adjustments to the replacement rates used in calculating their specific retirement income needs , the secretary of labor should take the following two actions: include in its retirement planning tools information about examples of individual circumstances that research has shown to result in higher or lower income replacement needs ( e.g. , household characteristics and income level ) and guidance on the direction and magnitude of the changes attributable to such circumstances as well as those due to particular lifestyle choices . modify its retirement planning tools to allow for some user flexibility in adjusting the replacement rate used in calculating retirement income needs . in its response , dol cited steps taken by the employee benefits security administration ( ebsa ) to ensure that retirement planning materials balance key information with usability of the tools , including working with key stakeholders and experts to develop and test materials . researchers have also cited concerns about the usefulness of replacement rates in their current form . in both cases , workers could reach retirement without adequate savings . to address our recommendations for providing more information on using replacement rates and modifying tools to allow for more flexibility , ebsa plans to make two changes by june 2017 .
the objectives of this review were to examine the extent to which: ( 1 ) sba enforces its regulations prohibiting the award of follow - on , sole - source 8 ( a ) contracts to subsidiaries of the same anc ; ( 2 ) sba limits subsidiaries of the same anc from operating in the same primary line of business ; ( 3 ) information is known about compensation , revenues , and benefits distribution of anc - owned firms ; and ( 4 ) sba has addressed challenges , if any , to its oversight and monitoring of anc - owned firm participating in the 8 ( a ) program since 2011 . the 8 ( a ) business development program ( 8 program ) , administered by the small business administration ( sba ) , is one of the federal government's primary vehicles for developing socially and economically disadvantaged small businesses , including those firms owned by alaska native corporations ( anc. ) . this report discusses the extent to which: ( 1 ) sba enforces its regulations prohibiting the award of follow - on , sole - source 8 ( a ) contracts to subsidiaries of the same anc ; ( 2 ) sba limits subsidiaries of the same anc from operating in the same primary line of business ; ( 3 ) information is known about compensation , revenues , and benefits distribution of anc - owned firms ; and ( 4 ) sba has addressed challenges , if any , to its oversight and monitoring of anc - owned firms participating in the 8 ( a ) program since 2011 . one of the key benefits of the program is the ability of participants to receive federal contract awards set aside solely for 8 ( a ) firms . overall , sba has struggled to articulate and execute its oversight strategy over 5 years after updating its regulations . government agencies obligated about $17 billion to just under 5,600 firms participating in sba's 8 ( a ) program in fiscal year 2014 . for fiscal year 2014 , federal obligations under the program totaled about $4 billion for 344 8 ( a ) anc - owned firms and represented almost a quarter of all 8 ( a ) obligations made that year . for instance , we found that its lack of updated program guidance on the 2011 regulations and limitations in information systems affected the agency's ability to execute proper oversight of internal controls for implementing the 8 ( a ) program for anc - owned firms . moreover , without additional actions to ( 1 ) develop an effective and comprehensive internal control framework , such as ensuring that its alaska district office has complete and consistent documentation on firms in the program , ( 2 ) design policies to effectively enforce the separation of duties and supervisory or administrator approval when reviewing anc - owned firms' progress and related documentation at this office , ( 3 ) approach staffing of its alaska district office in a comprehensive way ; and ( 4 ) launch the proposed continuing eligibility review unit with the policies and procedures that include specific tasks and milestones , there is limited assurance that sba can achieve the objectives of the program and at the same time maintain a high level of oversight and accountability to help ensure overall program integrity .
this report examines how ( 1 ) u.s. basel iii capital may affect u.s. banking organizations , including smaller banking organizations , and ( 2 ) implementation of basel iii's capital and other standards by different jurisdictions may affect the ability of u.s. banking organizations to compete internationally . because of capital's role in absorbing losses , promoting confidence , and protecting depositors , federal banking regulations require banking organizations to maintain adequate capital , and regulators set minimum capital levels to help ensure that institutions do so . the 2007-2009 financial crisis revealed that many banking organizations lacked capital of sufficient quality and quantity to absorb substantial capital reassures an institution's depositors , creditors , and losses.counterparties that unanticipated losses or decreased earnings will not impair the institution's ability to protect the savings of depositors , repay creditors , or fulfill their obligations to counterparties . in response to the crisis , banking regulators around the world moved to strengthen requirements for capital adequacy . in the united states , the dodd - frank wall street reform and consumer protection act of 2010 ( dodd - frank act ) introduced , among other things , new capital requirements for bank holding companies and savings and loan holding companies . to assess how the u.s. basel iii capital regulation may impact u.s. banking organizations , including smaller organizations , we used data from the consolidated financial statements for holding companies – form fr y - 9c ( y - 9c ) and from the consolidated reports of condition and income ( call reports ) as of march 31 , 2014 , to estimate ( 1 ) the number of bank holding companies and depository institutions with capital ratios greater than or equal to basel iii minimum capital ratios ; ( 2 ) the amount of capital bank holding companies and depository institutions would need to meet the u.s. basel iii minimum capital requirements ; and ( 3 ) the change in funding costs for bank holding companies and depository institutions associated with the amount of capital they would need to meet the minimum capital requirements . they also said that the eu has been adopting similar stress tests for eu banks . for the treasury's office of comptroller of the currency and the federal reserve board: regulatory capital rules: regulatory capital , implementation of basel iii , capital adequacy , tradition provisions , prompt corrective action , standardized approach for risk - weighted assets , market discipline and disclosure requirements , advanced approaches risk - based capital rule , and market risk capital rule ; final rule , 78 fed . 62018 ( oct. 11 , 2013 ) and for the federal deposit insurance corporation: regulatory capital rules: regulatory capital , implementation of basel iii , capital adequacy , tradition provisions , prompt corrective action , standardized approach for risk - weighted assets , market discipline and disclosure requirements , advanced approaches risk - based capital rule , and market risk capital rule ; interim final rule , 78 fed . some market participants we interviewed ( eight community banks and 10 g - sibs ) generally expected the u.s. capital requirements to increase compliance costs but have a limited effect on the cost and availability of credit .
the objectives of our review were to evaluate the extent to which ( 1 ) the army national guard ( arng ) has provided oversight of its recruiting process ; ( 2 ) the arng met its goals for recruiting , completion of initial military training , and completion of initial term of service in recent years ; and ( 3 ) the office of the secretary of defense ( osd ) , department of the army , and arng have conducted their oversight responsibilities of the arng's financial incentives programs . the nearly 15 years of deployment of u.s. troops in a wartime environment has proved challenging for recruiting servicemembers for the department of defense ( dod ) . this report evaluates the extent to which ( 1 ) the arng has provided oversight of its recruiting process ; ( 2 ) the arng met its goals for recruiting , completion of initial military training , and completion of initial term of service in recent years ; and ( 3 ) the office of the secretary of defense ( osd ) , department of the army , and arng have conducted their oversight responsibilities of the arng's financial incentives programs . at the height of operations enduring freedom and iraqi freedom , the department of the army and the national guard bureau ( ngb ) allowed applicants with lower aptitude scores or prior felony convictions to enlist in order to ensure that the army national guard ( arng ) and active army could meet their respective missions . the evaluation should also determine whether incentives are being effectively awarded in military occupational specialties that have been under or over authorized levels , and whether changes are needed to effectively use existing incentives . also , the house report included two additional provisions: ( 1 ) a provision for us to assess the extent to which contracting vehicles used to support arng recruiting were in compliance with dod and department of the army policies and regulations , and ( 2 ) a provision for us to assess the numbers of individuals who complete basic and advanced individual training and the average length of time between when a person enlists in the arng and when the person completes initial military training . we could not assess the extent to which the arng met goals prior to fiscal year 2015 because arng officials stated that the goals have changed over time and could not provide goals for previous fiscal years . with the army's downsizing and the current fiscal environment , including the budget control act of 2011 , dod faces an uncertain future where personnel decisions may prove even more important and where there is particular need for effective measures such as financial incentives to help the arng meet its recruiting mission and readiness requirements . and any type of recruiter misconduct could have significant implications for dod . however , since the end of operation iraqi freedom and a significant drawdown from afghanistan , the department of the army and ngb have issued guidance prohibiting approval of waivers for applicants with prior criminal offenses , such as certain types of sexual offenses , as well as increasing the applicant aptitude score standards . given that the reporting of information related to the amounts of incentives obligated has been a requirement but not carried out in recent years , we recommend that the office of the secretary of defense take the following action in order to ensure continued reporting in the future: enforce its requirement for the national guard and reserve component to submit information on the amounts of incentives obligated and incorporate the required information in the recruiting resources reports .
our objectives were to ( 1 ) assess agencies' progress in achieving savings from their it reform efforts ; ( 2 ) evaluate the extent to which agencies have established plans to reinvest their savings ; and ( 3 ) evaluate how selected agencies have reinvested their savings , including the extent to which it governance processes are in place to oversee such reinvestments . federal agencies spend over $80 billion annually to meet their increasing demand for information technology ( it ) . our objectives were to ( 1 ) assess agencies' progress in achieving savings from their information technology ( it ) reform efforts ; ( 2 ) evaluate the extent to which agencies have established plans to reinvest their savings ; and ( 3 ) evaluate how selected agencies have reinvested their savings , including the extent to which it governance processes are in place to oversee such reinvestments . specifically , omb and 12 agencies agreed with our recommendations , while 1 ( state ) did not state whether it agreed or disagreed , 3 had no comments , and 1 ( defense ) partially agreed . in addition , we are making 22 recommendations to 17 of the departments and agencies in our review to improve their reinvestment planning and oversight . specifically , we recommend that the director of omb direct the federal cio to ensure that agencies complete their reinvestment plans , in accordance with established requirements , and maintain those plans on an ongoing basis ; and require agencies to track actual reinvestment performance and define performance targets for agencies' reinvestments , as done previously . beginning in 2010 , the office of management and budget ( omb ) launched a series of it reform initiatives intended to help agencies achieve greater efficiency in their it investments by , among other things , consolidating the growing number of federal data centers and increasing the use of cloud computing . we received comments on a draft of our report from omb , the 17 agencies to which we made recommendations , and the remaining 10 that had no recommendations . subsequently , gsa provided additional documentation that included reinvestment plans for all of its initiatives . we have previously reported and testified that omb's it reform initiatives can help to improve the efficiency and effectiveness of the federal government and have the potential to save billions of dollars . this was based on the agency's quarterly integrated data collection submission to omb not including reinvestment plan information for 3 of the agency's 13 cost savings and avoidance initiatives . while we acknowledge nrc's comments , this report focused on agencies' progress in achieving savings from their it reform efforts and did not review the adequacy of omb's guidance on reporting cost savings , including related cost definitions and categorizations . until such requirements are in place , agencies may be challenged to ensure that their considerable savings are being used in the most efficient and effective manner possible and omb will be limited in its ability to ensure that agencies' reinvestments are occurring as planned . given the importance of omb's it reform efforts , you asked us to review agencies' savings from such efforts and determine how agencies are reinvesting their savings .
conduct an assessment to determine how state's transition to an open market dba system is affecting small businesses . our review focused on the department of state's ( state ) transition from a single insurer program to an open market system for the provision of defense base act ( dba ) insurance . this report assesses ( 1 ) how state managed the transition from a single insurer program to an open market system , ( 2 ) the extent to which this change affected dba premium rates paid by state's contractors , and ( 3 ) the extent to which this change affected small businesses . the defense base act ( dba ) , as amended , requires u.s. government contractors to provide employees working overseas — including , in many cases , foreign nationals — with uniform levels of workers' compensation insurance . according to a september 2009 department of defense ( dod ) report , with the increase in u.s. military and civilian engagement throughout the world , the cost to the u.s. government for dba insurance premiums sharply increased during the past decade ; total premiums paid to the four largest dba insurance providers increased from approximately $18 million in 2002 to approximately $400 million in 2007 . we also reviewed reports about dba insurance issued by the state , u.s. agency for international development ( usaid ) , and dol offices of inspector general ( oig ) as well as the special inspector general for afghanistan reconstruction ( sigar ) . the cost of the premiums paid for dba coverage , if allowable under the federal acquisition regulation ( far ) , is generally reimbursable under government contracts . evaluate whether a single insurer program or an open market system best serves its needs . this report examines ( 1 ) how state managed the transition from a single insurer program to an open market system , ( 2 ) the extent to which this change affected dba premium rates paid by state's contractors , and ( 3 ) the extent to which this change affected small businesses . state now requires its contractors to obtain dba insurance on the open market from 1 of 38 insurers authorized by dol . according to department of labor ( dol ) data , between 2002 and 2013 , the total number of claims rose from 430 to 14,705 , and the total amount of dba benefits paid to claimants working for u.s. government contractors rose from about $9.5 million to about $666 million in inflation - adjusted dollars . although more recent and comprehensive data on the total cost for dba premiums are not available , data on the cost of dba claims to the insurance industry suggest that dba premium costs have continued to rise . our analysis of existing federal procurement data did not show a clear effect on contractors that are small businesses resulting from state's transition to an open market system , but insurers and contractors have expressed concern that the change has had or could have an adverse effect . u.s. army corps of engineers' ( usace ) transition to an open market system for providing defense base act ( dba ) insurance in october 2013 , usace transitioned from a single insurer program to an open market system .
this report ( 1 ) describes the extent to which lpi is used , ( 2 ) discusses stakeholder views on the cost of lpi , and ( 3 ) describes state and federal oversight of lpi . to help ensure that adequate data collection efforts by state insurance regulators produce sufficient , reliable data to oversee the lpi market , we recommend that naic: work with the state insurance regulators to develop and implement more robust policies and procedures for the collection of annual data from lpi insurers to ensure they are complete and reliable ; and work with the state insurance regulators to complete efforts to obtain more detailed national data from lpi insurers . we were asked to review the lender - placed insurance ( lpi ) industry and the role of federal and state regulators in monitoring lpi practices . without more comprehensive and reliable data , state and federal regulators are lacking an important tool to help them fully evaluate the lpi industry and ensure that consumers are adequately protected . however , naic and state insurance regulators lack comprehensive and reliable data on lpi premium rates and industry practices to assess their effects on consumers . servicers' use of this type of insurance , known as lender - placed insurance ( lpi ) , peaked during the 2007-2009 financial crisis as an increasing percentage of borrowers fell behind on their mortgage and insurance payments . this report ( 1 ) describes the extent to which lpi is used , ( 2 ) discusses stakeholder views on the cost of lpi , and ( 3 ) describes state and federal oversight of lpi . homeowners insurance and flood insurance help protect both borrowers and lenders from the financial losses that can arise when homes are damaged . some state and federal regulators have taken action to improve oversight of lpi . naic was created to coordinate insurance regulation across states , and the agency needs quality information to evaluate the lpi industry and the effects of its premium rates and practices on consumers . as part of its efforts to collect financial data on the insurance industry , naic updated its credit insurance experience exhibit ( ciee ) in 2004 to require insurers to submit data on lpi to naic and state regulators . although naic is working to obtain the missing data , it is unclear when such data might be available , or that its efforts will be effective without additional action . without more comprehensive and reliable data and adequate policies and procedures to ensure the usefulness of the data , naic is limited in its ability to coordinate lpi regulation nationwide , and state and federal regulators lack reliable data about the industry . if a borrower allows coverage to lapse or otherwise become inadequate or loses coverage and does not respond to the servicer's requests to provide proof of sufficient coverage , the mortgage loan documents allow the servicer to protect the mortgage holder's interest in the property by purchasing insurance to cover the collateral on the mortgage loan and charge the borrower for the premium . further , the dodd - frank wall street reform and consumer protection act ( dodd - frank act ) , among other things , amended the real estate settlement procedures act ( respa ) to establish requirements for mortgage servicers on borrower notification before charging for homeowners lpi , termination of homeowners lpi , and refunding premiums paid by the borrower for homeowners lpi while the borrower maintained borrower - purchased coverage , among other things .
this report ( 1 ) identifies steps taken by the office of management and budget ( omb ) and the department of treasury ( treasury ) to establish government - wide data element definitions and the extent to which those definitions are consistent with leading practices or face challenges that could affect data quality ; ( 2 ) reviews efforts by omb and treasury to provide agencies with technical implementation guidance to standardize how data are collected and reported and related challenges ; and ( 3 ) examines the status of selected federal agencies' progress in meeting data act requirements . to improve the transparency and quality of the federal spending data made available to the public , the data act directs the office of management and budget ( omb ) and the department of the treasury ( treasury ) to establish government - wide data standards that include common data elements for reporting financial and payment information by may 2015 . the digital accountability and transparency act of 2014 ( data act ) holds considerable promise for shedding more light on how federal funds are spent . this report ( 1 ) identifies steps taken by omb and treasury to establish government - wide data element definitions and the extent to which those definitions are consistent with leading practices or face challenges that could affect data quality ; ( 2 ) reviews efforts by omb and treasury to provide agencies with technical implementation guidance to standardize how data are collected and reported and related challenges ; and ( 3 ) examines the status of selected federal agencies' progress in meeting data act requirements . to address these problems , we recommended that the director of omb ( 1 ) clarify guidance on reporting award information and maintaining supporting records and ( 2 ) develop and implement oversight processes to ensure that awards data are consistent with agency records . it is critical that agencies use government - wide standards to report spending data in order to help ensure the quality and usefulness of the resulting information . we identified these agencies using a three - step selection process that considered ( 1 ) whether the agency was in compliance with existing federal requirements for federal financial management systems ; ( 2 ) the type of federal funding provided ( such as grants , loans , and contracts ) ; and ( 3 ) status as a federal shared service provider for financial management . the federal government spends more than $3.5 trillion annually ; however , tracking this money can be difficult because spending data are often incomplete or inaccurate . in order to fully and effectively implement the data act , the federal government will need to address complex policy and technical issues . this report is the latest gao work in response to a statutory provision to review data act implementation . omb required the plans to include: ( 1 ) a timeline of tasks and steps toward implementing the requirements of this guidance ; ( 2 ) an estimate of costs to implement these tasks and steps ; ( 3 ) a detailed narrative that explains the required steps , identifies the underlying assumptions , and outlines the potential difficulties and risks to successfully implement the plan ; and ( 4 ) a detailed project plan that agencies will develop over time .
the general services administration ( gsa ) annually spends hundreds of millions of dollars making major and minor repairs and alterations to the more than 1,500 federally owned buildings that it holds . this report addresses ( 1 ) information about the extent , impact , and cause of unforeseen site conditions during repair and alteration projects in federally owned buildings held by gsa and ( 2 ) how gsa identifies and assesses the risks of unforeseen site conditions . to improve risk assessments for repair and alteration projects , we recommend that the administrator of gsa develop and implement a plan to periodically analyze information gsa already collects , for example , based on a representative sample of repair and alterations projects , in order to: identify the specific impacts unforeseen conditions have had on project costs , schedules , and scope of work ; analyze the causes of these conditions for those projects that experienced unforeseen site conditions ; and identify actions that will be taken to address the potential causes of unforeseen site conditions . the objectives of this report were to ( 1 ) identify information about the extent , impact , and cause of unforeseen site conditions during selected repair and alteration projects in federally owned buildings held by the general services administration ( gsa ) and to ( 2 ) determine how gsa identifies and assesses the risks of unforeseen site conditions . repairs and alterations are expensive ( over $1.2 billion to address immediate deferred maintenance and repair needs as estimated by gsa ) , and , therefore , it is imperative that the program operate as efficiently and effectively as possible and that costs , schedule delays , and project changes are minimized to the greatest degree possible . gsa's repair and alterations program has become increasingly important over time as the inventory of buildings continues to age and deterioration and deferred maintenance increase . gsa estimated that at the end of fiscal year 2015 it had over $1.2 billion in deferred maintenance and repair work . these buildings are used for a variety of purposes — from office space to warehouses — and are critical for federal agencies to fulfill their missions . in 2001 , the gsa inspector general's office , which reviewed 45 repair and alteration projects , reported that unforeseen site conditions in 10 projects completed in fiscal years 1998 and 1999 accounted for about $22 million , or about 43 percent , of cost growth on these projects . some of this work is initiated by gsa and some at the request of tenant agencies . the possible causes of the remaining unforeseen site conditions were tenant alterations unknown to gsa ( 2 out of 11 projects ) , a building's not being originally built up to code ( 2 of 11 projects ) , and difficulty faced by gsa in accessing the building for surveying and testing ( 4 out of 11 projects ) . however , gsa can improve how it identifies types of project risks and minimize their impacts on repair and alteration projects . to identify how gsa identifies and assesses the risks of unforeseen site conditions , we reviewed documents related to gsa's capital - planning process and project management requirements .
several issues call attention to the retirement security of this sizeable first , the decades - long shift in the private sector away from defined benefit ( db ) plans ( which typically pay lifetime annuity benefits in retirement ) to defined contribution ( dc ) plans ( which require workers to accumulate savings over their careers and manage withdrawals in retirement ) means that many workers and retirees need more savings to provide a secure retirement . some other reasons include wanting money to buy extras ( 54 percent ) , needing money to make ends meet ( 52 percent ) , a decrease in the value of their savings or investments ( 38 percent ) , or keeping health insurance or other benefits ( 34 percent ) . according to the census bureau , the age 65-and - over population in 2030 is projected to be about 74 million – more than 50 percent larger than in 2015 , and representing more than 20 percent of the projected total u.s. population . in addition , concerns about the long - term financial condition of social security , which provides the base of financial support for retirees , highlight the growing importance of americans accumulating savings for their retirement . conducted by the board of governors of the federal reserve system ( federal reserve ) , the scf is a triennial national survey of assets and income . and 2 ) what evidence do studies and surveys provide about retirement security for workers and retirees ? . in light of these developments , you asked us to review the financial status of workers approaching retirement and current retirees . we examined the following questions: 1 ) what financial resources do workers approaching retirement and current retirees have ? . baby boomers , the youngest of whom are now in their 50s , are approaching and reaching retirement in waves . throughout the report , we use the term “retirement savings” to mean money accrued in account - based dc plans , such as 401 ( k ) plans , and individual retirement accounts ( iras ) . since then , the number of private - sector db plans has shrunk considerably and the number of participants has remained flat , while the longer number of participants in dc plans has expanded considerably.life expectancy means that many baby boomers will spend more years in retirement than earlier cohorts and need their savings to last longer . in 1991 , private - sector db plans had more participants than dc plans . to describe the financial resources of current and future retirees , we examined financial information from the 2013 survey of consumer finances ( scf ) . to analyze retirement savings and income for workers approaching retirement and for those of retirement age , we answered the following questions: 1 . we do not estimate the value of db plans or include such an estimate in retirement savings.financial assets as non - retirement savings . savings held outside of retirement accounts are included in to analyze other evidence of retirement security , we reviewed several studies of retirement adequacy and compared and contrasted their methodologies and findings . these included academic studies based on formal models of optimal saving behavior and consumption patterns , studies that projected savings levels in retirement based on recent savings data , and other reports examining the levels , adequacy , and sources of retirement wealth .
specifically , our objectives were to ( 1 ) evaluate irs's efforts to address our recommendations for improving the reliability and reporting of cost , schedule , and scope information ; ( 2 ) summarize the reported cost , schedule , and performance of irs's major it investments ; and ( 3 ) assess the status and plans of selected investments . our objectives were to ( 1 ) evaluate irs's efforts to address our recommendations for improving the reliability and reporting of cost , schedule , and scope information ; ( 2 ) summarize the reported cost , schedule , and performance of irs's major it investments ; and ( 3 ) assess the status and plans of selected investments . the internal revenue service ( irs ) relies extensively on information technology ( it ) systems to annually collect more than $2 trillion in taxes , distribute more than $300 billion in refunds , and carry out its mission of providing service to america's taxpayers in meeting their tax obligations . for fiscal year 2014 , irs expected to spend about $2.4 billion for it investments ; this is about 21 percent of irs's total budget for the year . accordingly , the senate appropriations committee directed gao to review the cost and schedule performance of irs's major it investments . given the significant amount spent on irs's it investments and the challenges inherent in successfully delivering them , it is important that congress be provided ongoing , accurate , and objective information on the progress toward completion and the risks facing irs's projects . they address ( 1 ) the timely reporting of cost and schedule variance information for completed activities ; ( 2 ) consistently updating cost and schedule information for in - process activities ; ( 3 ) developing guidance on best practices to consider when determining cost and schedule variances for in - process activities ; ( 4 ) reporting cost and schedule information at the investment or investment segment level ( rather than by fiscal year only ) ; and ( 5 ) reporting qualitatively on how delivered scope compares to what was planned for investments until a quantitative measure is developed . providing similar ratings for its remaining 6 major investments would allow congress to more easily determine the ones requiring greater attention . he mentioned ( 1 ) irs's quarterly reporting to congress , and ( 2 ) the omb exhibit 300 baseline change request process as examples of such practices and processes . in his written comments , the commissioner stated that irs appreciated the acknowledgment of progress it had made to address two prior year recommendations to improve the consistency and timeliness in reporting cost , schedule and scope information for its major information technology ( it ) investments , but disagreed with our assessment of its efforts to address three prior recommendations for improving the reliability and reporting of cost , schedule , and scope information . irs's implementation of these recommendations is critical in ensuring that congress receives the reliable information it needs for effective oversight and decision making . however , these deviations were not transparent in congressional reporting because irs has yet to implement our prior recommendations regarding cumulative performance and scope reporting .
this appendix discusses in detail our methodology for addressing the following three objectives: determining how long the department of justice ( doj ) has taken to resolve federal bureau of investigation ( fbi ) whistleblower retaliation complaints and what factors have affected these time frames , determining the extent to which doj has taken steps to resolve complaints more quickly and determine the impact of any such efforts ; and determining the extent to which doj's office of the inspector general ( oig ) and office of professional responsibility ( doj - opr ) have complied with regulatory reporting requirements . to ensure that complainants receive the periodic updates that they are entitled to and need to determine next steps for their complaint , such as whether or not to seek corrective action from oarm , we recommend that counsel , doj - opr tailor its new case management system or otherwise develop an oversight mechanism to capture information on the office's compliance with regulatory requirements and , further , use that information to monitor and identify opportunities to improve doj - opr's compliance with regulatory requirements . specifically , our report examines: how long doj has taken to resolve fbi whistleblower retaliation complaints and what factors have affected these time frames ; the extent to which doj has taken steps to resolve complaints more quickly and determine the impact of any such efforts ; and the extent to which doj's oig and doj - opr have complied with regulatory reporting requirements . in 1998 , the department of justice ( doj ) issued regulations that set forth the process for federal bureau of investigation ( fbi ) whistleblowers to report complaints of retaliation for their disclosures . to assist congress in overseeing doj's efforts to protect fbi whistleblowers , you asked us to examine doj's process for handling fbi whistleblower retaliation complaints . further , with regard to guidance provided to fbi employees , the oig fully supports providing clear and comprehensive guidance as to all aspects of whistleblower rights and protections . oig has taken steps to begin tracking compliance with these requirements ; however , doj - opr has not yet taken similar action . however , whistleblowers also risk retaliation from their employers , sometimes being demoted , reassigned , or fired as a result of their actions . these initial steps position the agency to satisfy our recommendation that doj - opr tailor its new case management system or otherwise develop an oversight mechanism to capture information on the office's compliance with regulatory reporting requirements . however , doj officials have limited plans to assess the impacts of these actions . doj also reported that doj - opr is taking steps , such as developing a report template and upgrading its case management system which , when completed , could help the agency begin systematically tracking investigators' compliance with regulatory reporting requirements . these regulations require that fbi whistleblower retaliation complaints be directed to doj's office of the inspector general ( oig ) or office of professional responsibility ( doj - opr ) for investigation and provide specific timeliness and reporting requirements for these offices to meet as they manage these complaints . merit systems protection board ( mspb ) — federal agencies that handle whistleblower retaliation complaints for other federal employees — about those agencies' processes for handling whistleblower retaliation complaints .
this report examines ( 1 ) the number of mine plans the bureau of land management ( blm ) and the forest service approved from fiscal years 2010 through 2014 , the time it took these agencies to complete the mine plan review process , and the extent to which these agencies track this process ; and ( 2 ) the challenges , if any , that have affected the length of time for blm and the forest service to complete the review process , and the actions , if any , these agencies have taken to address these challenges . without modifying the system to provide such information , blm is limited in its ability to effectively oversee the extraction of minerals from federal land and manage the mine plan review process . this report examines ( 1 ) the number of mine plans blm and the forest service approved from fiscal years 2010 through 2014 , the time it took these agencies to approve these mine plans , and the extent to which these agencies track this process ; and ( 2 ) the challenges , if any , that have affected the length of time for blm and the forest service to complete the review process , and the actions , if any , these agencies have taken to address these challenges . the mining law of 1872 encouraged development of the west by opening up federal land to exploration , extraction , and development of hardrock minerals such as gold , silver , and copper . the forest service ( responding on behalf of agriculture ) generally agreed with the findings in the report and indicated that our recommendations are consistent with efforts they have underway or plan to incorporate . in addition , we recommend that the secretary of the interior direct the director of blm to take actions to improve the quality of mine plan submissions by , for example , developing guidance for mine operators and agency field officials that instructs them to hold pre - plan submittal meetings whenever possible ; issue a rule that assesses fees associated with reviewing hardrock mine plans that involve conducting environmental assessments ; and create new codes in its lr2000 database distinguishing between different types of mine plans to help track the length of time to complete the mine plan review process . to determine the number of mine plans that were approved from fiscal years 2010 through 2014 , we examined data from blm's legacy rehost 2000 ( lr2000 ) system and the forest service's locatable minerals database — automated information systems the agencies use to track key dates and milestones in the mine plan review process . to ensure effective oversight , strengthen internal controls , and address challenges associated with the hardrock mine plan review process , we are making two recommendations to the secretary of agriculture and three to the secretary of the interior . to determine the number of mine plans that were approved from fiscal years 2010 through 2014 , we examined data from blm's legacy rehost 2000 ( lr2000 ) system and the forest service's locatable minerals database — automated information systems the agencies use to track key dates and milestones in the mine plan review process .
the impacts and costs of certain weather disasters — such as floods , drought , and hurricanes — will increase in significance as previously rare events become more common and intense due to climate change , according to the united states global change research program's may 2014 national climate assessment . this report examines ( 1 ) how federal and private exposure to losses has changed since our 2007 report on flood and crop insurance and how climate change may affect insured and uninsured losses ; ( 2 ) how public insurers are preparing for climate change and associated challenges , if any ; and ( 3 ) how selected private insurers and reinsurers are preparing for climate change and associated challenges , if any . while the magnitude and extent of future climate change effects are uncertain , climate change presents a significant financial risk to the federal government in many areas . to determine how federal and private sector exposure to losses has changed since our 2007 report on flood and crop insurance and how climate change has or may affect insured and uninsured losses , we analyzed federal and private sector exposure data from 2007 through 2013 . to promote greater resilience to climate change effects in u.s. agriculture , we recommend that the secretary of agriculture direct rma to consider working with agricultural experts to recommend or incorporate resilient agricultural practices into their expert guidance for growers , so that good farming practices take into account long - term agricultural resilience to climate change . in 2007 , we found that climate change could increase federal insurers' financial risk and recommended that the secretaries of agriculture and homeland security analyze the potential long - term fiscal implications of climate change for crop insurance and flood insurance , respectively , and report their findings to congress . nfip has been on our high - risk list since march 2006 because of concerns about its long - term financial solvency and related operational issues . further , as we reported in 2014 , the federal government's crop insurance costs have increased in recent years , with appropriations more than doubling from $3.4 billion in fiscal year 2001 to $7.6 billion in fiscal year 2012 as program expansion and rising crop prices have led to increasing subsidy values and higher claims payments . in the public sector , federal insurance programs include the national flood insurance program ( nfip ) , administered by the federal emergency management agency ( fema ) within the u.s. department of homeland security , which makes flood insurance available to residential property owners and businesses , and the federal crop insurance program , administered by the risk management agency ( rma ) within the u.s. department of agriculture ( usda ) , which protects farmers against financial losses caused by drought , floods , and other natural disasters , among other things . as of june 2014 , fema's disaster relief fund had spent $3.8 billion for fiscal year 2014 , with an unspent balance of over $11.3 billion . consequently , crop insurance may continue to cover losses resulting from practices that increase vulnerability to climate change . as a result of these risks and the nation's fiscal condition , in february 2013 , we added limiting the federal government's fiscal exposure by better managing climate change risks to our list of areas at high risk to fraud , waste , abuse , and mismanagement , or most in need of transformation .
our high - risk program , supported by this committee and the senate committee on homeland security and governmental affairs , has brought much - needed focus to problems impeding effective government and costing billions of dollars each year . congressional oversight and legislative action have been critical to the progress that has been made . congress passed numerous laws targeting both specific problems and the high - risk areas overall . since 1990 , more than one - third of the areas previously designated as high risk have been removed from the high risk list because sufficient progress was made in addressing the problems identified . the office of management and budget ( omb ) regularly convenes meetings with agency leaders and gao to discuss progress updates on high - risk issues . since our last high - risk update in 2013 , solid , steady progress has been made in the vast majority of areas that remain on the list . in addition , top administration officials have continued to show their commitment to ensuring that high - risk areas receive attention and oversight . thank you for the opportunity to discuss our 2015 high - risk update.since 1990 , we have regularly reported on government operations that we have identified as high risk due to their greater vulnerability to fraud , waste , abuse , and mismanagement or the need for transformation to address economy , efficiency , or effectiveness challenges . nonetheless , 11 issues have been on the high risk list since the 1990s and 6 of these were on our original list of 14 areas in 1990 . this year , due to significant progress made , we narrowed the high - risk designation for two areas — protecting public health through enhanced oversight of medical products and dod contract management . lasting solutions to these and the other 30 high - risk areas offer the potential to save billions of dollars , dramatically improve service to the american public , and strengthen public confidence and trust in the performance and accountability of our national government . while there has been notable progress , much remains to be done to address the 32 high - risk issues that are currently on our high risk list . we also designated two new high - risk areas this year — managing risks and improving va health care and improving the management of it acquisitions and operations . our high risk update report and website provide details for each of these issues , describing the nature of the risks , what actions have been taken to address them , and what remains to be done to make further progress.the details in our report , along with successful implementation by agencies and continued oversight by congress , can form a solid foundation for progress to address risks and improve programs and operations . we have identified nine critical factors underlying successful major acquisitions that support the objective of improving the management of large - scale it acquisitions across the federal government: ( 1 ) program officials actively engaging with stakeholders ; ( 2 ) program staff having the necessary knowledge and skills ; ( 3 ) senior department and agency executives supporting the programs ; ( 4 ) end users and stakeholders involved in the development of requirements ; ( 5 ) end users participating in testing of system functionality prior to end user acceptance testing ; ( 6 ) government and contractor staff being stable and consistent ; ( 7 ) program staff prioritizing requirements ; ( 8 ) program officials maintaining regular communication with the prime contractor ; and ( 9 ) programs receiving sufficient funding .
this report describes the fines , penalties , and forfeitures federal agencies have collected from financial institutions for violations of bank secrecy act and related anti - money - laundering requirements ( bsa / aml ) , foreign corrupt practices act of 1977 ( fcpa ) , and u.s. sanctions programs requirements . as part of these efforts to stop the illegal flow of funds and to deter financial crimes , federal agencies — including the department of justice ( doj ) , department of the treasury ( treasury ) , and securities and exchange commission ( sec ) and other financial regulators — have the ability to reach settlements , take enforcement actions against institutions and individuals , and , in the case of doj and treasury , seize assets . over the last few years , billions of dollars have been collected in fines , penalties , and forfeitures from financial institutions for violations related to the bank secrecy act ( bsa ) , foreign corrupt practices act of 1977 ( fcpa ) , and u.s. sanctions programs requirements — referred to as “covered violations” in this report . similarly , federal agencies have developed regulations related to u.s. sanctions programs to enforce the blocking of assets and trade restrictions to accomplish foreign policy and national security goals . specifically , we analyzed publicly available data on the number and amounts of fines and penalties that were assessed from january 2009 through december 2015 by the board of governors of the federal reserve system ( federal reserve ) , federal deposit insurance corporation ( fdic ) , doj , national credit union administration ( ncua ) , office of the comptroller of the currency ( occ ) , sec , and the financial crimes enforcement network ( fincen ) , a bureau within treasury . you asked us to review the amounts of fines , penalties , and forfeitures federal agencies have collected from financial institutions for violations of bsa and related anti - money - laundering ( aml ) requirements ( referred to as “bsa / aml requirements” ) , fcpa , and u.s. sanctions programs requirements , how these funds and forfeitures are used and the policies and controls governing their distribution . this report describes ( 1 ) the amount of fines , penalties , and forfeitures that the federal government has collected for these violations from january 2009 through december 2015 , and ( 2 ) the process for collecting these funds and the purposes for which they are used . the agencies and offices included in this review were: ( 1 ) offices within the department of the treasury's ( treasury ) office of terrorism and financial intelligence , including officials from the financial crimes enforcement network ( fincen ) , office of foreign assets control ( ofac ) , and treasury executive office for asset forfeiture , and treasury's office of management ; ( 2 ) securities and exchange commission ( sec ) ; ( 3 ) the federal banking regulators — board of governors of the federal reserve system ( federal reserve ) , federal deposit insurance corporation ( fdic ) , national credit union administration ( ncua ) , and the office of the comptroller of the currency ( occ ) ; and ( 4 ) the department of justice ( doj ) .
specifically , nrc stated that the agency would consider gao's recommendations as part of the working groups the agency has established to evaluate ( 1 ) including category 3 sources in wbl and nsts , ( 2 ) license verification transfer requirements for category 3 sources , and ( 3 ) enhancing security and safety measures as part of the prelicensing process . this report ( 1 ) examines what steps nrc and agreement states have taken since 2007 to ensure that radioactive materials licenses are granted only to legitimate organizations , and licensees can obtain materials only in quantities allowed by their licenses , and ( 2 ) presents the results of our covert vulnerability testing designed to test the effectiveness of these controls . in addition , in 2005 , congress passed the energy policy act ( epact ) establishing a radiation source protection and security task force ( task force ) to make recommendations relating to the security of radiation sources in the united states from potential terrorist threats . nrc retains its mandate to regulate the use of radioactive materials in the remaining 13 states ( nrc states ) . as part of the ongoing efforts of nrc working groups meeting to develop enhancements to the prelicensing requirements for category 3 licenses , consider requiring that an on - site security review be conducted for all unknown applicants of category 3 licenses to verify that each applicant is prepared to implement the required security measures before taking possession of licensed radioactive materials . in 2008 , we found that nrc had worked with the agreement states and others to ( 1 ) identify sealed sources of greatest concern , ( 2 ) enhance requirements to secure radioactive sources , and ( 3 ) ensure that security requirements were implemented . specifically , in september 2007 , nrc approved its action plan to respond to recommendations to address security issues its and agreement states' radioactive materials programs raised in nrc inspector general , senate subcommittee , and gao reports . in addition , we found that nrc had made progress toward implementing recommendations to ( 1 ) modify its process for issuing licenses to ensure that radioactive materials cannot be purchased by those with no legitimate need for them and ( 2 ) examine whether certain radioactive sources should be subject to more stringent regulations . the atomic energy act gives the nuclear regulatory commission ( nrc ) regulatory authority over domestic industrial , medical , and research uses of radioactive materials . specifically , we recommend that the nuclear regulatory commission ( nrc ) take the following three actions: take the steps needed to include category 3 sources in the national source tracking system and add agreement state category 3 licenses to the web - based licensing system as quickly as reasonably possible . according to nrc officials , all agreement states have fully implemented compatible requirements to part 37 as of march 19 , 2016 ; state licensees operated under orders or other legally binding requirements in the interim . adequate to protect public health and safety and minimize danger to life and property . radioactive materials are commonly used throughout the world for a variety of purposes in medicine and the oil and gas , electric power , construction , and food industries .
the national nuclear security administration ( nnsa ) — a semiautonomous agency within the department of energy ( doe ) — is responsible for managing the nation's nuclear security missions . these missions include maintaining the safety , security , and effectiveness of the u.s. nuclear weapons stockpile and reducing the threat posed by nuclear proliferation . this report examines: ( 1 ) the extent to which doe and nnsa cost estimating requirements and guidance for its projects and programs reflect best practices for developing and reviewing cost estimates , and ( 2 ) the extent to which nnsa project and program reviews identified weaknesses in cost estimates , and the extent to which any weaknesses can be attributed to not following cost estimating best practices . further , doe stated that the revised order will ( 1 ) define which doe and nnsa program budget requests require cost estimates and ( 2 ) clarify that cost estimates for program budget submissions shall be conducted in accordance with the doe cost estimating guide ( or its successor policy ) . revise doe requirements and guidance that apply to programs to ensure that program reviews are conducted periodically , including reviews of the life - cycle cost estimates for programs . to achieve its missions , nnsa manages numerous programs such as the stockpile life extension program and the plutonium disposition program . these and other programs frequently rely on the acquisition of capital assets to meet program needs . revise doe directives that apply to programs to require that doe and nnsa and its contractors develop cost estimates in accordance with the 12 cost estimating best practices , including developing life - cycle cost estimates for programs . also , because doe order 413.3b has not been updated since 2010 , it omits reference to the supplemental cost estimating guide ; users of the order may not be aware of the guide's availability and may not benefit from its usefulness . to enhance nnsa's ability to develop reliable cost estimates for its projects and for its programs that have project - like characteristics , we recommend the secretary of energy take the following five actions: revise doe's project management order to require that doe , nnsa , and its contractors develop cost estimates in accordance with the 12 cost estimating best practices . as a result , reviews of cost estimates for programs are limited , and the extent to which program cost estimates have weaknesses is largely unknown . because doe does not require the use of most of the 12 cost estimating best practices for its projects and programs , it is unlikely that nnsa and its contractors will consistently develop reliable cost estimates . finally , without a requirement for conducting reviews of programs with project - like characteristics , including the life - cycle cost estimates of these programs , neither doe nor nnsa have appropriate internal controls to assess the quality of program performance over time . nonetheless , nnsa continues to struggle with significant cost overruns on its major projects . for example , to meet the needs of the plutonium disposition program , nnsa is currently managing the construction of two capital asset projects — the mixed oxide ( mox ) fuel fabrication facility and the waste solidification nnsa has a building — at doe's savannah river site in south carolina.history of struggling to complete these and other projects within their initial cost and schedule estimates .
as with our prior reports , our objectives were to ( 1 ) determine the extent to which lobbyists can demonstrate compliance with the requirements for registrations and reports filed under the lda ; ( 2 ) identify any challenges and potential improvements to compliance by lobbyists , lobbying firms , and registrants ; and ( 3 ) describe the resources and authorities available to the u.s. attorney's office for the district of columbia ( usao ) in its role in enforcing lda compliance and the efforts it has made to improve that enforcement . hlgoa also increased civil penalties and added criminal penalties for failure to comply with lobbying disclosure requirements . in addition , hloga requires us to annually audit the extent of lobbyists' compliance with the lobbying disclosure act of 1995 , as amended ( lda ) by reviewing publicly available lobbying registrations and other matters . the honest leadership and open government act of 2007 ( hloga ) amended the lobbying disclosure act of 1995 to require lobbyists to file quarterly lobbying disclosure reports and semiannual reports on certain political contributions . our objectives were to determine the extent to which lobbyists are able to demonstrate compliance with the lobbying disclosure act of 1995 , as amended ( lda ) by providing documentation to support information contained on registrations and reports filed under the lda ; to identify challenges and potential improvements to compliance , if any ; and to describe the resources and authorities available to the u.s. attorney's office for the district of columbia ( usao ) , its role in enforcing lda compliance , and the efforts it has made to improve lda enforcement . this methodology allows us to generalize some elements to the population of ld - 2 reports . to determine the extent to which lobbyists can demonstrate compliance , we examined a stratified random sample of 80 quarterly lobbying disclosure ( ld - 2 ) reports with income and expenses of $5,000 or more filed during the third and fourth quarters of calendar year 2014 and the first and second quarters of calendar year 2015 . usao reports that it is currently collecting payments on two cases which will be closed soon and has three cases which should result in further action in the next 6 months . the last revision occurred on february 15 , 2013 , to ( among other issues ) update the reporting thresholds for inflation . this methodology allows us to generalize to the population of ld - 203 reports both with and without contributions . table 4 shows the status of ld - 203 ( r ) referrals received and the number of enforcement actions taken by usao in its effort to bring lobbying firms into compliance . about 47 percent ( 783 of 1,672 ) of the referrals are pending further action . in 2015 , 10 ld - 203 reports were amended in response to our review . our sample of ld - 2 reports was not designed to detect differences over time . this is our ninth report under this mandate . for selected elements of lobbyists' ld - 2 reports that can be generalized to the population of lobbying reports our findings have been consistent from year to year .
two federal agencies — the federal protective service ( fps ) , an agency within the department of homeland security ( dhs ) , and gsa — are critical to ensuring security . we assessed ( 1 ) how the agencies' collaboration reflects key practices to ensure facility security and ( 2 ) the impact of their collaboration practices on day - to - day operations at the regional and facility levels . fps and gsa headquarters officials should develop mechanisms to monitor , evaluate , and report on their collaborative efforts to protect federal facilities in order to identify possible areas for improvement and to reinforce accountability . over one - million employees and a wide range of visitors seeking services depend on the government to provide security and protection at approximately 8,900 facilities held or leased by the general services administration ( gsa ) . the objectives of our report were to assess ( 1 ) how the agencies' collaboration reflects key practices to ensure facility security and ( 2 ) the impact of their collaboration practices on day - to - day operations at the regional and facility levels . finally , we selected four fps and gsa regions for review of their collaborative efforts: region 3 ( mid - atlantic ) ; region 5 ( great lakes ) ; region 7 ( greater southwest ) ; and region 10 ( northwest / arctic ) . additional interagency collaboration practices we did not select for our review include: ( 1 ) identify and address needs by leveraging resources and ( 2 ) reinforce individual accountability for collaborative efforts through performance management systems . gsa also has responsibility for protecting federal facilities and their grounds and is also responsible for taking steps to improve efficiency while managing the government's real property portfolio and the physical structure of facilities . to the extent that collaboration affects these agencies' ability to adequately protect facilities , security may be compromised . the homeland security act of 2002 vested both the secretary of dhs and the administrator of gsa with responsibilities for the protection of these facilities . for example , nppd's strategic plan does include two performance measures for fps ; gsa's strategic plan does not include any security - related performance measures . without working to strengthen these key collaboration practices , fps and gsa risk their ability to meet their mission to adequately identify and address serious security risks . fps is the component within dhs that has responsibility for security and protection of the facilities , their occupants , and visitors . we found that these regional examples most closely relate to three of the six collaboration practices we included in our review: ( 1 ) agreeing on roles and responsibilities ; ( 2 ) establishing compatible policies and procedures ; and ( 3 ) developing mechanisms to monitor , evaluate , and report on results . further , fps's and gsa's security - related performance measures , which allow agencies to track progress in achieving their goals , and to assist in monitoring and evaluating results , are limited . given the collaboration challenges that fps and gsa face in protecting federal facilities , we are making four recommendations to the secretary of homeland security and the administrator of the general services administration .
the health resources and services administration ( hrsa ) , an agency within the department of health and human services ( hhs ) , is charged with improving access to health care services for people who are uninsured , isolated , or medically vulnerable and enhancing the capacity of the health care workforce . these grantees serve millions of people each year through programs that provide health care to uninsured individuals ; people with human immunodeficiency virus and acquired immunodeficiency syndrome ( hiv / aids ) ; pregnant women , mothers , and children ; people living in rural communities ; and others . to help ensure complete and effective monitoring of grantees , we recommend that the administrator of hrsa develop a process , either at the agency or bureau level , to ensure that bureaus' sops address all of the key components of grantee monitoring as established by the agency . in this report , we examine ( 1 ) the extent to which hrsa has developed guidance for its staff responsible for monitoring grantees ; ( 2 ) the extent to which hrsa has implemented training for its staff responsible for monitoring grantees ; ( 3 ) hrsa's oversight of its staff responsible for monitoring grantees ; and ( 4 ) what practices , if any , hrsa has in place to ensure that the contractors conducting grantee monitoring activities are qualified and carry out their work as appropriate . in fiscal year 2013 , hrsa awarded over $6 billion in grants , which accounted for over 80 percent of the agency's appropriations . to manage its grant programs , hrsa employs project officers in its programmatic bureaus and staff in its office of federal assistance management ( ofam ) . because hrsa did not ensure that the bureaus' sops included the required information and detail , and thus provided comprehensive guidance to staff responsible for monitoring grantees , the agency has put itself at risk for incomplete or ineffective grantee monitoring , which could jeopardize its stewardship of federal dollars . hrsa has four main methods for overseeing project officers , grants management specialists , and financial integrity staff that are responsible for monitoring its grantees — supervisors reviewing information in , and reports from , ehb ; participating in staff interactions with grantees ; communicating regularly with staff ; and conducting performance appraisals . to carry out its mission , hrsa provides funding and support for a wide variety of programs , most commonly through grants . the performance appraisals for all staff with responsibility for monitoring grantees include performance elements related to monitoring . in addition , hhs provided information on its plans for implementing the recommendation , stating that hrsa officials had already begun to take action . in the past few years , hrsa has taken steps to increase and improve its guidance and training related to monitoring grantees , including implementing new training programs for key staff responsible for grantee monitoring and developing sops for these staff at both the agency and bureau level . hrsa's workforce — its staff and contractors — is responsible for monitoring grantees . the communication components that were not fully addressed by the sops were specifying the frequency and purpose of communication with grantees ( 3 sops ) , the process for communicating concerns or noncompliance ( 1 sop ) , and coordinating with ofam ( 2 sops ) .
this report assesses ( 1 ) the department of energy's ( doe ) national nuclear security administration's ( nnsa ) management approach for the b61-12 life extension program ( lep ) and ( 2 ) the extent to which nnsa and the air force are managing risks in the lep . to maintain the readiness of the b61 and other weapons in the stockpile , the department of energy's ( doe ) national nuclear security administration ( nnsa ) and dod undertake life extension programs ( lep ) that entail refurbishing or replacing weapons' components to extend the lives of weapons by 20 years or more . many weapons in the u.s. nuclear stockpile have aged far beyond their designed operational lives and , according to the department of defense ( dod ) , require modernization to ensure that the nuclear arsenal is safe , secure , and effective for as long as such weapons exist . some of the oldest of the weapons in the active stockpile are versions of the b61 bomb , an aircraft - delivered weapon that is a key component of the united states' commitments to the north atlantic treaty organization's ( nato ) nuclear deterrent . we are not making new recommendations in this report . potential challenges nnsa and dod have identified include the following: limited management capability and authority . this report assesses ( 1 ) nnsa's management approach for the b61-12 lep and ( 2 ) the extent to which nnsa and the air force are managing risks in the lep . given nnsa's past problems in executing leps , and a schedule with little room for delays , nnsa and air force may face challenges in the future in ensuring that risks are not realized and do not affect the program's schedule , its cost , or the performance of the b61-12 . leps may also enhance safety and security characteristics of weapons , as well as consolidate the stockpile into fewer weapon types to minimize maintenance and testing costs while preserving needed military capabilities . we provided a draft of this report to doe and dod for review and comment . under the b61 lep , nnsa and the air force — the armed service responsible for air - delivered weapons such as the b61 — plan to consolidate four of the five versions of the b61 bomb ( b61 legacy bombs ) , each of which was designed to fulfill specific military requirements , into a single weapon known as the b61-12 , which will be equipped with a new tail kit guidance assembly that will enable it to meet all military requirements . we will continue to assess the b61-12 lep as it passes through later stages of the phase 6.x process , in keeping with the senate report provision that gave rise to this report . these problems resulted in delays , additional expenditures , difficulties tracking the cost of the w76 program , and a b61 refurbishment that did not meet all of nnsa's and dod's technical objectives . for example , according to nnsa documents , nnsa plans to execute at least four leps per year simultaneously in fiscal years 2021 through 2025 — along with several major construction projects , including efforts to modernize nnsa's uranium and plutonium capabilities .
ppaca mandated that gao review pcori's activities in 2015. report examines ( 1 ) the extent to which pcori established priorities and processes for funding and disseminating comparative clinical effectiveness research consistent with its legislative requirements ; ( 2 ) the status of pcori's efforts to fund comparative clinical effectiveness research ; and ( 3 ) pcori's plans , if any , to evaluate the effectiveness of its work . in 2010 , the patient protection and affordable care act ( ppaca ) authorized the establishment of the patient - centered outcomes research institute ( pcori ) as a federally funded , nonprofit corporation to improve the quality and relevance of comparative clinical effectiveness research ( cer ) . see gao , hhs research awards: use of recovery act and patient protection and affordable care act funds for comparative effectiveness research , gao - 11-712r ( washington , d.c.: june 14 , 2011 ) ; comparative effectiveness: agency for healthcare research and quality's process for awarding recovery act funds and disseminating results , gao - 12-332 ( washington , d.c.: february 29 , 2012 ) ; patient - centered outcomes research institute: review of the audit of financial statements for 2013 and 2012 , gao - 14-415r ( washington , d.c.: march 27 , 2014 ) ; and patient - centered outcomes research institute: review of the audit of the financial statements for 2012 and 2011 , gao - 13-390r ( washington , d.c.: march 29 , 2013 ) .  ( see gao , comparative effectiveness research: hhs needs to strengthen dissemination and data - capacity - building efforts gao - 15-280 , washington , d.c.: march 3 , 2015 ) . cer , research that evaluates and compares health outcomes and the clinical effectiveness , risks , and benefits of two or more medical treatments , services , or items such as health care interventions , is important because more than half of all medical treatments may be delivered without clear evidence of effectiveness , according to the institute of medicine ( iom ) . ppaca also mandated gao to review hhs's cer - related activities in 2015 and 2018 . in addition to establishing the two advisory panels required by ppaca , pcori has also established five additional advisory panels: ( 1 ) assessment of prevention , diagnosis , and treatment options ; ( 2 ) improving healthcare systems ; ( 3 ) addressing disparities ; ( 4 ) patient engagement ; and ( 5 ) communication and dissemination research . in 2012 , pcori established five broad research priorities: ( 1 ) assessment of prevention , diagnosis , and treatment options ; ( 2 ) improving health care systems ; ( 3 ) communication and dissemination research ; ( 4 ) addressing disparities ; and ( 5 ) accelerating patient - centered outcomes research and methodological research . specifically , ppaca directed pcori to establish priorities for research that take into account factors that include disease incidence , prevalence , and burden ; gaps in evidence with regard to clinical outcomes ; patient needs , outcomes , and preferences ; and practice variations and health disparities in terms of delivery and outcomes of care , among other things .
the department of transportation's ( dot ) federal highway administration ( fhwa ) provides about $40 billion each year to states to build , improve , and preserve the nation's road and bridge infrastructure through the federal - aid highway program . this report examines ( 1 ) how dot regulates and provides oversight of oversize vehicles and loads on highways and bridges , and ( 2 ) how state agencies regulate oversize vehicles and loads on highways and bridges . to improve stewardship over the nation's highways and bridges , we recommend that the secretary of transportation direct the fhwa administrator to take the following action: conduct a study on state oversize - and overweight - permitting practices , including automated vehicle routing and escort driver certification , to identify areas of best practice and share the results with states . the bridge repair cost $8.5 million in federal - aid highway funds . this report examines ( 1 ) how dot regulates and provides oversight of oversize vehicles and loads on highways and bridges and ( 2 ) how state agencies regulate oversize vehicles and loads on highways and bridges . a national transportation safety board ( ntsb ) investigation of the skagit river bridge collapse reported that differences among states and regions on the various aspects of truck permitting could be a safety concern . while federal funding is provided to state and local governments to help improve highway infrastructure and support commercial vehicle safety activities , states own and maintain most of the nation's highways and bridges . dot's federal motor carrier safety administration ( fmcsa ) also provides over $300 million each year to state and local government agencies in grants for commercial motor vehicle safety activities . as a part of that effort , states develop regulations for vehicle size and weight to be enforced in their state ( subject to certain federal limits ) and issue permits that allow motor carriers to operate oversize and overweight vehicles , for example to deliver manufactured housing or to move heavy construction equipment to a job site . however , because fhwa does not collect information on state permitting , it is not in the best position to advise states on practices and requirements that could improve their performance . we have identified key steps agencies can take to improve agency performance ; one of them includes identifying best practices to help identify changes that might be needed to improve performance . a similar study related to state permitting practices and requirements could help identify best practices to assist states in making decisions on their permitting practices . the joint explanatory statement accompanying the consolidated appropriations act for fiscal year 2014 directed gao to review the oversight of oversize loads and the role of federal and state agencies in that process . however , fhwa has authority to conduct transportation research , including research on issues with national implications that could lead to improvements in highway safety , and in the past has worked with the trucking industry and others to identify best practices for related issues such as escort vehicles . this incident in washington not only injured three people but also disrupted traffic in an important freight corridor for nearly 4 weeks while the bridge was closed .
for years , gao has reported on problems in cost , schedule , and performance for major defense acquisition programs within the department of defense ( dod ) . the views of current and former military service chiefs on the current acquisition process , and ( 2 ) key problems or factors the service chiefs identified with the acquisition process and our assessment of these issues . this report examines: ( 1 ) senator inhofe's august 2014 request was in his role as ranking member of the senate armed services committee in the 113th congress . this report reviews further related issues and concerns the military service chiefs have with the department of defense's ( dod ) acquisition process and outcomes it produces . in 2014 , gao issued a report on dod's acquisition chain of command and found that the military service chiefs currently have several opportunities to contribute to the management and however , the extent to which oversight of defense acquisition programs.the chiefs are actively involved and influencing acquisition programs remained unclear . in recent years , acquisition reform advocates have suggested that acquisition outcomes could be improved by expanding the role of military service chiefs with respect to managing and overseeing weapon system programs . poor program outcomes can be traced to a culture in which the military services begin programs with unrealistic requirements , immature technologies , and overly optimistic cost and schedule estimates . specifically , we examined ( 1 ) the views of current and former military service chiefs on the current acquisition process , and ( 2 ) key problems or factors the service chiefs identified with the acquisition process and our assessment of these issues . we analyzed evidence and examples collected from our interviews with current and former dod leadership , and assessed them in relation to findings from acquisition reform studies and prior gao work on dod weapon systems and commercial best practices . gao issued a report in 2014 on the military service chiefs' role in the acquisition chain of command . to assess key problems or factors the service chiefs identified with the acquisition process and our assessment of these issues , we drew upon our extensive body of work in defense acquisitions and best practices , and reviewed program execution information from all 78 ongoing major defense acquisition programs identified in annual selected acquisition reports . you asked gao to conduct additional work on this topic and review what concerns , if any , the military service chiefs have with the department's acquisition process and outcomes it produces . to help ensure that requirements are well defined and well understood before a program is approved to start system development , we recommend that the secretary of defense direct the military service chiefs and service acquisition executives to work together to take the following two actions: assess whether sufficient systems engineering expertise is available during the requirements development process ; and develop a better way to make sure sufficient systems engineering is conducted and opportunities exist to better define requirements and assess resource trade - offs before a program starts . we also sought the perspectives of other dod leadership , including the service acquisition executives . in order to improve program outcomes , dod must focus its efforts on better integrating the requirements and acquisition processes , which can be achieved through better collaboration between these communities from the generation of requirements through system development , coupled with a greater emphasis on systems engineering and knowledge attainment early in a program's life cycle .
the department of defense ( dod ) depends on small businesses to support its missions , spark innovation , and develop technologies to support the warfighter . this report addresses the extent to which dod osbp has integrated cybersecurity into its existing outreach and education efforts for defense small businesses . to better position defense small businesses in protecting information and networks from cyber threats , we recommend that the secretary of defense direct the director of the dod osbp , as part of its existing outreach efforts , to identify and disseminate cybersecurity resources to defense small businesses . we focused our review on the department of defense ( dod ) office of small business programs ( osbp ) because this office is responsible for providing small business policy advice to the office of the secretary of defense and for providing policy oversight to dod military department and dod component small business offices , per dod directive 4205.01 . the defense security service also reported in 2012 that our national security relies on success in thwarting persistent attacks — including cyber attacks — that target u.s. technology , intellectual property , trade secrets and proprietary information . by leveraging resources that dod components and other federal agencies have already developed , some of which have been identified in this report , dod osbp will be able to spend more time focusing on other priorities such as developing the training curriculum . dod concurred with our recommendation that the secretary of defense direct the director of the dod osbp , as part of its existing outreach efforts , to identify and disseminate cybersecurity resources to defense small businesses . we also discussed with dod osbp officials any challenges or limitations to their ability to conduct cybersecurity outreach and education . dod stated that understanding the essential need to protect dod critical networks , information and infrastructure — including those within defense small businesses — dod osbp , with support from the dod chief information officer , is expanding its current cybersecurity awareness and outreach programs . in technical comments on the report , the federal communications commission identified the following additional federal cybersecurity resource — the communications security , reliability and interoperability council - cybersecurity risk management and best practices working group 4: final report . in february 2015 , the director of national intelligence reported that cyber threats to u.s. national and economic security are increasing in frequency , scale , sophistication , and severity of impact . dod maintains an office of small business programs ( osbp ) to ensure that small businesses receive a fair proportion of dod purchases , contracts , and subcontracts for property and services . by identifying and disseminating information about existing cybersecurity resources to defense small businesses , these businesses may be made more aware of cybersecurity practices and cyber threats , thereby potentially assisting them in protecting their networks against cyber exploits . we provided a draft of this report to dod , the federal communications commission , the department of homeland security , the department of justice , the u.s. small business administration , and the national institute of standards and technology for review and comment . while dod osbp officials have recognized the importance of educating defense small businesses about cybersecurity , they have not identified and disseminated cybersecurity resources through their outreach and education efforts to businesses because they have been focused on other priorities , such as developing a training curriculum for dod professionals who work with small businesses .
for the energy sector , which includes critical electrical infrastructure , the department of energy ( doe ) is the sector - specific agency and shares responsibility with dhs . thank you for the opportunity to discuss our work regarding the department of homeland security's ( dhs ) efforts to address electromagnetic threats to the electric grid . the threat posed by an electromagnetic pulse ( emp ) or solar weather event could have a debilitating impact on critical electrical infrastructure and communications systems , as well as other key assets and infrastructure that depend on electric utilities for power . taken actions to address recommendations from the 2008 emp commission report , and ( 2 ) coordinated with other principal federal agencies and industry stakeholders to mitigate risks to the electric grid from electromagnetic threats . within the nipp framework , dhs has the lead role in coordinating the overall federal effort to promote the security and resilience of the nation's critical infrastructure . emp and solar weather events could potentially lead to power outages over broad geographic areas for extended durations , which experts have reported could result in severe economic disruption and significant impacts to public health and safety . in april 2008 , the commission to assess the threat to the united states from electromagnetic pulse attack ( emp commission ) issued a report which included recommendations addressing the preparation , protection and recovery of u.s. critical infrastructures against a possible emp attack.to doe . however , the national infrastructure protection plan ( nipp ) outlines the roles and responsibilities of dhs and applicable sector - specific agencies for each of the 16 critical infrastructure sectors . addressing these threats necessitates effective collaboration among multiple government agencies and industry partners and no singular federal program or entity has sole responsibility for addressing electromagnetic threats . specifically , i will be discussing the extent to which dhs has: ( 1 ) we are conducting this work at the request of the senate committee on homeland security and governmental affairs and the house committee on homeland security . gao , critical infrastructure protection , observations on key factors in dhs's implementation of its partnership approach , gao - 14-464t ( washington , d.c.: march 6 , 2014 ) . for example , ppd - 21 states that dhs , in carrying out its responsibilities under the homeland security act of 2002 , as amended , is to , among other things , evaluate national capabilities , opportunities , and challenges in protecting critical infrastructure ; analyze threats to , vulnerabilities of , and potential consequences from all hazards on critical infrastructure ; identify security and resilience functions that are necessary for effective stakeholder engagement with all critical infrastructure sectors ; integrate and coordinate federal cross - sector security and resilience activities ; and identify and analyze key interdependencies among critical infrastructure sectors . for example , dhs - ip has not fully leveraged the infrastructure survey tool and regional resiliency assessment program ( rrap ) to help collect additional information related to infrastructure vulnerabilities and impacts related to electromagnetic threats . for example , dhs's efforts to clearly identify agency roles and responsibilities to date have been limited . for our ongoing review , dhs did not identify its actions as specifically responsive to the emp commission's recommendations ; nonetheless , some of the actions dhs has taken since 2008 could help to mitigate some electromagnetic impacts to the electric grid .
congress gave fsoc a number of significant authorities to help it execute its broad mission , including designating nonbank financial companies for heightened supervision by the board of governors of the federal reserve system ( federal reserve ) . in response to the crisis , in 2010 congress passed the dodd - frank wall street reform and consumer protection act ( dodd - frank act ) , which provided for a broad range of regulatory reforms . as you know , the 2007-2009 financial crisis focused attention on weaknesses in the u.s. regulatory structure , including the lack of an agency or mechanism responsible for monitoring and addressing risks across the financial system and a shortage of timely information to facilitate that oversight . 27 , 2005 ) and troubled asset relief program: additional actions needed to better ensure integrity , accountability , and transparency , gao - 09-161 ( washington , d.c.: dec. 2 , 2008 ) . gao , internal control: standards for internal control in the federal government , gao / aimd - 00-21.3.1 ( washington , d.c.: november 1999 ) ; and internal control standards: internal control management and evaluation tool , gao - 01-1008g ( washington , d.c.: august 2001 ) and gao , millennium challenge corporation: progress made on key challenges in first year of operations , gao - 05-625t ( washington , d.c.: apr . the dodd - frank act also created the office of financial research ( ofr ) , in part , to support fsoc by providing financial research and data . among other things , the act established fsoc to monitor the stability of the u.s. financial system and take actions to mitigate risks that might destabilize the system . our past work has shown that the lack of clear roles and coordination can lead to duplication , confusion , and regulatory gaps . we will continue to monitor fsoc's progress in implementing our recommendations and stand ready to assist congress as it continues its oversight of these entities . specifically , in our 2012 report we reviewed fsoc's challenges in achieving its mission , efforts to establish management mechanisms , activities for supporting collaboration among their members and external stakeholders , and its processes for issuing reports and rules and made nine recommendations to fsoc for improving its ability to identify systemic risk and emerging threats , its transparency and accountability , and collaboration and coordination across members and member agencies.in my comments today , i will discuss fsoc's progress in addressing these recommendations . fully addressing our recommendations will help shed more light on fsoc's decision making and activities and allow congress to hold the council accountable for results . thank you for the opportunity to be here today to discuss the financial stability oversight council ( fsoc ) . addressing our recommendations can also help fsoc enhance collaboration among its members and with external stakeholders that are critical to their ability to achieve their missions . however , further efforts continue to be needed , including fully implementing our september 2012 recommendations . we have ongoing work reviewing duplication , overlap , and fragmentation in the financial regulatory structure and as part of that work will be reviewing the various roles and responsibilities of federal agencies that oversee risks to financial stability .
my statement today focuses on ( 1 ) how the federal wildland fire management agencies assess the effectiveness of their wildland fire management programs and ( 2 ) the forest service's efforts to modernize the large airtanker fleet and challenges it has faced in doing so . we interviewed agency officials to identify key performance measures and other mechanisms the agencies use to determine the effectiveness of their wildland fire management programs and to understand agency efforts to identify their firefighting aircraft needs , including their use of information on performance and effectiveness . as you know , wildland fires have resulted in tragic loss of life and damage to homes , infrastructure , and important cultural and natural resources . our previous body of work on performance management has shown that it is important for agencies to collect performance information to inform key management decisions , such as how to identify problems and take corrective actions and how to identify and share effective approaches . the 2015 fire season has been especially severe , with over 9 million acres burned to date — well over the annual average of about 6.5 million acres burned during each of the last 10 years . for example , the forest service and interior agencies use a system called fuel treatment effectiveness monitoring to assess fuel reduction treatment effectiveness . balancing the need to suppress unwanted wildland fires to protect people and resources with the need to recognize fire's natural role on the landscape is a complex task , particularly given the current condition of the nation's landscape , increased development in and around wildlands ( an area often called the wildland - urban interface ) , and the future outlook for wildland fires . as a result , we recommended in our september 2015 report that the secretaries of agriculture and the interior direct the chief of the forest service and the director of interior's office of wildland fire to ( 1 ) develop specific criteria for selecting wildland fires for review and for conducting the reviews as part of their efforts to improve their approach to reviewing fires and ( 2 ) once such criteria are established , revise agency policies to align with the specific criteria developed by the agencies . in recent decades , increased wildland fire intensity has prompted new policies and efforts aimed at implementing more effective management strategies to manage wildland fire . a 2013 report assessing the usefulness of the forest service's five reviews of 2012 fires noted shortcomings in consistency across the reviews , including unclear criteria for selecting fires and conducting reviews , as well as limitations in the specificity of the resulting reports and recommendations . for example , in response to significant fire events , the agencies developed the federal wildland fire management policy of 1995 , under which the agencies continued to move away from their earlier emphasis on suppressing every wildland fire , seeking instead , among other things , to respond to fires in ways that protect communities and important resources while considering both the cost and long - term effects of the response . to examine how federal wildland fire management agencies assess program effectiveness , we reviewed documents , such as agency strategic plans , budget justifications , agency studies and strategy documents related to fire aviation , and reports resulting from fire reviews conducted by the agencies since 2009 .
i am pleased to be here today to provide some preliminary observations from our ongoing review of the environmental protection agency's ( epa ) science advisory board ( sab ) and the clean air scientific advisory committee ( casac ) . we are carrying out this work for the senate committee on environment and public works and the house committee on science , space , and technology . as federal advisory committees , the sab and casac must comply with the federal advisory committee act ( faca ) and its implementing regulations . the environmental research , development , and demonstration authorization act of 1978 ( erddaa ) mandated that epa establish the sab and required the sab to provide the epa administrator with scientific advice as requested . this testimony reflects our preliminary observations from our ongoing review that examines ( 1 ) the extent to which epa procedures for processing congressional committees' requests for scientific advice from the sab ensure compliance with erddaa and ( 2 ) the extent to which casac has provided advice related to naaqs . water body connectivity is the biological , chemical , and hydrologic connectivity of waters and the effects that small streams , wetlands , and open waters have on larger downstream waters such as rivers , lakes , estuaries , and oceans . epa's written procedures for processing congressional committee requests to the sab are found in the sab charter and in the following two documents that establish general policies for how epa's federal advisory committees are to interact with outside parties: epa policy regarding communication between members of federal advisory committee act committees and parties outside of the epa ( the april 2014 policy ) , and clarifying epa policy regarding communications between members of scientific and technical federal advisory committees and outside parties ( the november 2014 policy clarification ) . in addition , recent testimony received by the committee has raised questions regarding whether casac advises epa of any adverse public health , welfare , social , economic , or energy effects that may result from various strategies for attainment and maintenance of naaqs as called for in the clean air act . as you know , the sab and casac are federal advisory committees that review the scientific and technical basis for epa's decision making . recent interactions between the house committee on science , space , and technology and the sab related to specific sab reviews on hydraulic fracturing and water body connectivity have raised questions with the committee regarding whether the sab is fulfilling its statutory obligations to provide scientific advice to the designated congressional committees . in addition , epa must have procedures to ensure that the advice or recommendations of its federal advisory committees , including the sab , are products of their independent judgment and not “inappropriately” influenced by epa . naaqs , we reviewed the clean air act , its legislative history , and legal cases involving the act . these two federal advisory committees were established pursuant to statute . the clean air act requires epa to set and periodically review and revise naaqs for certain air pollutants , the emission of which cause or contribute to air pollution that may endanger public health or welfare .
the system , which is expected to enhance the intelligence , surveillance , reconnaissance , targeting , and strike capabilities of the navy's aircraft carrier fleet , is comprised of three segments: ( 1 ) air system , ( 2 ) aircraft carrier , and ( 3 ) control system and connectivity . the navy expects to have invested at least $3 billion through fiscal year 2020 in the development of the unmanned carrier - launched airborne surveillance and strike ( uclass ) system . program , and ( 2 ) the extent to which the navy has the knowledge about resources it needs to develop the uclass system . at a minimum this report should include: an updated cost estimate ; a schedule for holding a milestone b review and establishing an acquisition program baseline before initiating system development ; plans for new preliminary design reviews and technology maturation if more demanding requirements are validated ; and what consideration is being given to adopting an evolutionary acquisition approach . we reviewed department of defense ( dod ) acquisition policy including dod instruction 5000.02 and recent better buying power memorandums . 113-66 , § 213 ( d ) ( 2013 ) . to assess the extent to which the navy has the knowledge about resources it needs to develop the uclass system , we applied best practice standards developed by gao for using key product knowledge to support program investment decisions , and identified and reviewed relevant legislation such as the weapon systems acquisition reform act of 2009 . in august 2013 , the navy awarded contracts worth $15 million each to four competing contractors to develop and deliver preliminary designs for the air system . the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2014 included a provision that gao review the status of the uclass acquisition program annually . on behalf of dod , the navy partially agreed with our recommendation . the contractors delivered their preliminary designs , and the navy completed its assessment of their maturity in may 2014 . congress has raised concerns about whether uclass will be armed and survivable enough to support u.s. power projection in areas in which access and freedom to operate are challenged . the next anticipated steps for the uclass program will be to solicit proposals and award the contract for development , design , fabrication , test , and delivery of the air system . in addition , congress has heard testimony from former dod and navy officials expressing concerns about the ability of uclass to help counter the defenses of adversaries trying to deny u.s. access . congress , dod , and the navy continue to debate the primary role of the uclass system . once the jroc has validated uclass requirements , and in order to ensure that the navy has a sound and executable business case and establishes an acquisition program baseline before awarding a development contract and committing significant resources , we recommend that the secretary of defense direct the secretary of the navy to provide a report to the congressional defense committees and the secretary of defense demonstrating that the navy has the resources available and a strategy to deliver those required uclass capabilities . unsettled requirements will hinder the navy's ability to develop and present a business case with realistic cost and schedule estimates , and establish an acquisition program baseline .
this appendix discusses in detail our methodology for addressing ( 1 ) the u.s. department of education's ( education's ) current income - driven ( idr ) repayment plan budget estimates and how they have changed over time and ( 2 ) the extent to which education's approach to estimating idr plan costs and its quality control practices help ensure reliable budget estimates . education has also increased its estimates of idr plan costs . since 2009 , the u.s. department of education ( education ) has created several new income - driven repayment ( idr ) plans that borrowers can select to reduce challenges they face in repaying their loans . currently , over 30 million student loan borrowers hold more than $900 billion in william d. ford federal direct loans ( direct loans ) , and there are indications that some face difficulties repaying their loans . given questions among policymakers and experts about idr plan costs to the federal government , you asked us to examine education's idr plan budget estimates and evaluate its approach to estimating costs . for instance , in its fiscal year 2016 budget justification , education revised its prior - year estimates of direct loan costs upward by $12.3 billion , and cited growing idr plan enrollment as the primary cause . in april 2016 , the administration announced a new goal to add 2 million new borrowers to idr plans over the next year , through efforts including targeted outreach . for instance , almost 20 percent of direct loan borrowers were delinquent on their loan payments at the end of 2015 , and more than a million borrowers defaulted on their loans over the 2015 fiscal year . by june 2016 , 24 percent of borrowers repaying their loans ( or 5.3 million borrowers ) were doing so in idr plans , and it is likely that more will join in the future . to what extent do education's approach to estimating idr plan costs and quality control practices help ensure reliable budget estimates ? . participation in idr plans is growing , as is their estimated cost to the government . this information could help better support efforts to assess the cost - effectiveness of idr plans and design any needed reforms . more robust model testing , including more extensive sensitivity analysis , could also help education's management identify and mitigate problems that may reduce the reliability of its budget estimates . in addition to correcting its methodological weaknesses , education could enhance the reliability of its budget estimates by implementing more robust quality control practices . what are education's current idr plan budget estimates and how have they changed over time ? . to address these objectives , we reviewed relevant federal laws , regulations , and guidance on the william d. ford federal direct loan ( direct loan ) program and idr plans . implementing our previous recommendation to more thoroughly document and review its approach could help education's management identify and resolve weaknesses . these plans primarily base payment amounts on a borrower's income and extend repayment periods from the standard 10 years to up to 25 years with any remaining balance forgiven at the end of that period .
our objectives were to: ( 1 ) describe what actions the centers for medicare & medicaid services ( cms ) has taken , if any , to assist states that have chosen to transition to a marketplace it platform different from the one they originally used and identify the costs and challenges for states in making this transition ; ( 2 ) assess what actions cms has taken to assist selected states' plans to ensure that the development and operations of marketplace it systems can be financially self - sustained ; and ( 3 ) assess the steps that cms has taken to monitor the performance of the states' marketplace it systems . our objectives for this review were to: ( 1 ) describe what actions cms has taken , if any , to assist states that have chosen to transition to a marketplace it platform different from the one they originally used and identify the costs and challenges for states in making this transition ; ( 2 ) assess what actions cms has taken to assist selected states' plans to ensure that the development and operations of marketplace it systems can be financially self - sustained ; and ( 3 ) assess the steps that cms has taken to monitor the performance of the states' marketplace it systems . the patient protection and affordable care act ( ppaca ) , signed into law on march 23 , 2010 , included provisions to reform aspects of the private health insurance market and expand the availability and affordability of health care coverage .  ( recommendation 6 ) . incomplete sustainability plans may also limit the agency's ability to assess and respond to state marketplace sustainability risks . the department of health and human services' ( hhs ) centers for medicare & medicaid services ( cms ) is responsible for overseeing the establishment and operation of these marketplaces , including a federally facilitated marketplace in states that do not choose to operate their own . in addition , the marketplaces must be able to determine eligibility for other health coverage programs , such as medicaid or the state children's health insurance program ( chip ) . recognizing states' marketplace efforts , you requested that we review cms's and states' actions related to implementing the marketplaces . however , we found that in the first few enrollment periods , all states faced difficulties with the rollout and operation of their marketplace it , and a number of states that struggled with the implementation of their marketplaces are now using the federal platform .  ( recommendation 5 ) 6 . cms assisted selected states with their effort to financially sustain the development and operations of their marketplaces ( including supporting it systems ) by reviewing sustainability plans ; reviewing annual independent financial audit reports ; and conducting sustainability risk assessments . to make the state selections , we considered four factors for the plan year 2016 enrollment period: total enrollment , total federal marketplace grant dollars , a previous gao review , and whether or not the state transitioned its marketplace to the federal platform . these marketplaces began facilitating enrollment on october 1 , 2013 , as required by a regulation implementing ppaca .
the secretary of energy should direct the office of nuclear energy to reassess its decision to engage in discussions with potential host communities , screen sites , or conduct other site selection activities until key prerequisites to these efforts — such as revising health and safety regulations — have been addressed . these defense - related activities produced about 14,000 metric tons of nuclear waste , consisting of high - level waste ( hlw ) and spent nuclear fuel ( snf ) that are currently stored in facilities in five states and managed by the department of energy ( doe ) . from 1944 until the 1980s , the united states used nuclear reactors to produce plutonium and other materials for nuclear weapons . to ensure balance among the entities , we interviewed representatives from ( 1 ) independent groups and academia , ( 2 ) community interest groups , ( 3 ) industry , ( 4 ) state and local governments , and ( 5 ) the federal government . we found that doe's cost estimates were not reliable because they excluded major costs that will likely add tens of billions of dollars , were minimally documented , lacked transparency , and were not fully credible . in addition , the nation has nearly 80,000 metric tons of commercial snf from the nation's fleet of nuclear power reactors — an amount that is expected to increase by more than 2,000 metric tons per year . specifically , this report assesses ( 1 ) what doe cited as the benefits of a separate defense hlw repository in its recommendation to the president ; ( 2 ) the reliability of doe's cost and schedule estimates for its new plan to site , license , and construct a defense hlw repository ; and ( 3 ) doe's efforts to site a defense hlw repository and key challenges , if any , to siting the repository . we compared this information with the best practices identified in the cost guide to determine whether the cost estimates were ( 1 ) comprehensive , ( 2 ) accurate , ( 3 ) well documented , and ( 4 ) credible . we evaluated this information to determine whether the doe - developed schedules were ( 1 ) comprehensive , ( 2 ) well - constructed , ( 3 ) credible , and ( 4 ) controlled . stakeholders from potentially affected states and communities have raised concerns about the potential increased costs to defense appropriations that could result from doe's plan . these categories covered ( 1 ) independent groups and academia , ( 2 ) community interest groups , ( 3 ) industry , ( 4 ) state and local governments , and ( 5 ) the federal government . doe estimates that the amount of commercial snf will increase to about 140,000 metric tons over the next several decades . the secretary of energy should direct the office of nuclear energy to conduct a comprehensive assessment , which adheres to omb guidance and best practices , of the benefits , costs , and schedules of the options it reviewed and provided to the president in 2015 , and , in light of the new information and results of its assessment , revise — if needed — the report's conclusion that a strong basis exists to find that a defense hlw repository is required .
specifically , this report examines the extent to which blm ( 1 ) approved requests for exceptions from lease and permit requirements intended to mitigate environmental impacts , and how these decisions were made and documented ; ( 2 ) involved the public in the development of lease and permit requirements and in the approval of exception requests ; and ( 3 ) implemented its best management practices policy and assessed its effectiveness in mitigating environmental impacts . this report examines ( 1 ) the extent to which blm approved requests for exceptions to lease and permit requirements intended to mitigate environmental impacts , and how these decisions were made and documented ; ( 2 ) the extent to which blm involved the public in the development of lease and permit requirements and in the approval of exception requests ; and ( 3 ) the extent to which blm implemented its best management practices policy and assessed its effectiveness in mitigating environmental impacts . this appendix details the methods we used to assess the department of the interior's bureau of land management's ( blm ) efforts to mitigate environmental impacts from oil and gas activities . establish a policy requiring staff responsible for conducting environmental and monitoring inspections to take standardized training . development of the nation's domestic sources of oil and gas on federal , state , and private land continues to make a critical contribution to our nation's energy supply . at the same time , the effect of this development on the environment — including wildlife — and surrounding communities has generated concern among some federal and state government officials and conservationists . the bureau of land management ( blm ) , within the department of the interior ( interior ) , is responsible for managing oil and gas resources that lie under federal and private land for which the federal government retains mineral rights . this included examining ( 1 ) how the request was made ; ( 2 ) who at blm reviewed the request ; ( 3 ) what the applicable blm criteria were , if any ; ( 4 ) whether blm provided an explanation of its decision ; and ( 5 ) how blm communicated the decision to the operator . improving blm's monitoring inspection program could allow the agency to better assess environmental impacts of oil and gas development and the effectiveness of efforts to mitigate such impacts . blm has generally implemented its best management practices policy by including key practices as permit requirements . you asked us to review blm's efforts to mitigate the environmental impacts of oil and gas development . blm has generally implemented its best management practices policy by including key practices as permit requirements . the extent to which blm approves requests for exceptions to environmentally related lease and permit requirements is unknown because blm does not have comprehensive or consistent data on these requests . further , blm field offices have not effectively used monitoring inspection data to assess the effectiveness of best management practices to mitigate environmental impacts of oil and gas development . provide additional guidance to field offices on how to collect and use data collected during monitoring inspections and , in doing so , determine and implement an approach for using the data to assess the effectiveness of the agency's mitigation efforts , including its best management practices .
this report examines ( 1 ) factors federal officials and nonfederal stakeholders cited as affecting federal - nonfederal collaboration aimed at reducing wildland fire risk to communities and ( 2 ) actions federal officials and nonfederal stakeholders said could help improve their ability to reduce wildland fire risk to communities . wildland fires are both natural and inevitable , and play an important role on our nation's lands . over the past century , however , various land management practices , including fire suppression , have disrupted the normal frequency of fires in many forest and rangeland ecosystems , resulting in abnormally dense accumulations of vegetation . we also compared agency efforts to our previous reports related to interagency strategies and agencies' efforts to collaborate . according to scientific reports , this altered landscape , combined with drought and other climate stressors , has contributed to larger and more severe wildland fires . such measures could , as noted in the cohesive strategy , allow congress and other stakeholders to monitor and assess progress toward achieving the strategy's goals . among the laws we reviewed were the federal land assistance , management , and enhancement act ; healthy forests restoration act of 2003 ; good neighbor authority ; wyden amendment ; and tribal forest protection act of 2004 . this report examines ( 1 ) factors federal officials and nonfederal stakeholders cited as affecting federal - nonfederal collaboration aimed at reducing wildland fire risk to communities and ( 2 ) actions federal officials and nonfederal stakeholders said could help improve their ability to reduce wildland fire risk to communities . however , wflc has not developed performance measures to assess the combined efforts of federal and nonfederal participants in meeting the goals of the cohesive strategy . as a result , it is not clear whether interior has fully considered the potential for using research findings or other tools described in the 2016 report to measure national progress in a cost - effective way . over the past 2 decades , federal land management agencies have issued guidance and policies supporting a collaborative , cross - boundary approach to reducing wildland fire risk and have undertaken multiple efforts intended to reduce risk . more broadly , the wildland fire leadership council ( wflc ) — the interagency organization responsible for oversight and leadership in implementing the cohesive strategy ( and which includes the forest service and interior as members ) — has not developed measures to assess progress on the part of federal and nonfederal participants in meeting the national goals of the cohesive strategy . however , as we note in our report , agency performance measures are intended to separately assess each agency's performance — or , in some cases the performance of specific programs — and do not represent a set of measures to assess national progress toward meeting the cohesive strategy's goals , as called for in the strategy . wildfire prevention messaging: efforts to provide prevention information or materials . the forest service and interior each have performance measures to monitor and assess their wildland fire management efforts , but those measures apply to the agencies individually and do not represent the set of national measures called for in the cohesive strategy .
medicare administrative contractors ( mac ) , on behalf of the centers for medicare & medicaid services ( cms ) , an agency within the department of health and human services ( hhs ) , process and pay ffs claims for health care items and services submitted by medicare providers . this appendix provides additional details regarding our analysis of ( 1 ) trends in medicare fee - for - service ( ffs ) appeals for fiscal years 2010 through 2014 ; ( 2 ) differences in claim - level and appeal - level reversal rates ; ( 3 ) appeals resolved by the centers for medicare & medicaid services' ( cms ) global settlement ; ( 4 ) cms's estimate of interest paid by the agency to certain providers ; and ( 5 ) data reliability . in fiscal year 2014 , medicare processed 1.2 billion fee - for - service ( ffs ) claims submitted by providers or suppliers on behalf of beneficiaries . the three appeals data systems are the contractor reporting of operational and workload data ( crowd ) system , the medicare appeals system ( mas ) , and the medicare operations division automated case tracking system ( modacts ) . hhs efforts to reduce the number of appeals and the appeal backlog . when medicare denies or reduces payment for an item or service , health care providers , beneficiaries , and state medicaid agencies , or their representatives , may appeal these coverage decisions through a medicare ffs appeals process . macs and other cms contractors also identify and deny for payment health care claims that are invalid or otherwise improper as part of cms's responsibility to ensure payments to medicare providers are made correctly . as a result , hhs and members of congress have considered ways to streamline the medicare appeals process and improve the timeliness with which appeals are decided . to examine trends in appeals for fiscal years 2010 through 2014 — the 5 most recent and complete fiscal years at the time we began our analysis — we analyzed extracts of three data systems we obtained from the hhs components responsible for the medicare appeals process: cms ; the office of medicare hearings and appeals ( omha ) , an hhs staff division ; and the medicare appeals council ( the council ) within the departmental appeals board ( dab ) , which is also an hhs staff division . in this report , we examine 1. trends in appeals for fiscal years 2010 through 2014 ; 2. data hhs uses to monitor the medicare appeals process ; and 3 . hhs generally agreed with four of the five draft recommendations and outlined a number of initiatives it is taking to improve the efficiency of the medicare appeals process , reduce the backlog of pending appeals , and mitigate the possibility of future backlogs . according to hhs , in fiscal year 2014 , medicare denied 128 million ffs claims , or 10.5 percent of claims submitted . currently , hhs data systems are not collecting additional information that would assist hhs agencies in their monitoring efforts . hhs also expressed its willingness to modify the appeal data systems in order to collect consistent data across the appeal data systems and to implement a more efficient way to adjudicate certain repetitive claims .
if , in making revisions to its manual , the board determines that statutory changes may be helpful to enhance board operations , then the board should also engage with stakeholders on such proposed changes . although the board has undergone some changes since that time — such as designating the chief of the capitol police ( chief ) as a non - voting member in 2003 and adopting a manual of procedures ( manual ) in 2013 to document , among other things , its mission , purpose , and composition — according to some congressional stakeholders , accountability and communication challenges persist . our report also outlines a number of options requiring statutory change , which could further address concerns about the board's operations , but could also pose new challenges . to ensure that the capitol police board's current and any new approaches help enhance accountability , transparency , and effective external communication with its stakeholders , we recommend that the board revise its manual of procedures to fully incorporate each of the leading practices for internal control and governance standards discussed in this report . in this report , we examine the following objectives: ( 1 ) what are the roles and responsibilities of the capitol police board ( board ) and the chief of the capitol police ( chief ) as set out in statute and in the board's manual of procedures and how does the board's scope compare to other law enforcement oversight entities ? . what are congressional stakeholder perspectives on the degree to which the board is accountable , transparent , and effective in its communication approaches and what options exist to enhance the board's approaches ? . the u.s. capitol police is responsible for protecting the congress , as well as its members , staff , visitors , and facilities so that it can fulfill its constitutional and legislative responsibilities in a safe , secure , and open environment . thus , in 2002 we provided insights into the board's operations , internal controls , and standardized governance practices , as well as alternatives to the existing board's design . identifying and communicating potential changes to its congressional stakeholders , and incorporating their views into the revision process , as appropriate , would help the board ensure that steps to revise its manual best address both the leading practices and chief stakeholder concerns . these leading practices are: ( 1 ) defining roles , responsibilities , and areas of authority ; ( 2 ) overseeing functions of the corporation ; ( 3 ) conducting performance evaluations and reviews ; ( 4 ) developing processes for internal functions of the board ; ( 5 ) disclosing information to stakeholders ; and ( 6 ) developing processes for communication with stakeholders .  ( 2 ) to what extent does the board's manual of procedures incorporate leading practices from internal control and other standardized governance principles to facilitate accountability , transparency , and effective external communication and in what ways is the board implementing these practices ? . these options center on changes to the boards' scope and duties , its composition and size , and alternatives to congressional oversight of the board , among other things .
the justice for victims of trafficking act ( jvta ) of 2015 includes a provision for gao to report on federal and selected state efforts to combat human trafficking in the united states , as well as identify federal grant programs that can be used to assist victims of trafficking . the justice for victims of trafficking act ( jvta ) of 2015 includes a provision for gao to report on federal and selected state efforts to combat human trafficking in the united states , as well as identify federal grant programs that can be used to assist victims of trafficking . what federal efforts have been made to determine the prevalence of human trafficking in the united states ? . federal agencies , including the departments of health and human services ( hhs ) , homeland security ( dhs ) , justice ( doj ) , labor , and state , as well as state and local law enforcement and non - governmental organizations , have taken a collaborative approach to combating human trafficking in the united states , both in conducting investigations and prosecutions and ensuring that victims have access to needed services . what federal grant programs are intended to combat human trafficking and assist victims within the united states , and what steps have federal agencies taken , if any , to reduce the potential for duplication among grant programs ? . we also reviewed documentation issued by the president's interagency task force to monitor and combat trafficking to learn about additional federal efforts to determine prevalence . sometimes perceived to be a foreign issue , human trafficking — the exploitation of a person typically through force , fraud , or coercion for such purposes as forced labor , involuntary servitude or commercial sex — is occurring in the united states . we analyzed data from federal investigative and prosecutorial agencies and two federally - funded entities , the national human trafficking resource center ( nhtrc ) and the national center for missing and exploited children ( ncmec ) , which , while not specifically intended to do so , could give an indication of where human trafficking is occurring in the united states for fiscal years 2013 through 2015 . to address the first objective , we reviewed the jvta and other federal laws related to human trafficking , and interviewed doj , dhs , and hhs officials to learn whether any federal agencies had efforts underway to collect data that could be used to determine the prevalence of human trafficking in the united states . specifically , the updated guidance directs participating agencies to share information with members of the grantmaking committee prior to final decisions in at least one of the following ways: ( 1 ) share plans for programs containing anti - trafficking components during the grant program development process ; ( 2 ) notify the spog of grant solicitations within a reasonable time after they are issued ; or ( 3 ) notify spog partner agencies of proposed funding recipients prior to announcing the award . human trafficking victims include women , men and transgender individuals , adults and children , and foreign nationals and u.s. citizens or nationals who are diverse with respect to race , ethnicity , and sexuality , among other factors .
the department of defense ( dod ) is faced with a variety of challenges as it seeks to maximize the return on its roughly $70 billion annual investment in weapon system research and development . our objectives were to assess ( 1 ) how the department of defense ( dod ) has used prototyping prior to system development on major defense acquisition programs , and ( 2 ) what steps dod has taken to increase innovation through prototyping activities conducted outside of major defense acquisition programs . this report assesses ( 1 ) how dod has used prototyping prior to system development on major defense acquisition programs , and ( 2 ) what steps dod has taken to increase innovation through prototyping activities conducted outside of major defense acquisition programs . at risk of having its dominance disrupted , dod has been looking for innovative ways to sustain and advance its military superiority . congress has enacted legislation with numerous prototyping - related provisions . a major defense acquisition program ( mdap ) is a program that is designated as such or is estimated by dod to require an eventual total expenditure for research , development , test , and evaluation ( rdt&e ) of more than $480 million , or for procurement of more than $2.79 billion , in fiscal year 2014 constant dollars , for all increments . it can also help ensure that new , innovative , and disruptive technologies are available for inclusion into potential future weapons and demonstrate the value of new technologies or systems . over the past few years , dod has acknowledged the importance of prototyping to maintain the u.s. military's capability to rapidly address emerging threats and provide technological surprise , as it has in the past through capabilities including stealth and precision weapons . prototyping — the development and testing of a model or system design that uses available or emerging technologies — can be employed in weapon system acquisition programs to reduce risk by maturing technologies and to improve understanding of a potential system's likely design , feasibility , cost , and schedule before making major funding commitments . to determine how dod has used prototyping in mdaps , we examined 22 mdaps that entered system development between december 2009 — which is when dod implemented new prototyping requirements enacted by congress in the weapon systems acquisition reform act of 2009 ( wsara ) — and february 2016 . house report 114-102 accompanying a bill for the national defense authorization act ( ndaa ) for fiscal year 2016 included a provision that we review how dod's research and development funds are used and whether this approach effectively supports activities such as prototyping . while it is generally acknowledged that u.s. weapon systems are the best in the world , there is concern within dod and elsewhere that american dominance in key warfighting domains is eroding as potential adversaries modernize their weapon system capabilities at a rapid rate . expand the community of interest working groups to include budget activity 6.4-funded prototyping and innovation initiatives in their science and technology planning and coordination processes or employ a similar coordination mechanism for budget activity 6.4- funded prototyping and innovation initiatives . dod has taken several steps to adopt aspects of private sector innovation practices and has developed mechanisms to coordinate and review its science and technology investments , but without a more strategic , inclusive , and deliberate approach overall , its new prototyping and experimentation initiatives might not generate the levels and types of innovation the department is seeking .
u.s. customs and border protection ( cbp ) , within the department of homeland security ( dhs ) , is responsible for securing u.s. borders to prevent acts of terrorism and the unlawful movement of people , illegal drugs , and other contraband across u.s. borders .  ( 2 ) to what extent has cbp taken actions to assess the effectiveness of its uas and aerostats for border security activities ? . within cbp , the u.s. border patrol ( border patrol ) reported apprehending over 300,000 illegal entrants and seizing over 1 million pounds of marijuana and 10,000 pounds of cocaine in fiscal year 2015 . cbp has taken steps to implement a small uas program to support the u.s. border patrol ( border patrol ) . cbp currently has ongoing efforts to assess the effectiveness of its predator b program . this report addresses the following questions: ( 1 ) how does cbp use uas and aerostats for border security activities , and to what extent has cbp developed and documented procedures for uas coordination ? . cbp is responsible for securing the u.s. border across nearly 4,000 miles with canada and 2,000 miles with mexico , and cbp law enforcement personnel are responsible for securing u.s. borders to prevent acts of terrorism and the unlawful movement of people , illegal drugs , and other contraband across u.s. borders . record air support forms for predator b mission requests from non - cbp law enforcement agencies in its data collection system for predator b missions . to determine the extent to which cbp assesses the effectiveness of predator b uas and aerostats , we reviewed and analyzed cbp information ; asset assist data for seizures , apprehensions , and other events ; and met with responsible cbp program officials . however , improving its collection of predator b mission data by updating guidance and implementing training would help to ensure information is collected and recorded in a standardized and consistent way across all operating locations and could also further its efforts to assess the effectiveness of its predator b program . amo's fleet of air assets includes predator b unmanned aerial systems ( uas ) equipped with video and radar surveillance technology to conduct border security efforts . update and maintain guidance for recording predator b mission information in its data collection system . we compared cbp's available documentation of its procedures for coordination of its use of predator b uas with standards for internal control in the federal government . provide training to users of cbp's data collection system for predator b missions . to improve its efforts to coordinate predator b operations among supported agencies and assess the effectiveness of its predator b and tactical aerostat programs , we recommend that the commissioner of cbp take the following five actions: develop and document procedures for predator b coordination among supported agencies in all operating locations . updated guidance and training for users for predator b mission data collection would help cbp ensure consistent recording across all predator b operating locations to support cbp's efforts to assess the effectiveness of its predator b program . to help secure the border , cbp law enforcement personnel use a variety of technologies , which are critical to their ability to detect and identify the illegal entry of narcotics and people between ports of entry .
this appendix discusses in detail our methodology for addressing three research questions: ( 1 ) how child welfare and medicaid agencies in selected states work to ensure the appropriate use of psychotropic medications for children in foster care ; ( 2 ) what is known about the results of their efforts , and ( 3 ) the extent to which the department of health and human services ( hhs ) helps states support the appropriate use of psychotropic medications for children in foster care . to help states effectively address ongoing challenges related to ensuring the appropriate use of psychotropic medications for children in foster care , the secretary of hhs should consider cost - effective ways to convene state child welfare , medicaid , and other stakeholders to promote collaboration and information sharing within and across states on psychotropic medication oversight . hhs also provided additional information on their efforts to date to help states address medical and mental health care for children in foster care . while hhs has made efforts to help support states in their oversight activities , additional support from hhs to convene state child welfare and medicaid agencies and other stakeholders could create opportunities for state agencies to learn from one another's experience , collaboratively develop solutions to mitigate common challenges , strengthen oversight practices for psychotropic medications , and more effectively ensure appropriate treatments for children in foster care . our selection criteria included ( 1 ) a high percentage of children in foster care in the state when compared nationwide in fiscal year 2014 ; ( 2 ) variation in medicaid and child welfare systems ; ( 3 ) recommendations from national organizations ; and ( 4 ) geographic diversity . these agencies , along with hhs's substance abuse and mental health services administration ( samhsa ) — which undertakes efforts to improve substance abuse and mental health treatment , prevention , and related services for individuals — provide support to states in their efforts to ensure child well - being . this report examines: 1. how child welfare and medicaid agencies in selected states work to ensure the appropriate use of psychotropic medications for children in foster care ; 2. what is known in selected states about the results of their efforts to ensure the appropriate use of psychotropic medications for these children ; and 3. the extent to which hhs helps states support the appropriate use of psychotropic medications for children in foster care . hhs also oversees the medicaid program through the centers for medicare & medicaid services ( cms ) , in accordance with federal laws , regulations , and guidance . at the federal level , the department of health and human services ( hhs ) monitors state implementation of relevant federal programs , including those that provide federal assistance to support state child welfare and foster care programs , through the administration for children and families ( acf ) . multiple studies have shown that children in foster care may have more mental health conditions than those in the general population , and prior gao reports have looked at the rate at which these children are prescribed psychotropic medications , which affect mood , thought , or behavior . additional efforts from hhs to include relevant stakeholders in collaborations to address continuing challenges can better position states in their work to improve practices to oversee medication use and effectively ensure appropriate treatments for the foster care population .
the objectives of this report are to assess ( 1 ) the extent to which lessons learned from implementing the interim cap goals were incorporated into the governance of the current cap goals ; ( 2 ) the extent to which gprama requirements for reporting on cap goal progress are included in the selected cap goal quarterly progress updates ; and ( 3 ) the initial reported progress in implementing the selected cap goals . many of the results the federal government seeks to achieve require the coordinated effort of more than one federal agency , level of government , or sector . effectively managing these government - wide efforts requires coordination between multiple federal agencies and transparent communications to the congress and decision makers about progress toward achieving results . the gpra modernization act of 2010 ( gprama ) established a framework and processes aimed at encouraging a more crosscutting and integrated approach to federal performance , and improving transparency and accountability for these efforts . these tasks include protecting the nation's critical information systems , responding to public health emergencies , ensuring food safety , and better managing the risks of climate change . further , to ensure that the federal government is achieving its crosscutting goals , both top leaders and agency managers must have accurate and reliable performance information to monitor and track the progress they are making on achieving their goals . among other things , gprama requires the office of management and budget ( omb ) to coordinate with agencies to develop federal government priority goals ( known as cross - agency priority or cap goals ) — 4-year outcome - oriented goals covering a number of crosscutting mission areas — as well as goals to improve management across the federal government . to assess the extent to which omb incorporated lessons learned from implementing the interim cap goals into governance for the current cap goals , we reviewed gprama , omb , and performance improvement council ( pic ) guidance for assessing and reporting cap goal progress , and relevant omb and agency documentation . performance goals and measures allow cap goal teams and other stakeholders to track the progress they are making toward their goals and provide critical information on which to base decisions for improving programs or activities . to improve the transparency of public reporting on cap goal progress , we recommend that the director of omb , working with the pic , take the following action: report on performance.gov the actions that cap goal teams are taking , or plan to take , to develop performance measures and quarterly targets . the cap goals we reviewed are intended to drive progress in important and complex areas , such as improving information technology and customer service interactions across government , coordinating federal stem education efforts , and improving federal hiring practices . further , omb and the pic's efforts to build the capacity of the cap goal teams to implement the goals has resulted in increased leadership attention and improved interagency collaboration for these goals . we found that during the first two years of goal implementation , omb and cap goal teams made improvements to their quarterly progress updates by adding new performance measures , providing additional information on performance trends , and reporting on new prospects for performance improvement , among other improvements .
however , if clinicians want to bill medicare for these services , the service must meet medicare's statutory requirements for payment . we provided a draft of this report to hhs , dod , and va for review and comment . the centers for medicare & medicaid services ( cms ) , another hhs agency , oversees medicare payments for telehealth services . in this report we 1. describe the extent to which telehealth and remote patient monitoring are used by medicare and other federal programs to provide health care services ; 2. assess the extent to which cms oversees telehealth payments in medicare ; 3. describe the factors associations representing providers and patients rated — and payers cited — as affecting the use of telehealth and remote patient monitoring in medicare ; and 4. describe how emerging payment and delivery models could affect the potential use of telehealth and remote patient monitoring in medicare . to describe the extent to which telehealth and remote patient monitoring are used by medicare and other federal programs , we reviewed available data , statutes , regulations , and other relevant documentation related to telehealth in medicare , medicaid , the department of defense ( dod ) , and the department of veterans affairs ( va ) . while medicare currently uses telehealth primarily in rural areas or regions designated as having a shortage of health professionals , in the future emerging payment and delivery models may change the extent to which telehealth and remote patient monitoring are available and used by medicare beneficiaries and providers in other areas . in recent years there have been efforts to increase the use of telehealth and remote patient monitoring in federal health care programs . our report also describes the use of remote patient monitoring by selected health plans in the private insurance market ( see app . a federal strategic plan prepared by the office of the national coordinator for health information technology within hhs calls for an increased use of telehealth and remote patient monitoring in federal health care programs . beyond the medicare program , other federal programs , along with some private insurers , also pay for — or provide — some telehealth and remote patient monitoring services . according to cms officials , clinicians using telehealth and remote patient monitoring for these purposes do not have to bill medicare for the service in order to receive credit for it under the merit - based incentive payment system , and these services can count for credit under the improvement activities performance category regardless of whether they meet the statutory telehealth requirements . these departments provided technical comments , which we incorporated as appropriate . for dod , we obtained data on the use of telehealth for fiscal year 2015 , the most recent fiscal year available , and we interviewed officials about the use of telehealth and remote patient monitoring in dod's health care program . the medicare access and chip reauthorization act of 2015 included a provision that we study telehealth and remote patient monitoring . cms relies on medicare administrative contractors ( mac ) , which process and pay medicare claims in specific geographic jurisdictions . as part of our work , we interviewed officials from health plans in the private insurance market ( private payers ) about the use of remote patient monitoring .
our objectives were to examine ( 1 ) how much the national park service ( park service ) has allocated to maintain assets in fiscal years 2006 through 2015 , ( 2 ) the amount and composition of the park service's deferred maintenance in fiscal years 2009 through 2015 , ( 3 ) how the park service makes asset maintenance decisions , and ( 4 ) the actions the park service is taking to help address its maintenance needs . this report examines ( 1 ) how much the park service has allocated to maintain assets in fiscal years 2006 through 2015 , ( 2 ) the amount and composition of the park service's deferred maintenance in fiscal years 2009 through 2015 , ( 3 ) how the park service makes asset maintenance decisions , and ( 4 ) actions the park service is taking to help address its maintenance needs . to ensure that the elements of the agency's process for making asset maintenance decisions are achieving desired outcomes , we recommend that the secretary of the interior direct the director of the park service to evaluate the capital investment strategy and its results to determine if it is achieving its intended outcomes or if changes need to be made . the national park service ( park service ) , within the department of the interior , manages more than 75,000 assets — including buildings , roads , and water systems — at 413 park units that cover 84 million acres across all 50 states , the district of columbia , and some territories . however , evaluating the capital investment strategy and its results in a few years may allow the park service to determine if the strategy is achieving its intended outcomes or if changes need to be made . as of september 30 , 2015 , the park service estimated that its deferred maintenance had grown to about $11.9 billion . in recent years , reports prepared by the park service and stakeholder groups have highlighted challenges that the park service faces — particularly fiscal challenges — and the park service has reported that its funding does not cover the cost of its mission to preserve the parks for current and future generations to enjoy . maintenance allocation data from fiscal year 2015 are the most current data available . in a 2013 testimony before congress , the director of the park service said that the organization faced a maintenance backlog of about $11.5 billion at the end of fiscal year 2012 and would need to spend nearly $700 million per year on deferred maintenance to keep the backlog from continuing to grow . with the park service celebrating its centennial in 2016 and park visits at an all - time high , policymakers and others have expressed concern about the condition of park units and the amount of park service deferred maintenance . to examine how much the park service has allocated to maintain assets in fiscal years 2006 through 2015 , we obtained and analyzed maintenance allocation data from the park service for that period . the park service has allocated $1.16 billion on average to maintain its assets in fiscal years 2006 through 2015 , but its deferred maintenance has continued to increase .
the food and drug administration ( fda ) — an agency within the department of health and human services ( hhs ) — has faced challenges carrying out its responsibilities to approve and oversee the safety and efficacy of medical products sold in the united states . systematically track funding of regulatory science projects across each of its priority areas . systematic tracking of both progress on measurable goals and funding is essential for fda to strategically plan its regulatory science initiative across the agency . we examined the achievements related to regulatory science for 17 projects funded by the food and drug administration ( fda ) . in 2013 , fda issued another strategic plan for regulatory science , as required by the food and drug administration safety and innovation act of 2012 ( fdasia ) . develop and document measurable goals , such as targets and time frames , for its regulatory science efforts so it can consistently assess and report on the agency's progress in regulatory science efforts . to evaluate fda's strategic planning efforts to address its regulatory science priorities for medical products , we analyzed fda documents , including its 2011 and 2013 strategic planning documents , its reports on strategic priorities , and a 2015 progress report . in order to improve fda's strategic planning for regulatory science efforts , we recommend the secretary of health and human services direct the commissioner of fda to take the following two actions: 1 . since then , fda issued two reports on its progress . such goals are a best practice for strategic planning and could enable fda to assess and report its progress in addressing its identified priority areas and strategically plan and allocate resources for its broader regulatory science initiative . this report 1. evaluates fda's strategic planning efforts to address its regulatory science priorities for medical products , 2. describes fda's funding targeted at regulatory science projects related to medical products , and 3. describes the achievements of selected fda regulatory science projects related to medical products . as a result , we identified fda's oversight of medical products as an area of high risk , and we noted that rapid changes in science and technology had contributed to these challenges . we also reviewed relevant criteria from gao's body of work on effectively managing performance under the government performance and results act of 1993 ( gpra ) as enhanced by the gpra modernization act of 2010 . nevertheless , fda should develop measureable goals that are related to the impacts that are discussed in hhs's comments , including the effectiveness and efficiency of fda's regulatory review , new pathways for medical product development , enhancements in the agency's ability to provide useful guidance to sponsors , and new technologies to monitor manufacturing and real world use of approved medical products . the agency faces another obstacle to its strategic plan without consistent information about centers and offices' distribution of targeted regulatory science funding among those identified priority areas . in 2007 , fda's science board reported that the agency's ability to fulfill its mission was at risk because of a weak scientific base . we classified these achievements into three categories: shorter - term achievements , such as sharing information via dissemination of project findings ; medium - term achievements , such as internal changes at fda ; and longer - term achievements such as changes by industry and other groups outside of fda .
this report covers fiscal year 2014 and addresses ( 1 ) the extent to which agencies met sbir and sttr program spending requirements , ( 2 ) the extent to which agencies and sba complied with certain program reporting requirements , ( 3 ) the potential effects of basing the spending requirements for the programs on an agency's total r&d budget authority instead of its extramural r&d obligations , and ( 4 ) what is known about how much agencies spent to administer the programs . federal agencies support research or research and development ( r&d ) projects at small businesses through the small business innovation research ( sbir ) and small business technology transfer ( sttr ) programs . federal agencies have awarded more than 150,000 contracts and grants , totaling more than $40 billion , through these programs since their inception in 1982 and 1992 , respectively . complete the required reporting on the administrative pilot program for fiscal year 2014 , which could include an evaluation of the potential constraints that may hinder agencies' participation and any steps to address these constraints . as part of its technical comments , sba provided additional information on steps it has taken to identify why its annual reports to congress have taken so long to complete and corrective actions it has taken to address the delays . this administrative pilot program , as outlined in the reauthorization and policy directives , allows agencies to use not more than 3 percent of the funding allocated to the sbir program for new activities , including program administration ; outreach ; commercialization ; standardization and simplification of program procedures ; prevention of waste , fraud , and abuse ; and reporting . the first report , issued in november 2013 , covered fiscal years 2006 through 2011 ; the second report , issued in june 2014 , covered fiscal year 2012 ; and the third report , issued in april 2015 , covered fiscal year 2013 . the data that the agencies submitted to the small business administration ( sba ) indicate that 9 of the 11 participating agencies spent amounts for the small business innovation research ( sbir ) program that met or exceeded their fiscal year 2014 spending requirements , while spending for the remaining 2 agencies did not meet the requirements . the 2011 reauthorization includes a provision for us to annually review the participating agencies' compliance with spending and reporting requirements for the programs , as well as other aspects of the programs . these awards have supported development and commercialization of innovative technologies . third , because sba has not submitted a report on the administrative pilot program to congress for fiscal year 2014 , it has not evaluated the effects of potential constraints on agencies' ability to participate in the pilot program for that year and the steps needed to address these constraints . for example , one company , sanaria , received multiple sbir awards totaling approximately $10.8 million to develop a vaccine aimed at preventing malaria infection and disease among individuals living in severely affected areas . sba has taken actions to address some of these recommendations and sba officials have told us of their plans to address others .
our objectives were to determine ( 1 ) whether agencies have established complete application inventories and ( 2 ) to what extent selected agencies have developed and implemented processes for rationalizing their portfolio of applications . of the 24 , 17 agreed with the recommendations directed to them ; one ( the department of defense ) disagreed with the recommendations directed to it ; five ( the department of the treasury , the national science foundation , the nuclear regulatory commission , the small business administration , and the and u.s. agency for international development ) stated that they had no comments ; and one ( the department of justice ) agreed with the assessment and conclusion for three of the four practices associated with establishing a complete software application inventory and provided clarifying information on the two other practices . in fiscal year 2017 , the federal government is expected to spend more than $90 billion on information technology ( it ) , including software applications . to address the second objective , we selected six agencies — the departments of defense ( dod ) , homeland security ( dhs ) , labor ( labor ) , and the interior ( interior ) ; the national aeronautics and space administration ( nasa ) ; and national science foundation ( nsf ) . our objectives were to determine ( 1 ) whether agencies have established complete application inventories and ( 2 ) to what extent selected agencies have developed and implemented processes for rationalizing their portfolio of applications . the department also provided clarifying information regarding its procedures to ensure application inventory accuracy and provided documentation showing that it updates the inventory and implements quality controls to ensure its reliability . to improve federal agencies' efforts to rationalize their portfolio of applications , we are recommending that: the heads of the departments of agriculture , commerce , education , energy , health and human services , housing and urban development , the interior , labor , state , transportation , the treasury , and veterans affairs ; and heads of the environmental protection agency ; national aeronautics and space administration ; national science foundation ; nuclear regulatory commission ; office of personnel management ; small business administration ; social security administration ; and u.s. agency for international development direct their cios and other responsible officials to improve their inventories by taking steps to fully address the practices we identified as being partially met or not met ; and the secretaries of defense , homeland security , the interior , and labor ; and the director of the national science foundation to direct the cios and other responsible officials to modify existing investment management processes to address applications more completely . specifically , the secretary of defense should direct the responsible official to modify the department's existing processes to collect and review cost , technical , and business information for the enterprise and business it systems within the enterprise information environment mission area applications which are currently not reviewed as part of the department's process for business systems ; the secretary of homeland security should direct the department's cio to identify one high - cost function it could collect detailed cost , technical , and business information for and modify existing processes to collect and review this information ; the secretary of the interior should direct the department's cio to document and implement a plan for establishing policy that would define a standard analytical technique for rationalizing the investment portfolio ; the secretary of labor should direct the department's cio to consider a segmented approach to further rationalize and identify a function for which it would modify existing processes to collect and review application - specific cost , technical , and business value information ; and the director of the national science foundation should direct the cio to consistently document evaluations for all applications and report cost information for them in the roadmap or other documentation .
this report examines ( 1 ) the joint comprehensive plan of action ( jcpoa ) commitments that the international atomic energy agency ( iaea ) has been asked to verify and monitor and its authorities to do so , ( 2 ) the resources iaea has identified as necessary to verify and monitor iran's nuclear - related commitments under the jcpoa , and ( 3 ) potential challenges and mitigating actions , if any , iaea and others have identified with regard to verifying iran's nuclear - related commitments under the jcpoa . iran's past efforts to develop a nuclear weapons program threatened regional and global security and presented significant challenges to the united states . the united states and other nations imposed sanctions on iran that adversely affected the iranian economy . this report , which updates the preliminary findings in the interim report , examines ( 1 ) the jcpoa commitments that iaea has been asked to verify and monitor , and its authorities to do so ; ( 2 ) the resources iaea has identified as necessary to verify and monitor iran's nuclear - related commitments under the jcpoa ; and ( 3 ) potential challenges and mitigating actions , if any , iaea and others have identified with regard to verifying and monitoring iran's nuclear - related commitments under the jcpoa . these challenges include ( 1 ) integrating the additional jcpoa - related funding needs that iaea has identified into the agency's regular budget , ( 2 ) managing human resources within the safeguards program , which could affect iaea's safeguards efforts internationally , and ( 3 ) addressing potential challenges with technical resources . in july 2015 , multilateral talks with iran culminated in an agreement — the joint comprehensive plan of action ( jcpoa ) — in which the united states , france , germany , the united kingdom , russia , and china , with the high representative of the european union for foreign affairs and security policy , agreed to reciprocal commitments with iran . these potential challenges include ( 1 ) detecting undeclared nuclear materials and activities , ( 2 ) accessing sites in iran , and ( 3 ) managing safeguards budgetary , human , and technical resources . on july 20 , 2015 , the united nations security council endorsed the jcpoa and requested that the international atomic energy agency ( iaea ) verify and monitor these commitments . iaea also faces a potential human resource management challenge in its safeguards program as it implements actions to verify and monitor the jcpoa , which could affect its broader international safeguards mission . the jcpoa details iran's commitments related to its nuclear facilities , equipment , materials , and activities , among other things . iaea has previously found iran to be in noncompliance with its safeguards obligations . detection of undeclared nuclear materials and activities is an inherent challenge for iaea ; iaea and member states have taken some steps to improve the agency's ability to detect undeclared activities . iaea — an independent international organization based in vienna , austria , and affiliated with the united nations — has the dual mission of promoting the peaceful uses of nuclear energy and verifying that nuclear technologies and materials are used for peaceful purposes and not diverted to nuclear weapons .
this report describes ( 1 ) what is known about the extent of elder abuse by guardians ; and ( 2 ) what measures federal agencies and selected state and local guardianship programs have taken to help protect older adults with guardians from abuse . the federal government does not regulate or directly support guardianship , but federal agencies may provide indirect support to state guardianship programs by providing funding for efforts to share best practices and facilitate improved coordination . we also conducted interviews with various guardianship stakeholders including the following: federal agencies including the department of health and human services ( hhs ) , bureau of consumer financial protection ( cfpb ) , and department of justice to discuss efforts to support to state guardianship programs . in 2014 , the u.s. census bureau estimated that there were over 46 million older adults — individuals aged 65 and over — in the united states . because of your concern about the financial exploitation and other abuses of older adults , you asked us to review whether abusive practices by guardians are widespread . while many guardians act in the best interest of persons under guardianship , some have been reported to engage in the abuse of older adults . the social security administration ( ssa ) , the department of veterans affairs , and the office of personnel management have programs that appoint representative payees to manage federal benefits received by individuals who are unable to do so for themselves . in addition , some agencies have established programs that appoint representative payees to manage federal benefits for individuals who are unable to do so for themselves . generally , guardianships are legal relationships created when a state court grants one person or entity the authority and responsibility to make decisions in the best interest of an incapacitated individual — which can include an older adult — concerning his or her person or property . the census bureau predicts this number will nearly double to 88 million by 2050 . to determine what is known about the extent of elder abuse by guardians , we reviewed relevant research , reports , studies , and other publications issued by organizations with expertise on elder abuse and guardianship issues . when an older adult becomes incapable of making informed decisions , a guardianship may be necessary . to identify measures federal agencies and selected state and local guardianship programs have taken to help protect older adults with guardians from abuse , we reviewed relevant research , publications , and other materials on elder abuse and guardianship . we also interviewed officials from the social security administration ( ssa ) , the department of veterans affairs , and office of personnel management to discuss their representative payee programs . the survey collected information regarding appointment , monitoring , and discipline of guardians ; caseloads and electronic case - management capabilities ; and court interaction with federal agencies and other organizations . more specifically , we found that information about ssa's incapable beneficiaries and their representative payees could help state courts ( 1 ) avoid appointing individuals who , while serving as ssa representative payees , have misused beneficiaries' ssa payments in the past , and ( 2 ) provide courts with potential candidates for guardians when there are no others available .
onrr should provide additional guidance on how to report royalty - free and royalty - bearing flaring and consider creating a separate category for royalty - bearing flaring ; how to report certain unreported or underreported emissions , such as emissions from storage tanks and gas vented during well completions ; and how to differentiate between combusted and noncombusted lease use volumes reported on the ogor , which could assist interior in measuring its progress toward greenhouse gas reduction goals . further , improved reporting from operators could also help interior better track its efforts to curb greenhouse gases from federal leases and its new goals for methane reduction . to help improve reporting of emissions data on the ogor , the secretary of the interior should direct blm or onrr , as appropriate , to take the following four actions: blm should provide additional guidance on how to estimate natural gas emissions from federal oil and gas leases . in fiscal year 2015 , oil and gas companies produced more than 3.3 trillion cubic feet of natural gas and more than 171 million barrels of oil from onshore oil and gas leases on federal lands managed by the department of the interior's ( interior ) bureau of land management ( blm ) , according to data provided by interior . since operators of federal leases may be subject to state regulations and policies regarding natural gas emissions , we reviewed the regulatory activity in five states with high federal oil and gas production and emissions . interior provided written comments , in which it concurred with two of the six recommendations in the draft report , partly concurred with two others , and did not concur with the remaining two recommendations . blm is responsible for managing and accounting for approximately 700 million subsurface onshore acres and production from nearly 100,000 federal onshore oil and gas wells . this report examines ( 1 ) the extent to which interior can account for natural gas emissions from onshore federal leases and ( 2 ) how selected blm field offices have managed requests to vent or flare natural gas on onshore leases . on january 22 , 2016 , blm announced its proposed methane and waste reduction regulations that would update its existing guidance on venting , flaring , and lease use gas . since interior has historically focused on royalty - bearing oil and gas production and has limited guidance on how to report natural gas emissions , it cannot yet consistently account for these emissions on federal leases . interior's office of natural resources revenue ( onrr ) collects these royalties , which its data show totaled nearly $2.2 billion in fiscal year 2015 . interior did not concur with two recommendations included in the draft report , which would have blm apply its existing guidance on venting and flaring and issue interim guidance on the circumstances under which long - term flaring would be subject to royalties , respectively . we are making four recommendations to the secretary of the interior . according to interior , production from these wells accounts for 11 percent of the nation's natural gas supply and 5 percent of its oil supply . blm's proposed regulations are part of an interagency effort known as the president's climate action plan's strategy to reduce methane emissions — which sets a goal to cut methane emissions from the oil and gas sector by 40 to 45 percent from 2012 levels by 2025 and calls upon blm to “lead by example” on public lands .
we provided a draft of this report for review and comment to gsa , the departments of defense ( dod ) , energy ( doe ) , homeland security ( dhs ) , justice ( doj ) , state , the treasury , and veterans affairs ( va ) ; the administrative office of united states courts ; the federal deposit insurance corporation ( fdic ) ; the office of the director of national intelligence ( odni ) ; the securities and exchange commission ( sec ) ; the social security administration , and agencies which determined that the information about the foreign - owned buildings that they occupy is for official use only and is not included in this report . the general services administration ( gsa ) leases space for many agencies in the federal government , including some high - security space . the federal government routinely leases space from private sector landlords , including high - security space occupied by law enforcement agencies and members of the intelligence community . we recommend that the administrator of the general services administration determine whether the beneficial owner of high - security space that gsa leases is a foreign entity and , if so , share that information with the tenant agencies so they can adequately assess and mitigate any security risks . we have previously reported that government facilities — some of which contain high - security space used for classified operations , data centers , and to store items such as weapons and sensitive evidence — are vulnerable to threats from foreign sources that may affect their information systems and the physical security of the occupants . we reviewed: ( 1 ) what is known about foreign ownership of high - security space leased by gsa ; ( 2 ) what potential risks , if any , are posed by foreign ownership of high - security gsa - leased space associated with physical and cybersecurity and sources of funding ; and ( 3 ) what policies and procedures guide gsa's leasing of space from foreign - owned entities and how gsa follows them . as the leasing agent , gsa is in the best position to identify the beneficial owners of the high - security space that it leases and communicate the relevant information to its federal tenants so that they may adequately assess and mitigate any potential security risks associated with them . as a result , gsa cannot rely on cfius to identify and mitigate these risks . because cfius's authority is limited to reviewing foreign acquisitions that could result in control of a u.s. business , which rarely involves gsa - leased space , cfius has a limited role in identifying and mitigating risks of gsa leasing from foreign companies . however , the extent to which gsa is leasing high - security space from foreign owners — entities based in foreign countries — is unclear . dhs , doj , the department of the treasury , and the social security administration provided technical comments which we incorporated as appropriate . gsa provided us with information about the steps that it took to ensure the completeness and reliability of its leasing data . gsa's incomplete information and lack of policies and procedures regarding foreign ownership of high - security leased space may undermine the security of the tenants' facilities .
ltss can be provided in institutional or home - and community - based settings and comprise a broad range of health care , personal care , and supportive services to help individuals with limited ability for self - care maintain their quality of life . to improve available data about the direct care workforce , we recommend that the acting administrator of the health resources and services administration take steps to produce projections of direct care workforce supply and demand and develop methods to address data limitations in order to do so . these concerns are heightened by the large increase expected in the number of people ages 65 and older , who are projected to comprise one - fifth of the u.s. population by 2030 . for example , the congressional commission on long - term care reported in 2013 that a number of states have experienced shortages and high attrition of direct care workers but lack data to help them assess the size of the problem . hrsa , within the department of health and human services ( hhs ) , is responsible for ensuring that americans have access to a skilled health workforce . while policymakers and other stakeholders are aware of the challenges in recruiting and retaining direct care workers , their ability to develop relevant , targeted policies addressing these challenges has been hampered by gaps in data . high reported attrition rates and persistent challenges recruiting and retaining direct care workers , however , have fueled long - standing concerns by experts and policymakers about the capacity of this workforce to meet ltss demands . the commission recommended that an appropriate federal agency , such as the health resources and services administration ( hrsa ) , initiate a process to collect detailed data about the direct care workforce and launch comprehensive data collection efforts . unless hrsa takes actions to overcome data limitations in order to make projections of supply and demand , the ability of policymakers and other stakeholders to develop appropriate workforce strategies to ensure a sufficient number of qualified direct care workers will continue to be hampered . the study also recommended that states collect a minimum dataset about their direct care workforces that includes three elements: ( 1 ) the number of direct care workers ; ( 2 ) workers' compensation ( wages and benefits ) ; and ( 3 ) workforce stability measures ( attrition and vacancy rates ) . within hrsa , the national center for health workforce analysis helps build a body of knowledge about the health workforce by projecting the supply of and demand for u.s. health workers and developing methods to inform health workforce decisions . 1. available federal and selected state data about the direct care 2. actions hrsa has taken to develop information , project supply and demand , and overcome data limitations related to the direct care workforce . given the concerns about the ability of the direct care workforce to meet current and future demands for ltss and the reported lack of data needed to estimate the size and characteristics of this workforce , you asked us for current information about direct care workers who provide ltss , such as their wages , hours , and attrition rates . while existing federal data sources provide a broad picture of the direct care workforce , gaps exist , such as the lack of information on independent providers and attrition .
the general services administration ( gsa ) has taken some important steps to improve the capacity of the federal real property profile ( frpp ) to allow agencies to better record data ; however , questions remain about the accuracy of data collected and reported . as of september 30 , 2015 , this real estate portfolio included approximately 240,000 federally owned buildings that are under the custody and control of the 24 civilian and defense chief financial officer ( cfo ) act agencies in the united states and u.s. territories . this report assesses ( 1 ) the reliability of government - wide data and reporting on domestic , federally owned buildings' disposal data in fiscal years 2014 and 2015 and ( 2 ) steps omb , gsa , and selected cfo act agencies have taken to improve disposal data . the combined initiatives ( 1 ) of omb's requirement for cfo act agencies to implement standard data - validation and verification checks beginning in fiscal year 2017 , ( 2 ) of gsa's updated guidance and the expanded capacity of the frpp to allow agencies to enter more complete disposal data , and ( 3 ) of selected agencies' development of new processes should lead to improved data reliability . the federal government is the largest real property owner in the united states with a vast and complex inventory costing billions of dollars annually to operate and maintain . in this time of fiscal constraint , the administration and congress have taken an interest in the disposal of unneeded buildings through demolition , sale , and transfer to other federal agencies that need them . an official from the office of management and budget ( omb ) testified in june 2015 and in september 2016 on government - wide building disposals . in fiscal year 2014 , chief financial officer ( cfo ) act agencies reported that they disposed of nearly 50 percent of their domestic , federally owned buildings through “other” means ( see table 2 ) . such disposals have the potential to save the government and taxpayers millions of dollars . to assess the reliability of government - wide reporting on domestic , federally owned buildings' disposal data reported in fiscal year 2014 and fiscal year 2015 , we examined the disposal date , disposal method , square footage , and annual operations and maintenance ( o&m ) data fields within the frpp database to determine whether the data were complete , within reasonable ranges , and internally consistent ( e.g. , federally owned buildings reported as disposed would not be listed as disposed of through “lease termination” ) . in 2003 , we added “managing federal real property” to our high risk list , in part due to long - standing challenges federal agencies face in managing their real property , including disposal of excess and underutilized properties and collecting and reporting reliable real - property data . although we found that the government - wide real property data were generally reliable , continued improvements in data reliability could lead to more effective real - property management decision making . to assess steps omb , gsa , and selected cfo act agencies have taken to improve the reliability of reported frpp data since the fiscal year 2014's reporting cycle , we interviewed omb and gsa officials as well as real property officials at a non - generalizable selection of three civilian agencies — the united states department of agriculture ( agriculture ) , the department of energy ( energy ) , and the department of the interior ( interior ) — with the highest numbers of disposed buildings during the evaluation period .
specifically , this report examines: ( 1 ) the approaches selected states have taken to develop plans for implementing wioa provisions related to career pathways , sector partnerships , and regional planning , and ( 2 ) the related planning challenges , if any , these states have encountered and how they have addressed them . these programs , administered primarily by the departments of labor ( dol ) and education ( education ) , provide a combination of education and training services that help job seekers obtain employment and advance in the labor market . we examined 1 ) the approaches selected states have taken to develop plans for implementing workforce innovation and opportunity act ( wioa ) provisions related to career pathways , sector partnerships , and regional planning , and 2 ) the related planning challenges , if any , these states have encountered and how they have addressed them . enacted in july 2014 , the workforce innovation and opportunity act ( wioa ) brought changes to the programs that serve as a foundation for the nation's employment and job training system . to address both objectives , we reviewed relevant federal laws , regulations , and guidance ; conducted case studies in five states ; and interviewed federal department of labor ( dol ) and department of education ( education ) officials . to conduct case studies , we selected five states ( california , colorado , kentucky , ohio , and pennsylvania ) , which were among those identified by national associations as 1 ) having substantial experience developing and implementing career pathways , sector partnerships , or regional planning prior to wioa , and / or 2 ) making significant changes to implement any of these strategies under wioa . states were required to submit their first state plans under wioa to dol and education by april 1 , 2016 , in order to be considered timely . associations could recommend states in any of the following six categories: experienced with career pathways strategies ; experienced with sector partnership strategies ; experienced with regional planning strategies ; making significant changes to implement career pathways strategies ; making significant changes to implement sector partnership making significant changes to implement regional planning strategies . in addition , a kentucky official said the state is also using a private grant to fund regional efforts to develop career pathways and sector partnership strategies and ensure that they help job seekers obtain credentials that are valued by employers . such services include job search assistance , career counseling , occupational skills training , classroom training , and on - the - job training . in light of these developments , you asked us to review states' planning approaches for addressing new wioa requirements . in addition , wioa requires that states develop career pathways strategies to help job seekers obtain employment or education , sector partnership strategies to engage employers in the workforce system , and regional planning strategies to coordinate local services . to address both objectives , we reviewed relevant federal laws , regulations , and guidance . california is also using discretionary funding to support the workforce accelerator fund initiative , which aims to better align existing programs to accelerate employment outcomes for populations with barriers to employment .
thank you for the opportunity to be here today to discuss some of the unmanned aerial systems ( uas ) pilot personnel challenges that the department of defense ( dod ) faces . i will focus my remarks today on dod's progress in ( 1 ) taking actions to strengthen the management of air force uas pilots , ( 2 ) addressing challenges the army faces to ensure that its uas pilots complete their required training and receive high - quality training , and ( 3 ) coordinating the training of uas pilots within dod . the air force flies the mq - 1 ( predator ) , the mq - 9 ( reaper ) , and the rq - 4 ( global hawk ) while the army flies the rq - 7 ( shadow ) , the mq - 5 ( hunter ) and the mq - 1c ( gray eagle ) . in recent years , the size , sophistication , and cost of dod's uas portfolio has grown considerably , as has the demand for trained uas pilots . in april 2014 and may 2015 , we reported on these other issues and made ten recommendations to dod to improve the air force's management of uas pilots , address army uas pilot training challenges , and enhance dod coordination of uas pilot training . however , as of march 2016 , the office of the assistant secretary of defense ( readiness ) has not yet issued the dod - wide uas training strategy . we found in our prior work that in recent years , the air force has not provided a sufficient number of uas pilots to meet requirements due to several factors including most notably the increase in demand for intelligence , surveillance , and reconnaissance . however , without addressing if and how the services can enhance their coordination efforts on training uas pilots in dod's forthcoming training strategy , the services may not be able to achieve additional benefits to the efficiency and effectiveness of uas pilot training across the department . in addition , the review included recommendations to increase emphasis on training in uas units including that the army should ( 1 ) issue guidance to unit commanders on uas training ; ( 2 ) ensure that uas warrant officers are qualified on their uas ; ( 3 ) increase the amount of home station training for uas units ; and ( 4 ) establish a system to report uas training readiness on unit status reports . we recommended that dod establish a dod - wide uas training strategy to resolve challenges that affect the ability of the air force and the army to train personnel for uas operations and dod concurred with that recommendation . we asked the army to provide information to update our may 2015 report to show ( 1 ) the amount of unit training that uas pilots completed in fiscal year 2015 , and ( 2 ) actions the army had taken in response to its internal recommendations to increase emphasis on unit training . the army has not fully addressed challenges related to uas pilots completing their required training and its use of less experienced instructors , which could affect training quality . agencies should identify the human , information technology , physical , and financial resources needed to initiate or sustain their coordinated effort .
therefore , this estimate may not cover the full cost of establishing a system for self - reporting equipment problems . this report examines ( 1 ) potential safety impacts of establishing a system for self - reporting equipment problems and repairs for commercial motor carriers and their drivers , and ( 2 ) factors that could affect the feasibility and cost of establishing a system for self - reporting equipment problems and repairs . one of the challenges in assessing the safety impact of a potential system for self - reporting equipment problems is its hypothetical nature . to perform this work , we reviewed relevant regulations , information on other existing systems for self - reporting safety - related information , ( fmcsa's national consumer complaint database and the federal aviation administration's ( faa ) aviation safety action program ) , and our past work on fmcsa's compliance , safety , accountability ( csa ) program . large trucks and buses transport billions of tons of freight and travel hundreds of billions of miles every year on our nation's highways . the office of management and ( omb ) and the department of transportation ( dot ) provide guidance on estimating a program's societal impact , such as its health and safety benefits , through a benefit - cost analysis . the federal motor carrier safety administration ( fmcsa ) sets requirements in regulations for the operating condition of vehicles operated by commercial motor carriers ( “carriers” ) . to examine the potential safety impacts of this hypothetical self - reporting system , we identified existing guidance ( office of management and budget and department of transportation ) on estimating the benefits of a new government program . while we cannot estimate costs for the type of self - reporting system described in this report with any degree of confidence , fmcsa broadly estimated that a self - reporting system would cost between $5 and $10 million to establish and operate for the first year . for a new program designed to affect safety , identifying the base case and the potential benefits of the new program generally requires data on past events related to the type of bad outcomes ( i.e. , injuries and deaths ) that the new program is expected to reduce . in 2014 , we reported on the effectiveness of sms and found that fmcsa faces challenges in reliably assessing safety risks for the majority of carriers . fmcsa officials said this estimate did not use other dot self - reporting systems as a benchmark nor did it explicitly include training , testing , or data storage — some of the factors that gao's cost - estimating guide identifies as key to establishing and maintaining a new electronic system . if a driver identifies some aspect of his or her vehicle's equipment that is out of compliance with these regulations — for instance brakes that do not adequately stop and hold the vehicle — the carrier ( or its agent , e.g. , the driver or a repair facility ) is responsible for repairing the problem before the vehicle is on the road . to enforce compliance with fmcsa regulations , fmcsa partners with states' law enforcement agencies and others to perform roadside inspections of commercial motor vehicles .
to address these issues , dhs initiated hrit in 2003 to consolidate , integrate , and modernize the department's information technology ( it ) infrastructure that supports human resources . i am pleased to be here today to discuss the department of homeland security's ( dhs ) efforts to implement the human resources information technology ( hrit ) investment . since dhs was created in 2002 and merged 22 agencies into one department with eight components , its human resources environment has included fragmented systems , duplicative and paper - based processes , and little uniformity of data management practices . specifically , my remarks today summarize key findings from that study , which ( 1 ) evaluated the progress dhs has made in implementing the hrit investment and how effectively dhs managed the investment , ( 2 ) determined whether the performance and learning management system ( palms ) — hrit's only ongoing program — is being implemented enterprise - wide , and ( 3 ) evaluated the extent to which palms is implementing selected it acquisition best practices . according to dhs , these limitations in its human resources environment are compromising the department's ability to effectively and efficiently carry out its mission . key causes for dhs's lack of progress in implementing hrit and its associated strategic improvement opportunities include unplanned resource changes and the lack of involvement of the hrit executive steering committee . however , as of november 2015 , dhs had fully implemented only 1 of the strategic improvement opportunities , which included 2 associated projects . however , dhs has also made limited progress in achieving these two performance targets . the information in my testimony is based on our report being released at today's hearing on the results of our review of dhs's implementation of hrit . without developing and maintaining a current schedule showing when dhs plans to implement the strategic improvement opportunities , dhs and congress will be limited in their ability to oversee and ensure dhs's progress in implementing hrit . dhs has partially implemented five of the other strategic improvement opportunities , but it is unknown when they will be fully addressed . additionally , dhs developed an hrit strategic plan for fiscal years 2012 through 2016 that outlined the investment's key goals and objectives , including reducing duplication and improving efficiencies in the department's human resources processes and systems . according to the human capital segment architecture blueprint , dhs planned to implement 14 of the 15 strategic improvement opportunities and 68 of the 77 associated projects by june 2015 ; and the remaining improvement opportunity and 9 associated projects by december 2016 . figure 1 provides a summary of hrit's progress towards achieving its service delivery performance targets . the strategic plan identified , among other things , two performance metrics that were focused on reductions in the number of component - specific human resources it services provided and increases in the number of department - wide hrit services provided by the end of fiscal year 2016 . implementing our recommendations is critical to the department addressing its fragmented and duplicative human resources environment that is hindering the department's ability to efficiently and effectively perform its mission .
the u.s. coast guard , within the department of homeland security ( dhs ) , is the principal federal agency responsible for maritime safety , security , and environmental stewardship . in recent years , the coast guard has begun to deploy new assets , such as national security cutters and fast response cutters , and has taken actions to assess what assets it needs to carry out its missions and how to best allocate its current assets . following the terrorist attacks of september 11 , 2001 , the coast guard was charged with expanded security - related mission responsibilities . the coast guard continues to face decisions about what assets it needs and how to best allocate those assets to meet its mission responsibilities . it is primarily based on our may 2016 report on the coast guard's allocation of assets ; as well as prior reports on the coast guard's acquisition of assets , in addition , my statement includes selected updates from may 2016 on the coast guard's efforts to reassess and update its mission needs , and fiscal year 2015 asset resource hour data . we have reported extensively on the coast guard's challenges in managing its multi - billion dollar major acquisition portfolio , intended to acquire assets and capabilities to conduct its various missions . the impact of balancing a broad array of coast guard missions , in conjunction with constrained budgets in recent years , have underscored the need for the coast guard to ensure it has the proper mix of assets and can effectively allocate them to achieve its mission responsibilities . in addition , in may 2016 , we reported on the challenges that the coast guard faces in strategically allocating its assets to meet its strategic goals . we have also reported that the coast guard has experienced delays in acquiring some of its planned assets and some of the coast guard's new assets that have been deployed have faced operational challenges . in addition to the 20-year fleet modernization plan , we have made several recommendations in recent years for the coast guard to improve its recapitalization business case by , among other things , identifying the cost , capabilities , and quantity and mix of assets needed ; as well as the trade - offs necessary to meet fiscal constraints . nevertheless , because of changes in the assumptions underlying the 2005 mission needs statement baseline , it may not accurately reflect the coast guard's current needs , specifically ( 1 ) the planned fleet mix of aircraft and vessels has changed , and ( 2 ) the planned operational capacities of these new assets have , in some cases , been revised downward . it is to determine the most cost - effective method of executing mission needs by addressing ( 1 ) gaps identified in the mission need statement , ( 2 ) the funding requirements proposed in the 5-year capital investment plan , and ( 3 ) options for reasonable combinations of alternative capabilities of aircraft and vessels , to include icebreaking resources and fleet mix . furthermore , to ensure that assets are deployed consistent with coast guard mission priorities , the coast guard should follow through with implementing our prior recommendations to improve its annual resource allocation process .
this report examines ( 1 ) how hud determined the capital advance amounts for section 202 and section 811 and ( 2 ) the section 202 and section 811 capital advance amounts by state from fiscal years 2008 through 2011 and any changes in the distribution of capital advances over that period . the department of housing and urban development ( hud ) has funded through capital advances approximately 151,000 units for very low - income elderly households and persons with disabilities through the section 202 supportive housing for the elderly ( section 202 ) and the section 811 supportive housing for persons with disabilities ( section 811 ) programs . these programs also provide rental assistance funding to these organizations to help ensure the affordability of rent . from november 1990 through november 2011 , the programs provided capital advances to nonprofit organizations to develop affordable housing units . the house report accompanying the consolidated and further continuing appropriations act of 2015 includes a provision for gao to provide information on hud capital advances for the section 202 and section 811 programs by state for fiscal years 2008 through 2013 . to obtain information on how hud determined capital advance amounts for section 202 and section 811 , we reviewed the funding allocation and application processes described in hud's notices of funding availability for fiscal years 2008 through 2013 , the years addressed in our mandate . together , section 202 and section 811 help address unmet housing needs among these vulnerable populations . these categories were ( 1 ) capacity of the applicant and relevant organizational staff ; ( 2 ) need , or the extent of the problem ; ( 3 ) soundness of approach ; ( 4 ) leveraging resources ; and ( 5 ) achieving results and program evaluation . we interviewed officials in hud's office of multifamily housing and housing groups that represent low - income older adults and individuals with disabilities . six states received between $10 million and $14,999,999 , while 11 states received between $5 million and $9,999,999 . from fiscal years 2008 through 2011 , 6 states received capital advances of $15 million or more . tables 4 through 7 show the number of section 202 and section 811 capital advance awards and the total dollar amounts by state ( including the district of columbia and puerto rico ) from fiscal years 2008 through 2011 . as shown in figure 2 , for fiscal years 2008 through 2011 , applicants in 9 states received 10 or more awards , 15 states received between 5 and 9 awards , 19 states received between 2 and 4 awards , and 5 states received 1 award . from fiscal years 2008 through 2011 , three states received total capital advances of $75 million or more . as shown in figure 4 , applicants in 8 states received 10 or more awards , 12 states received between 5 and 9 awards , 19 states received between 2 and 4 awards , and 5 states received 1 award . we were not able to review individual applications for capital advances to understand the score each application received because hud only retains these records for a period of 3 years and records from the period under our review have been destroyed .
the u.s. commercial space launch industry , which the federal aviation administration ( faa ) reports had estimated revenues of $617 million in 2015 , has experienced considerable change since the enactment of the commercial space launch amendments act of 2004 ( “the act” ) . in addition , in recent years , faa has been licensing an increasing number of commercial space launches , including those for the national aeronautics and space administration's ( nasa ) commercial cargo program , which contracts with commercial launch companies to transport cargo to the international space station ( iss ) . my testimony today focuses on ( 1 ) developments in the commercial space launch industry and ( 2 ) challenges faa faces in overseeing and promoting the industry . the act promoted the development of the emerging commercial human spaceflight industry and made the department of transportation ( dot ) responsible for overseeing the safety of the new industry — a responsibility that dot delegated to faa . as part of its safety oversight responsibilities , faa licenses and permits launches as well as licenses launch sites . the challenges for faa that they identified included: ( 1 ) determining whether and when to regulate the safety of crew and spaceflight participants and ( 2 ) handling an increased workload relating to licensing and permitting launches and launch sites . in the 2017 budget submission , faa provided workload indices based on the number of authorizations which the agency uses to authorize companies to conduct one or more launches , the number of licenses and permits , the number of on - site inspections as part of licensing launch sites , and staffing levels since fiscal year 2006 . for the 2015 report , we reviewed faa's guidance on its launch permit , licensing , and safety oversight activities ; interviewed faa officials , industry stakeholders , and experts who were selected on the basis of their knowledge of faa's oversight of the commercial space launch industry ; and visited spaceports where two 2014 launch mishaps occurred . to allow the space tourism industry to develop , the act prohibited faa from regulating the safety of crew and “spaceflight participants” before 2012 , except in limited circumstances — a moratorium that was extended to october 1 , 2023 in the commercial space launch competitiveness act enacted in november 2015 . these challenges included faa's ability to determine the specific circumstances under which it would regulate the safety of crew and spaceflight participants and estimating its future resource needs to license and permit launch activities . we will continue to monitor faa's progress toward implementing this recommendation . to provide congress with more information about the resources requested to address developments in the commercial space launch industry , we recommended that faa provide more detailed information in its budget submissions about its workload . congress mandated that faa review the methodology and report back to the congress by may 2016 . faa agreed with the recommendation , but dot also had some concerns about how issues were presented . in 2006 , we reported that faa had provided a reasonable level of safety oversight regarding commercial launches , but that the agency faced several challenges in regulating the space tourism industry .
i will address 1 ) the organizational structure of va's procurement function , 2 ) va procurement policies , and 3 ) the extent to which opportunities exist to improve va's key procurement functions and to save money . the department of veterans affairs ( va ) spent about $20 billion on goods and services in fiscal year 2015 . the wide range of goods and services that va procures — including construction , information technology , medical supplies , and many other categories — is essential to meeting its mission to provide health care , pensions , and other benefits to the nation's military veterans . prior assessments of va management , both internal and external , have found shortcomings in va procurement . in 2015 , gao added va health care to our high risk list because of issues including ambiguous policies , inconsistent processes , and inadequate oversight and accountability . however , many of va's regulations and policies are outdated , most notably the va acquisition regulation ( vaar ) , which has not been updated since 2008 . as part of our work for our september 2016 report , in order to evaluate va's procurement organizational structure , we reviewed policy documents and interviewed officials in leadership , local contracting office management , and contracting officer roles . to assess va's procurement policies , we obtained and analyzed policy documents , and interviewed officials responsible for making and implementing procurement policy . to assess opportunities to improve va's key procurement functions and to save money , we obtained and analyzed information regarding va's medical - surgical prime vendor program and interviewed officials with roles in management , contracting , and operations for the program . to provide the necessary leadership commitment to take advantage of these opportunities , we recommended in our september 2016 report that vha procurement and logistics conduct a review of visn - level strategic sourcing efforts , identify best practices , and , if needed , issue guidance . the selected contracts were chosen from the national contracting offices and local veterans health administration ( vha ) contracting offices we visited , and the basis for selection included dollar value and whether these contracts were competed or not . a new revision of the vaar is also in development , but has faced delays . va began the process in 2011 but does not plan to finalize the new vaar until december 2018 , including the required rulemaking process . we also reviewed a non - generalizable sample of 37 contracts and 19 associated task orders from fiscal years 2013 through 2015 . most orders are placed through the integrated funds distribution control point activity , accounting and procurement ( ifcap ) system , a decades - old it system with a text - based interface , which does not include a tool to look up items that are available on the national contracts . va has done this successfully in some areas , such as pharmaceuticals , and the planned changes to the mspv program could result in greater use of discounted national contracts for medical supplies if they are successfully implemented . key va procurement policies are outdated and difficult for contracting officers to use .
while the department has made progress in these efforts , it has also faced significant information technology challenges that contributed to our designation of va health care as a high risk area . thank you for inviting me to testify at today's hearing on the department of veterans affairs' ( va ) electronic health record system — the veterans health information systems and technology architecture ( vista ) — and the department's progress toward achieving interoperability with the department of defense ( dod ) . for almost two decades , va has been working with dod to advance electronic health record interoperability between their systems , in an attempt to achieve the seamless sharing of health care data and make patient data more readily available to health care providers , reduce medical errors , and streamline administrative functions . in addition , we have reported on actions that va has taken with regard to modernizing its electronic health record system . since 2001 , we have issued a number of reports that addressed va's progress , in conjunction with dod , toward achieving interoperable electronic health records between their separate systems , as well as its project with dod to jointly develop a shared electronic health record system . also , for much of this same time period , va has been planning and taking steps toward the modernization of its electronic health record system , with the intent of ensuring that the department can effectively deliver care for the millions of veterans and others that it serves . as va has proceeded with its program to modernize vista ( known as vista evolution ) , the department has developed a number of plans to support its efforts . the ipo is responsible for monitoring and reporting on va's and dod's progress in achieving interoperability and coordinating with the departments to ensure that these efforts enhance health care services . in addition , va's unsuccessful efforts over many years to modernize its vista system raise concern about how the department can continue to justify the development and operation of an electronic health record system that is separate from dod's system , even though the departments have common system needs . specifically , in developing this testimony , we relied on our previous reports , as well as information that we obtained and reviewed on va's actions in response to our previous recommendations . among other actions , provisions in the act directed each department to ( 1 ) ensure that all health care data contained in their systems ( va's vista and dod's armed forces health longitudinal technology application , referred to as ahlta ) complied with national standards and were computable in real time by october 1 , 2014 ; and ( 2 ) deploy modernized electronic health record software to support clinicians while ensuring full standards - based interoperability by december 31 , 2016 . as such , va's approach to addressing its electronic health record system needs remains uncertain . in addition to the initiatives mentioned in table 1 , va has worked in conjunction with dod to respond to provisions in the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2008 , which required the departments to jointly develop and implement fully interoperable electronic health record systems or capabilities in 2009 .
this report examines ( 1 ) hud oversight of mtw agencies , including agency reporting and compliance with demonstration requirements ; ( 2 ) any association between mtw flexibilities and program outcomes , including public housing occupancy rates and voucher unit utilization rates ; and ( 3 ) the extent to which hud monitored effects of rent - reform , work - requirement , and time - limit policies on tenants . in fiscal year 2017 , mtw agencies received funding of about $4.3 billion , which represented more than 17 percent of hud's public housing and housing choice voucher ( voucher ) programs . the moving to work ( mtw ) demonstration , administered by the department of housing and urban development ( hud ) , was established in 1996 to provide statutory and regulatory flexibility to participating public housing agencies . the mtw demonstration is intended to give participating agencies ( mtw agencies ) the flexibility to design and test innovative strategies ( activities ) for providing and administering housing assistance using funding they receive for their public housing and voucher programs , including making changes to hud's rent calculation and adopting work - requirement and time - limit policies for tenants .  ( recommendation 11 ) . however , we found that hud's oversight — review of annual reports and compliance assessments — has not been timely and hud has not fully documented its process for assessing compliance , due to limited staffing and competing priorities . mtw agencies also are able to combine the funding they are awarded annually from hud's public housing and voucher programs into a single agency - wide funding source . our objectives were to examine ( 1 ) the department of housing and urban development's ( hud ) oversight of agencies participating in the moving to work ( mtw ) demonstration , including agency reporting and compliance with demonstration requirements ; ( 2 ) any association between mtw flexibilities and program outcomes , including public housing occupancy rates and voucher unit utilization rates ; and ( 3 ) the extent to which hud monitored effects of rent - reform , work - requirement , and time - limit policies on tenants . in addition , hud has not clearly documented its process for assessing compliance with the five requirements . to assess the extent to which hud followed its procedures , we reviewed hud's documentation of compliance assessments from 2013 through 2016 ( the only years for which hud completed such assessments ) . while agencies were already required to submit annual plans and reports , hud revised its reporting requirements for mtw agencies in may 2013 in response to our recommendations . of approximately 3,900 public housing agencies , 39 were participating in the mtw demonstration as of september 2017 . hud acknowledged in its response to the recommendation that its workforce planning efforts will continue in 2018 . however , researchers and organizations that advocate on behalf of residents , including legal aid groups , have raised questions about the expansion because of the lack of information about the demonstration's effects on tenants . hud said our draft report did not discuss two other factors ( beyond insufficient staff ) that affected oversight of the mtw demonstration: ( 1 ) 2013 was the first year hud assessed each agency's compliance with the five demonstration requirements , and ( 2 ) from 2013 to 2015 , hud was in protracted and complex negotiations with the existing mtw agencies to determine the terms of the extension of their mtw participation .
swaps and other over - the - counter ( otc ) derivatives played a role in the 2007 — 2009 financial crisis in varying degrees and ways , as illustrated by the failure of lehman brothers holdings inc. ( lehman ) and the near failure of american international group , inc. ( aig ) . to examine the costs or negative effects of the amended and original section 716 for u.s. banks and swap end - users , we reviewed the 2-year transition applications submitted by banks to the board of governors of the federal reserve system ( federal reserve ) or the office of the comptroller of the currency ( occ ) ; documentation on and materials related to the international swaps and derivatives association ( isda ) master agreement and credit support annex ; and reports addressing the implementation of section 716 published by consulting firms , credit rating agencies , and law firms . according to fdic , the agency intends to maximize the use of private funding in a systemic resolution , and the law expressly prohibits taxpayer losses from the use of orderly liquidation authority . to examine the banks' and taxpayers' risks associated with swap activities covered by the original section 716 , we reviewed the dodd - frank act's prudential and resolution reforms and related regulations ; publicly available regulatory filings submitted by u.s. banks registered as swap dealers or their parent holding companies , including annual or quarterly financial filings and resolution plans ; and industry , academic , and other studies or reports examining the role of derivatives in the 2007 — 2009 financial crisis and ways to mitigate risks posed by derivatives under the u.s. bankruptcy code . proponents of the original section 716 sought to prohibit banks with access to federal assistance from engaging in riskier swap activities and to reduce the potential for the federal government , and therefore potentially taxpayers , to have to provide emergency assistance to banks engaging in such swap activities . while the largest bank swap dealers supported amending section 716 to narrow its scope , other stakeholders held that the amendment could increase the risk of a bank needing federal assistance and could provide less protection to taxpayers . importantly , fdic is authorized to transfer swaps and other qualified financial contracts to the bridge company or another solvent financial company . since 2013 , fdic has been developing a spoe strategy to implement this authority . in contrast , opponents of the provision maintained that swaps trading by banks did not significantly contribute to the 2007 — 2009 financial crisis . before the act , the government generally had two options to address the potential failure of a systemically important bhc or other nonbank financial firm: ( 1 ) allow it to enter bankruptcy or ( 2 ) provide it with aid . to examine the number of u.s. banks and the value of their swaps affected by the amended and original section 716 , we reviewed both versions of section 716 and relevant analyses prepared by the federal banking regulators , four large banks , selected law firms , and others . in addition to section 716 , the dodd - frank act included other provisions to address , among other things , the financial stability risks associated with major financial companies and the swap market .
ensuring information security: gao has designated federal information security as a government - wide , high - risk area . we also interviewed u.s. officials in washington , d.c. , and arlington , virginia , from state , dod , and the u.s. agency for international development ( usaid ) to obtain their views on key issues , obtain updated information and data , and follow up on actions state and its partner agencies have taken on past gao and other oversight report recommendations . since 1998 , u.s. personnel working in diplomatic facilities overseas have faced increasing threats to their safety and security , including numerous attacks in high - risk locations . state faces evolving threats and challenges to maintaining obsolete technology , defining clear roles and responsibilities for information security , and overseeing technology contractors . to fulfill its mission , diplomatic security collaborates with other state entities — such as the bureaus of overseas buildings operations ( obo ) and information resource management — and other u.s. government agencies , including the department of defense ( dod ) . these attacks resulted in close scrutiny of the department of state's ( state ) security practices overseas . the 1998 bombings marked a pivotal moment in the conduct of u.s. diplomacy , as it became clear that terrorist networks had the ability and intent to exploit security vulnerabilities at american diplomatic missions . to identify key issues affecting diplomatic security , we reviewed gao's body of work related to this issue and reports issued by state and other entities . however , we found weaknesses in state's process to address residential security vulnerabilities . physical security of diplomatic residences and other soft targets: state has taken steps to address residential security vulnerabilities and manage risks at schools and other soft targets overseas . status of recommendations made in reports following the benghazi attack: state has addressed many recommendations stemming from the reports generated by a group of interagency security assessment teams and the accountability review board , both of which were convened subsequent to the 2012 attacks in benghazi . on august 7 , 1998 , terrorists bombed the u.s. embassies in nairobi , kenya , and dar es salaam , tanzania , killing over 220 people and injuring 4,000 others . when facilities do not or cannot meet certain security standards , state works to mitigate identified vulnerabilities through various construction programs and its waivers and exceptions process . we believe these issues warrant significant oversight because of their cost and impact and the need to ensure progress . state's bureau of diplomatic security ( diplomatic security ) is responsible for the protection of people , property , and information at state's 275 overseas posts and 152 domestic locations . state and dod continue to update their plans and policies for coordination in times of crisis . this report contains 11 enclosures , each including information based largely on prior gao work in the following specific areas: diplomatic security funding: since 1998 , diplomatic security funding has increased considerably in reaction to a number of security incidents overseas and domestically . in fiscal year 2016 , total funding for diplomatic security operations — which includes its bureau managed funds as well as other funding , such as personnel salaries , managed by other bureaus and offices — was almost $4.8 billion .
this report examines ( 1 ) what is known about primary and secondary online ticket sales , ( 2 ) the consumer protection concerns that exist related to online ticket sales , and ( 3 ) potential advantages and disadvantages of selected approaches to address these concerns . the better online ticket sales act of 2016 ( bots act ) restricted the use of bots and gave the federal trade commission ( ftc ) and state attorneys general the authority to pursue violators with civil actions . the objectives of this report were to examine ( 1 ) what is known about primary and secondary online ticket sales , ( 2 ) the consumer protection concerns that exist related to online ticket sales , and ( 3 ) potential advantages and disadvantages of selected approaches to address these concerns . as such , no activity , outside of expanding the supply , is likely to effectively address one key source of consumer dissatisfaction: that tickets are not available to popular sold - out events . for example , some consumers have complained about difficulty obtaining face - value tickets for popular events at the primary , or initial , sale to the general public — only to find the tickets immediately available at high markups on the secondary , or resale , market . although the council can play a role in monitoring deceptive advertising related to ticketing , it also faces constraints — for example , it addresses practices case - by - case and its recommendations depend on voluntary compliance by the advertiser . other issues that have been raised include the amount of ticket fees and restrictions on transferring some tickets . in recent years , consumers and others have raised issues about the online ticket marketplace for concerts , commercial theater , and sporting events . you asked us to review the marketplace and consumer protection issues related to online ticket sales . some industry players are implementing technological and market - based approaches that seek to address concerns about secondary market activity . no matter what efforts are made to address concerns about the ticket marketplace , some of the consumer dissatisfaction with event ticketing stems from an intractable issue: demand for tickets to highly popular events exceeds supply . to address the second objective , we reviewed the websites of 6 primary market ticket sellers , 11 secondary ticket exchanges , and 8 ticket sellers using “white - label” websites . we also reviewed trade industry data on ticket prices and sales . we also reviewed foreign government reports to obtain information on relevant ticketing restrictions in two foreign countries ( canada and the united kingdom ) with similar consumer protection issues reviewed in this report . in addition , the advertising industry's self - regulatory organization has taken steps to address potentially misleading pricing practices in the ticket industry . federal agencies face constraints in addressing ticketing issues . in response , event organizers and legislators have targeted ticket bots — automated software that ticket brokers can use to buy large volumes of tickets . as noted earlier , the organization recently referred a major ticket company to ftc for not following its recommendations to conspicuously disclose its fees . similar legislation has been introduced in several other states in recent years .
our objectives were to determine to what extent: ( 1 ) gsa's plans and guidance to agencies for transitioning to eis incorporate lessons learned from prior transitions , and ( 2 ) selected agencies are following established planning practices for their transitions .  ( recommendation 25 ) . the general services administration ( gsa ) is responsible for ensuring that federal agencies have access to the telecommunications services and solutions that they need to meet mission requirements . as federal agencies have evolved in their use of telecommunications , so too have gsa's contracts to help support their needs . the delays led to an increase of $66.4 million in costs to gsa and an estimated $329 million in lost savings . currently , these telecommunications contracts not only support agencies' basic telephone needs , but also provide an acquisition vehicle for wireless and satellite services , as well as managed network services and information technology ( it ) security services .  ( recommendation 24 ) the secretary of transportation should ensure that the department's chief information officer fully demonstrates that dot's transition goals and measures align with its mission ; completely identifies transition risks related to information security , critical systems , and continuity of operations ; and fully identifies mission - critical priorities in the transition timeline . specifically , our objectives were to determine the extent to which ( 1 ) gsa's plans and guidance to federal agencies for transitioning to eis incorporate lessons learned from prior transitions and ( 2 ) selected agencies are following established planning practices for their transitions . in preparation for the end of its current telecommunications contracts in 2020 , gsa developed a successor program , known as enterprise infrastructure solutions ( eis ) . in fiscal year 2015 alone , federal agencies spent about $1.6 billion on services acquired through the contracts under gsa's current telecommunications program , known as networx . the last two gsa government - wide telecommunications contract transitions experienced significant delays that led to hundreds of millions of dollars in increased costs and missed savings .  ( recommendation 21 ) the secretary of transportation should ensure that the department's chief information officer identifies the agency's future telecommunications needs , areas for optimization , and costs and benefits of new technology ; and completes efforts to align dot's approach with its long - term plans and enterprise architecture . the transition that began in 1998 experienced delays that hindered the timely achievement of program goals and resulted in an estimated $74 million in missed savings . gsa's role in the transition includes providing guidance and technical assistance to agencies .  ( recommendation 22 ) the secretary of transportation should ensure that the department's chief information officer identifies roles and responsibilities related to the management of assets and human capital and legal expertise for the transition ; develops a transition communications plan ; and fully uses configuration and change - management processes in dot's transition . for example , developing a transition plan consists of ( 1 ) identifying and documenting objectives and measures of success ; ( 2 ) determining risks that could affect success ; and ( 3 ) defining transition preparation tasks and developing a timeline for these tasks .
the department of defense's ( dod ) 2005 round of base realignment and closure ( brac ) was the largest , costliest , and most complex of the five brac rounds since 1988 .  ( recommendation 2 ) . in contrast to prior rounds , which focused on the goal of reducing excess infrastructure , dod's goals for brac 2005 also included transforming the military and fostering joint activities across the military departments . since 2005 , we have issued more than 40 reports and testimonies on brac 2005 planning , implementation , costs , and savings ; this work highlights information dod can use to improve its process for developing and implementing brac recommendations . by implementing the 198 recommendations approved by the 2005 brac commission , dod closed 23 major bases , realigned 24 major bases , combined 26 installations into 12 joint bases , and eliminated about 12,000 civilian positions . congress has not authorized additional brac rounds to date . after implementing these brac 2005 recommendations , in 2017 dod estimated that it continued to have significant excess capacity remaining .  ( matter for consideration 1 ) . in the department's brac 2005 report , the secretary of defense stated that brac 2005 provided dod a unique opportunity to address new challenges posed by international terrorism , the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction , ungoverned areas , rogue states , and nonstate actors . if congress would like to increase its oversight for any future brac round , requiring dod to identify appropriate measures of effectiveness and track achievement of its goals would provide it with improved visibility over the expected outcomes . congress should consider , in any future brac authorization , a requirement for dod to identify appropriate measures of effectiveness and to track the achievement of its goals . for example , in our march 2013 report on lessons learned from the brac 2005 round , we found that dod's process for providing the brac commission with cost and savings estimates was hindered by underestimating requirements . selected economic indicators for the 20 communities surrounding the 23 department of defense ( dod ) installations closed in the 2005 base realignment and closure ( brac ) round vary compared to national averages . specifically , for the brac analysis phase , dod implemented 1 of 12 recommendations , and it has agreed to implement another 7 recommendations should congress authorize any future brac round . dod generally agreed with 32 and did not concur with 7 recommendations . to address remaining excess capacity , between 2013 and 2017 dod requested additional brac rounds and , in february 2018 , stated that it would work with congress to find common areas where reforms and changes could be made . dod has implemented 33 of the 65 prior recommendations that we identified in our work since 2004 , and it has the opportunity to address additional challenges regarding communications and monitoring to improve any future brac round . in this report , we assess the extent that dod ( 1 ) measured the achievement of its goals for reducing excess infrastructure , transforming the military , and promoting jointness for brac 2005 and ( 2 ) implemented prior gao recommendations and addressed any additional challenges faced in brac 2005 to improve performance for any future brac round .
this report assesses: ( 1 ) the extent to which the navy provides complete , quality ships to the fleet that are free of government and contractor deficiencies ; ( 2 ) the extent to which the navy's policy governing ship delivery facilitates efforts to deliver complete and quality ships ; and ( 3 ) the extent to which navy reports to congress on the progress of shipbuilding programs consistently define key milestones such as ship delivery and initial operational capability . for this review , we assessed: ( 1 ) the extent to which the navy provides complete , quality ships to the fleet that are free of government and contractor deficiencies ; ( 2 ) the extent to which the navy's policy governing ship delivery facilitates efforts to deliver complete and quality ships ; and ( 3 ) the extent to which reports to congress on the progress of shipbuilding programs consistently define key milestones such as ship delivery and initial operational capability . the u.s. navy spends at least $18 billion per year on its new construction shipbuilding programs , with a portion of this money spent after delivery on work to prepare the ships for the fleet . over the past several years , we have reported on significant cost growth and quality problems facing several navy shipbuilding programs . revise the navy's ship delivery policy to clarify what types of deficiencies need to be corrected and what mission capability ( including the levels of quality and capability ) must be achieved at ( 1 ) delivery and ( 2 ) when the ship is provided to the fleet ( at owld ) . in september 2014 , we found that littoral combat ship ( lcs ) 1 and 2 , while legally accepted by the government , had quality problems that persisted after delivery . in may 2009 , we compared navy shipbuilding with commercial shipbuilding and generally found that the navy accepts significantly more risk when it builds ships compared to commercial shipbuilders and buyers . in november 2013 , we found significant quality problems with navy ships at delivery — noting that the navy regularly accepts ships with numerous deficiencies . most recently , in march 2016 , we found that the navy pays for the vast majority of shipbuilder - responsible deficiencies discovered after the navy takes delivery of its ships . senate report 114-255 to accompany a bill for the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2017 included a provision for us to review the delivery process from the time the navy takes custody of ships until they are complete and ready for operations , particularly in light of the navy's delivery strategies for the cvn 78-class of aircraft carriers and ddg 1000-class of destroyers . reflect additional ship milestones in selected acquisition reports to congress , including owld and readiness to deploy . in addition , you asked us to review the period after ship delivery , including the extent to which and why the navy defers construction work to the post - delivery period , specifically as it relates to aircraft carrier and lead ship construction . the navy's selected acquisition reports to congress do not clearly communicate its ships' progress and completion , which can inhibit oversight , particularly for measuring results .
the objectives of this report are to determine the extent to which ( 1 ) the navy and marine corps have completed training for amphibious operations priorities and taken steps to mitigate any training shortfalls , ( 2 ) the navy's and marine corps' efforts to improve naval integration for amphibious operations incorporate leading collaborative practices , and ( 3 ) the marine corps has integrated selected virtual training devices into its operational training . these key practices include ( 1 ) defining and articulating a common outcome ; ( 2 ) establishing mutually reinforcing or joint strategies ; ( 3 ) identifying and addressing needs by leveraging resources ; ( 4 ) agreeing on roles and responsibilities ; ( 5 ) establishing compatible policies , procedures , systems , and other means to operate across agency boundaries ; ( 6 ) developing mechanisms to monitor , evaluate , and report on results ; and ( 7 ) reinforcing agency accountability for collaborative efforts through plans and reports , among others . to achieve desired goals and align efforts to maximize training opportunities for amphibious operations , we recommend the secretary of defense direct the secretary of the navy , in coordination with the chief of naval operations and commandant of the marine corps , to clarify the organizations responsible and time frames to define and articulate common outcomes for naval integration , and use those outcomes to develop a joint strategy ; more fully establish compatible policies , procedures , and systems ; better leverage training resources ; and establish mechanisms to monitor results . to more effectively and efficiently integrate virtual training devices into operational training , we recommend that the secretary of defense direct the commandant of the marine corps to develop guidance for the development and use of virtual training devices that includes developing requirements for virtual training devices that consider and document training tasks and objectives , required proficiency , and available training time ; setting target usage rates and collecting usage data ; and conducting effectiveness analysis of virtual training devices that defines a consistent process for performing the analysis , including the selection of the devices to be evaluated , guidelines on conducting the analysis , and the data that should be collected and assessed . according to the department of defense ( dod ) , the future security environment will require forces to train across the full range of military operations — including types of operations that have not been prioritized in recent years , such as amphibious operations . in its comments , dod concurred with all three recommendations . this first critical step will enable them to fully incorporate other leading collaboration practices aimed at a common purpose , such as developing a joint strategy ; more fully establishing compatible policies , procedures , and systems ; better leveraging resources ; and establishing mechanisms to monitor results that are needed to achieve service - level goals for naval integration and to align efforts to maximize training opportunities for amphibious operations . developing guidance for the development and use of virtual training devices would help close these gaps , which is critical as virtual training will become increasingly important to the development of the capability of marines , including the capability for conducting amphibious operations , among other mission areas .
 ( recommendation 4 ) . in fiscal year 2016 , the u.s. department of agriculture ( usda ) spent $478 million to provide more than 150 million meals to children through the summer food service program ( sfsp ) . this appendix discusses in detail our methodology for addressing three research objectives: ( 1 ) what is known about participation in the summer food service program ( sfsp ) and how has it changed in the last 10 years ? .  ( 2 ) what other programs help feed low - income children over the summer ? . to assess the reliability of sfsp and nslp data , we ( 1 ) performed electronic testing of relevant data elements , ( 2 ) reviewed existing information about the data and the system that produced them , and ( 3 ) interviewed agency officials knowledgeable about the data . what challenges exist , if any , in providing summer meals to children , and to what extent does fns provide assistance to states and sponsors to address these challenges ? . as a federal nutrition assistance program , the primary purpose of the sfsp is to provide food service to children in low - income areas during periods when area schools are closed for vacation .  ( recommendation 3 ) the administrator of fns should disseminate information about existing flexibilities available to state agencies to streamline administrative requirements for sponsors participating in the sfsp and other child nutrition programs to help lessen the administrative burden . what is known about participation in the summer food service program and how it has changed in the last 10 years ? .  ( recommendation 2 ) the administrator of fns should evaluate and annually report to congress , as required by statute , on its use of waivers and demonstration projects to grant states and sponsors flexibility with respect to the requirement that children consume sfsp meals on - site in areas experiencing crime or violence , to improve its understanding of the use and impact of granting these flexibilities on meeting program goals . however , a lack of clarity concerning the circumstances under which fns grants flexibilities in areas of violence and crime , and a lack of information on its use of these flexibilities and their impact on program administration , hinder efforts to ensure program goals are met . what other programs help feed low - income children over the summer ? . usda's food and nutrition service ( fns ) oversees the sfsp , which is administered by the states and operated by a variety of public and private nonprofit organizations and government entities that sponsor meals at sites such as schools , camps , parks , churches , and libraries . and ( 3 ) what challenges exist , if any , in providing summer meals to children , and to what extent does the u.s. department of agriculture's ( usda ) food and nutrition service ( fns ) provide assistance to states and sponsors to address these challenges ? . in the last decade , federal expenditures have increased as the program has expanded , according to fns data . furthermore , absent a reminder to states regarding existing options for streamlining administration across multiple nutrition programs , some providers may continue to be discouraged from participating in these programs due to duplicative and burdensome administrative requirements , which may ultimately limit the provision of nutritious meals to children .
 ( recommendation 3 ) . doj implemented 11 of our recommendations , including that doj develop performance measures for criminal debt collection and better coordinate internally and with federal courts .  ( recommendation 1 ) to improve oversight of the collection of restitution we recommend that the attorney general: develop and implement performance measures and goals for each usao related to the collection of restitution , and measure progress towards meeting those goals . developing and implementing performance measures and goals for each usao would allow doj to gauge usaos' success in collecting this restitution and , by extension , the department's success in achieving its major management initiative to increase the collection of debt . the justice for all reauthorization act of 2016 contained a provision for us to review and assess the federal criminal restitution process for fiscal years 2014 through 2016 . to address these findings , we made 24 recommendations , including 14 to doj , among other agencies . usaos have identified a significant portion of outstanding restitution debt as uncollectible , but they have also identified $10 billion of outstanding restitution debt that could be collected . once restitution is ordered by the court , doj is responsible for collecting restitution payments and has delegated these activities to financial litigation units ( flu ) within each u.s. attorney's office ( usao ) . to what extent has doj conducted oversight on the collection of restitution ? . the impact of crime on victims often has significant emotional , psychological , physical , financial , and social consequences . we are making three recommendations , including one to the judiciary and two to doj . doj took action to address the inspector general's recommendations by reviewing the system it uses to prioritize debt collection actions , by incorporating discussion of asset recovery into its training program , and by initiating a comprehensive study to review existing protocols and structures to improve doj's ability to collect debts owed to crime victims .  ( recommendation 2 ) in cases where forfeited assets were not used to compensate victims , gather information on reasons why forfeited assets were not used for victims . doing so would better position doj to take action to increase the use of forfeited assets to compensate eligible victims if warranted and to provide assurance that it is maximizing the use of asset forfeiture in satisfying restitution debts , one of the agency's most effective mechanisms for satisfying restitution . while doj has delegated collection activities for restitution to usaos , it could provide better oversight to ensure it is making reasonable efforts to collect restitution and meeting its responsibility to victims . the collection of federal criminal restitution has been a longstanding challenge . further , doj could use performance information to improve the practices of offices in seeking and recovering restitution , consistent with a requirement in the justice for all reauthorization act of 2016 . among other aspects of usao operations , these internal evaluations review the extent to which each flu is complying with statutory and doj requirements related to debt collection , has sufficient program resources , and adequately manages its caseload . finally , doj could gain greater visibility into the use of forfeited assets to compensate victims by gathering information on cases in which victims have been identified and restitution is anticipated but forfeited assets are not used , and any reasons why .
 ( recommendation 4 ) . u.s. research facilities , including those managed by federal agencies , use a wide range of animal species in research , testing , teaching , and experimentation . the agencies are commerce , defense , hhs , department of homeland security ( dhs ) , interior , usda , va , the environmental protection agency ( epa ) , the national aeronautics and space administration ( nasa ) , and the smithsonian institution . these activities can occur in laboratories or field settings and have many purposes , such as developing knowledge about human disease diagnosis and treatment , testing medicines and other products for toxicity , training professionals in veterinary methods , and conserving animal populations . the u.s. department of agriculture ( usda ) has used cattle , poultry , and other agricultural species in research on animal production and health and on the effects of animal agriculture on the environment , among other things . federal agencies may have additional information about their animal use programs . federal agencies conducted research using animals at about 120 domestic and international research facilities in fiscal years 2014 through 2016 . for example , the departments of defense , health and human services ( hhs ) , and veterans affairs have used rats , mice , nonhuman primates , and other species in research on disease prevention and treatment . iii for more information about stakeholders' responses to our questions ) . the hhs's national institutes of health ( nih ) is responsible for establishing guidelines implementing certain provisions of the health research extension act of 1985 . we included these questions to understand the extent to which stakeholders use available data and whether they had suggestions for changes in how aphis currently makes data routinely available . to examine the extent to which aphis and nih provided federal agencies with guidance for reporting on their animal use programs , we took the following steps: aphis . the public may request information about agencies' research activities using procedures established under the freedom of information act ( foia ) , which requires federal agencies to provide the public with access to government information , with some exceptions , on the basis of the principles of openness and accountability in government .  ( recommendation 1 ) the administrator of aphis should instruct federal agencies to report their use of animals covered by the animal welfare act in federal facilities located outside of the united states . we selected 10 types of information for stakeholders to consider , including some types of information that federal agencies may have for internal purposes and , in some instances , may provide to other agencies or organizations but that neither they nor others are required to proactively share with the public . we are making the following four recommendations to aphis: the administrator of aphis should develop a timeline for ( 1 ) defining birds that are not bred for research and that are covered by the animal welfare act , and ( 2 ) requiring that research facilities report to aphis their use of birds covered by the act .  ( recommendation 2 ) in developing the definition of field studies , the administrator of aphis should provide research facilities with clear criteria for identifying field studies that are covered by the animal welfare act's regulations and that facilities should report to aphis as well as field studies that facilities should not report .
the 11 selected agencies include the following: the departments of commerce ( commerce ) , energy ( doe ) , health and human services ( hhs ) , homeland security ( dhs ) , justice ( doj ) , and transportation ( dot ) , as well as the environmental protection agency ( epa ) , federal communications commission ( fcc ) , federal trade commission ( ftc ) , national science foundation ( nsf ) , and office of science and technology policy ( ostp ) . these and other efforts , while under way , are likely to take several years or longer to fully implement and measure success . recent advancements in iot - related technologies , such as the decreasing cost and size of electronics and the expansion of connectivity ( e.g. , broadband networks and wi - fi ) have allowed not only individuals and businesses , but also governments and communities , to use connected objects to gather and communicate new types and quantities of information . for example , “smart” traffic lights may collect and evaluate real - time traffic information to update traffic signals' timing to reflect current traffic conditions , with the goal of improving traffic flow by easing congestion and reducing vehicles' emissions . the internet of things ( iot ) generally refers to the technologies and devices that allow for the network connection and interaction of a wide array of devices , or “things,” throughout such places as buildings , vehicles , transportation infrastructure , or homes . the u.s. government has shown increased interest in supporting iot in communities , in part to harness the economic potential ; help address anticipated challenges , such as risks to privacy or security ; and promote replicability — that is , make it easier for projects in one community to be deployed in other communities . as a result of these advances , communities — both at home and abroad — are increasingly deploying projects with iot devices , generally with a goal of improving livability , management , service delivery , or competitiveness . iot devices , or “smart” devices , are increasingly being used to communicate and process information to an extent that was not possible before . how selected communities are using federal funds to deploy iot projects , including any challenges they face in integrating those projects . the european union ( eu ) and some foreign governments also have made investments in supporting iot projects in communities . for example , the eu , in 2015 , funded three large - scale pilot projects with the aim of identifying and deploying integrated community solutions — that is , projects or technologies that aim to meet community goals . to identify how selected communities are using federal funds to deploy iot projects and any challenges they face in integrating those projects , we conducted semi - structured interviews by telephone or in person with representatives from multiple stakeholders groups in four communities that are using federal efforts to implement iot projects — chattanooga , tennessee ; chicago , illinois ; columbus , ohio ; and portland , oregon . we requested comments on a draft of this product from commerce , doe , hhs , dhs , doj , dot , epa , fcc , ftc , nsf , and ostp .
 ( 6 ) establish a documented process for assessing bia's workforce composition at agency offices taking into account bia's mission , goals , and tribal priorities .  ( 5 ) incorporate effective workforce planning standards by assessing critical skills and competencies needed to fulfill bia's responsibilities related to energy development and by identifying potential gaps . we recommend that the administrator of the general services administration develop implementing guidance to clarify how contracting officials should implement and apply the statutory authority to provide a tribal preference to future acquisitions of energy products . this report examines ( 1 ) whether the actions of the energy subgroup and service center have helped to overcome long - standing factors hindering development , ( 2 ) bia's efforts to address workforce challenges that hinder indian energy development , ( 3 ) the progress of federal agencies to implement the preference authority to purchase energy from tribes , and ( 4 ) any additional opportunities stakeholders identified that federal agencies could take to help overcome factors hindering indian energy development . the council helps direct and coordinate government - wide procurement policy and maintains the federal acquisition regulation ( far ) . leading practices can help agencies enhance and sustain their collaborative efforts ; however , federal agencies involved in both of these efforts have not incorporated some of these practices .  ( 2 ) establish formal agreements with all agencies identified for inclusion in the subgroup to encourage participation . development of energy resources is vital for the livelihood , well - being , and long - term economic sustenance of some indian tribes and their members , in part because energy development provides opportunities to improve poor living conditions and decrease high levels of poverty . fish and wildlife service ( fws ) , and the environmental protection agency ( epa ) — also have regulatory roles and involvement with energy development . other federal agencies — such as the bureau of land management ( blm ) , u.s . tribes and their members determine how to use indian energy resources to meet the needs of the community .  ( 3 ) establish a documented process for seeking and obtaining input from key stakeholders , such as bia employees , on the service center activities . the standards and leading practices include the following: ( 1 ) possessing and maintaining staff with a level of competence that allows them to accomplish their assigned duties ; ( 2 ) identifying the key skills and competencies the workforce needs to achieve current and future agency goals and missions , assessing any skills gaps , and monitoring progress towards addressing gaps ; and ( 3 ) conducting resource planning to determine the appropriate geographic and organizational deployment to support goals and strategies .  ( 4 ) document the rationale for key decisions related to the establishment of the service center , such as alternatives and tribal requests that were considered . however , if the resources are held in trust or restricted status , the department of the interior's ( interior ) bureau of indian affairs ( bia ) — through its 12 regional offices , 85 agency offices , and other supporting offices — generally must review and approve leases , permits , and other documents required for development .
in this review , we examine ( 1 ) the extent to which states have adopted policies and procedures to notify cps of substance - affected infants , and to guide how cps officials respond once they receive a notification ; ( 2 ) the extent to which states have adopted policies and procedures to develop plans of safe care for substance - affected infants , and any challenges associated with implementing such policies and procedures ; and ( 3 ) steps hhs has taken to assist and monitor states' efforts in implementing capta provisions related to substance - affected infants . the secretary of hhs should direct acf to provide additional guidance and technical assistance to states to address known challenges and enhance their understanding of capta requirements , including the requirements for health care providers to notify cps of substance - affected infants and the development of a plan of safe care for these infants . under capta , state governors are required to provide an assurance to the secretary of the department of health and human services ( hhs ) that their states have in effect and are enforcing a law or statewide program that requires ( 1 ) health care providers to notify child protective services ( cps ) of all infants affected by substance use or withdrawal symptoms resulting from prenatal drug exposure , and ( 2 ) a plan of safe care be developed for all such infants , including the affected caregiver . effective implementation of our recommendation should help states better implement protections for children . in addition , the number of children under the age of 1 entering foster care increased by about 15 percent ( from 41,235 to 47,219 ) from fiscal year 2012 through fiscal year 2015 — an increase that many researchers and child welfare professionals attribute to the opioid epidemic . the child abuse prevention and treatment act ( capta ) is one of the key pieces of federal legislation that guides child protection and includes provisions related to substance - affected infants . states reported that parental drug abuse was a factor associated with the removal of 32 percent of the children entering foster care in fiscal year 2015 . infants born to women who misuse drugs or alcohol during their pregnancy are particularly vulnerable . additional guidance and assistance from hhs would help states better understand what they need to do to develop policies and procedures that meet the needs of children and families affected by substance use . in addition , we interviewed officials from the department of health and human services' ( hhs ) administration for children and families ( acf ) and the substance abuse and mental health services administration ( samhsa ) about oversight , technical assistance , and guidance regarding capta provisions related to substance - affected infants . the survey included open - ended and closed - ended questions about state laws , policies , and procedures regarding substance - affected infants ; specific requirements or processes relating to infants affected by opioids ; plans for ensuring the safety and well - being of substance - affected infants ; data collection efforts ; challenges to implementing capta requirements ; and assistance and guidance provided by hhs . many infants are born affected by substance exposure and experience withdrawal symptoms , referred to as substance - affected infants .
this report examines ( 1 ) how energy storage can be used to enhance grid operations and performance ; ( 2 ) factors that affect the deployment of energy storage for grid operations ; and ( 3 ) federal and state policies and other efforts that address the deployment of energy storage . we selected 29 studies from the congressional research service ( crs ) ; doe ; national laboratories ; government - sponsored research ; non - governmental organizations such as nonprofits and research institutes ; industry associations ; and peer - reviewed scientific and trade journals . moreover , the california public utility commission has approved rules that increase the ways for energy storage systems to obtain revenue for multiple uses , or grid services , for example , from frequency regulation , capacity , or other services . through interviews with stakeholders and our review of documents , we identified examples of policies and other efforts that have encouraged the deployment of energy storage or aim to address market barriers , including the establishment of mandates and targets for storage adoption , the revision of interconnection rules and planning requirements , financial incentives , and funding . the federal energy regulatory commission ( ferc ) , which regulates interstate electricity transmission and oversees wholesale interstate electricity markets , plays a role in addressing barriers to competition in electricity markets as part of its statutory duty to ensure that market rates are just and reasonable and not unduly discriminatory or preferential . electricity is supplied through a complex network of power plants and power lines — the electricity grid — managed by utility companies and other operators . the traditional model for generating and selling electricity in the united states is changing . specifically , we interviewed officials and representatives from 4 federal agencies ( doe , ferc , crs , and the internal revenue service ) ; 3 national laboratories ( the national renewable energy laboratory , the pacific northwest national laboratory , sandia national laboratories ) ; 8 state government agencies ; 11 grid operators and utilities ; 7 industry associations ; 2 nongovernmental organizations ; and 6 other market participants , including storage project developers and consultants . while doe has undertaken a range of efforts over the past several years to address challenges to deployment , future funding of these efforts is uncertain . the operation of electric power systems involves a complex process of forecasting the demand for electricity , and scheduling and operating power plants to meet that varying demand . the ability to store electricity more easily could change the operating capabilities of the electricity grid . given our methodology , we identified examples that illustrate the range of state policies and other efforts that may encourage the deployment of energy storage or that address market barriers ; however , these examples do not represent a comprehensive list of all state policies and efforts . ferc has taken several steps to address market barriers to energy storage deployment , but the impact of these efforts will depend on implementation by rtos . federal and state policymakers have used a variety of policies and other efforts to encourage the deployment of storage and address market barriers . efforts to address safety and reliability challenges .
this report assesses the extent to which ( 1 ) dod and faa have identified security and operations risks and approved solutions to address these risks to military aircraft equipped with ads - b out technology ; and ( 2 ) dod has implemented key tasks in the 2007 deputy secretary of defense memorandum on implementing nextgen ( hereinafter referred to as the 2007 nextgen memorandum ) . this report assesses the extent to which ( 1 ) the department of defense ( dod ) and the faa have identified security and operations risks and approved solutions to address these risks to military aircraft equipped with ads - b out technology ; and ( 2 ) dod has implemented key tasks in the 2007 deputy secretary of defense memorandum on implementing nextgen . senate report 114-255 , accompanying a bill for the national defense authorization act of fiscal year 2017 , included a provision that we assess issues related to the defense implications of implementation of the federal aviation administration's ( faa ) next generation air transportation system ( nextgen ) and automatic dependent surveillance — broadcast ( ads - b ) , a main component of nextgen . we interviewed officials from norad , dod , and faa about potential risks , vulnerabilities , and mitigation strategies . the north american aerospace defense command ( norad ) and dod have also expressed concerns about the faa's plan to decommission faa legacy radar systems on which norad relies to conduct aerospace warning and aerospace control missions , and on which dod relies to conduct its air traffic missions . these documents address ads - b implementation , acquisition , operations , cybersecurity , risk management and mitigation , and any other issues that may be pertinent to identifying and addressing operations and security risks resulting from ads - b . this technology — known as automatic dependent surveillance - broadcast ( ads - b ) out — is a key component of the faa's next generation air transportation system ( nextgen ) , which seeks to modernize the current ground - based radar system to a satellite - derived system for automated aircraft position reporting , navigation , and digital communications . to assess the extent to which dod and faa have identified risks and approved solutions to address these risks to military aircraft equipped with ads - b out technology , we reviewed policies , procedures , guidance , assessments , and other relevant documents from norad , dod , and faa . while military aircraft and existing radar systems may be equipped with other devices ( such as mode s transponders ) that could also pose security risks , this report focused primarily on risks and potential solutions associated with ads - b out technology that faa mandated dod to install on its aircraft by january 1 , 2020 . this report does not identify specific classified details of dod assessments , security risks , and other actions dod is taking to address security risks related to ads - b out or the nextgen system that dod deemed to be sensitive . over the years , the department of defense ( dod ) has expressed concern about the operations security risk of openly transmitting flight data from military aircraft .
 ( recommendation 1 ) . congress passed the post - katrina emergency management reform act of 2006 ( post - katrina act ) to improve the federal government's preparation for and response to natural and manmade disasters . in this report , we examined: the challenges selected stakeholders have experienced related to emergency communications ; the emergency communications assistance — technical assistance and funding — provided by dhs and selected stakeholders' views on these efforts ; and the reccwgs established by the post - katrina act and their effect on emergency communications capabilities . these provisions required that the department of homeland security ( dhs ) provide assistance to support the rapid establishment of interoperable emergency communications in urban areas and other areas deemed to be consistently at a high level of risk from disasters ; and the establishment of regional emergency communications coordination working groups ( reccwg ) in each of the 10 federal emergency management agency ( fema ) regions . while dhs has provided assistance in the form of technical assistance and funding and congress has established the reccwgs ( commonly pronounced rec - wigs ) , natural disasters such as hurricanes harvey , irma , and maria in 2017 continued to test the nation's emergency communications capabilities . you asked us to evaluate how the implementation of the post - katrina act's provisions has affected disaster preparedness , response , and recovery in general . hurricane katrina exposed gaps in how federal , state , and local entities responded to the catastrophic storm , gaps that include revealing that the equipment the first responders used for emergency communications were often not operable and interoperable . among the more than 300 reforms in the post - katrina act , two of the provisions relate to emergency communications during disaster response and recovery . dhs noted that fema is committed to increased collaboration among reccwgs to coordinate multi - state efforts and measure progress on and improving survivability , sustainability , and interoperability of communication at the regional level and nationwide . for first responders in emergency situations , reliable communications are critical for a rapid and sufficient response . a concerted effort focusing on these groups' collaboration needs , while also considering fema's resource constraints , could help fema and regional stakeholders determine an appropriate mechanism for collaboration moving forward . the administrator of fema should work with reccwg members to reach consensus on and implement an ongoing mechanism to encourage nationwide collaboration across these groups , considering the costs of one or more suitable methods , such as a national - level working group that uses virtual or other means of coordination , as appropriate . we analyzed fema data on preparedness grant funding from fiscal years 2011 to 2016 . these types of events can cross jurisdictional borders , highlighting the critical need for collaboration of first responders and public safety officials both within and across regions . such collaboration could help the groups address common challenges by providing a way to improve the sharing of best practices and lessons learned and to allow members to leverage the knowledge and experience of their counterparts to improve emergency communications capabilities in their regions and nationwide . we also reviewed relevant reports and documentation from dhs — such as reports on national preparedness and on specific emergency incidents and technical assistance offerings — as well as other documents we identified through a literature search .
the report examines ( 1 ) the insurance coverage spaceport operators have in place to protect themselves from losses resulting from space launch mishaps and ( 2 ) stakeholder views on the need to change the current insurance approach and options for revising it . this report examines ( 1 ) the insurance coverage spaceport operators have in place to protect themselves from losses resulting from space launch mishaps and ( 2 ) stakeholder views on the need to change the current insurance approach and options for revising it . in recent years , the u.s. commercial space industry has been expanding — u.s . launch companies conducted eight launches in 2015 , compared with none in 2011 — and federal law includes insurance requirements for launch companies involved in commercial space launches . specifically , the commercial space launch act amendments of 1988 ( cslaa ) requires launch companies — firms that operate launch vehicles for launches licensed by the federal aviation administration ( faa ) — to purchase insurance to cover damage to the uninvolved public , or “third parties,” as well as damage to federal government property , in case of a launch mishap . to better ensure spaceport operators' understanding of faa's financial responsibility regulations for commercial space launches , we recommend that the secretary of transportation ensure that the faa administrator provides additional communication to clarify faa's interpretation of the financial responsibility regulations for commercial space launches . section 115 of the u.s. commercial space launch competitiveness act ( cslca ) contains a provision for gao to report on the potential inclusion of all government property , including state and municipal property , in the existing indemnification regime established under 51 u.s.c . faa is currently evaluating its maximum probable loss methodology . the forms of communication could include , among other things , issuing additional guidance or using other forums to clarify when a spaceport operator is a third party to a launch and when it is not . furthermore , the national aeronautics and space act ( space act ) authorizes the national aeronautics and space administration ( nasa ) to enter into legal agreements with spaceport operators — entities that host launches at their launch sites ( i.e. , spaceports ) — for use of nasa property in support of commercial space launches , which may include insurance requirements for companies involved in those launches . we also conducted semistructured interviews with other stakeholders , including five launch companies that are active in the industry , all five key insurance industry stakeholders that had provided coverage to the commercial space industry ( three insurance brokers and two insurance companies ) , and two industry associations . we reached out to all 10 spaceport operators licensed by the federal aviation administration ( faa ) , as of july 2016 , and conducted semistructured interviews with 8 of these 10 spaceport operators . nevertheless , this event highlighted a potential concern about the adequacy of insurance coverage obtained by faa - licensed spaceport operators , an increasingly key part of the u.s. commercial space industry . the cslaa also added a requirement , subject to appropriation , for the federal government to indemnify launch companies for claims that exceed their required insurance coverage , up to $1.5 billion adjusted for post - 1988 inflation , which was around $3.06 billion in fiscal year 2016 .
we compared the u.s. department of transportation's ( dot ) practices and procedures for aspects of its air ambulance oversight to federal internal control standards related to information collection and external communication . to describe what is known about factors affecting prices and selected stakeholders' views on actions the federal government could take to address pricing , we selected and interviewed 26 stakeholders , including representatives from: 8 air ambulance providers ( 3 large independent providers and 5 hospital - affiliated providers ) chosen to represent a range of business model types ( independent and hospital - affiliated ) , sizes , and known perspectives in the industry ; 2 associations representing air ambulance providers ; 6 groups familiar with air ambulance business and billing , such as industry analysts and consultants ; 4 states active in assessing air ambulance costs and prices charged ; 2 associations of state officials ; 2 associations representing health insurers ; and 2 groups involved with consumer policy or research . consider consumer disclosure requirements for air ambulance providers , which could include information such as established prices charged , business model and entity that establishes prices , and extent of contracting with insurance . we reviewed documentation — including pertinent laws , regulations , guidance , enforcement actions , and legal opinions — and interviewed officials from dot and the department of health & human services' centers for medicare & medicaid services ( cms ) . assess available federal and industry data and determine what further information could assist in the evaluation of future complaints or concerns regarding unfair or deceptive practices . for this work we examined: ( 1 ) what is known about the prices charged for air ambulance service , ( 2 ) what is known about the factors that affect the prices charged for air ambulance service , and ( 3 ) what actions , if any , selected stakeholders believe the federal government should take regarding air ambulance pricing . without better information , dot has limited ability to understand the industry including the nature of competition that could affect its decisions on whether to take investigative or enforcement actions . air ambulance transportation is widely regarded as having a beneficial impact on improving the chances of survival and recovery for trauma victims and other critical patients , particularly in rural areas that lack readily accessible advanced - care facilities such as trauma or burn centers . furthermore , dot lacks data needed to assess several key aspects of the industry , ranging from basic aspects — such as the composition of the industry by provider type , prices charged by provider , or number of overall air ambulance transports — to the more complex , such as the extent of contracting between providers and insurers or extent of balance billing to patients . see hcci , data brief: non - shoppable health care services: inpatient hospitalizations ( february 2017 ) , 9-10. documentation and comparing our results across both data sets and to published sources , among other things , and determined both sources were sufficiently reliable for the purposes of this report . for example , media reports of balance billing have included a provider placing a lien on a patient's home as well as patients having their credit negatively affected or filing for bankruptcy .
the transportation security administration ( tsa ) is responsible for securing the nation's transportation systems while facilitating the movement of passengers and commerce using security - related technologies . this report addresses ( 1 ) the extent and purposes of tsa's use of otas and ( 2 ) how tsa ensures prices are reasonable and how it oversees otas . otas entered into under this authority are generally not subject to certain federal laws and regulations related to federal contracts such as the federal acquisition regulation ( far ) , allowing tsa to customize them to help meet project requirements and mission needs . in addition to the steps tsa has taken to improve ota oversight , such as revising its ota policy and increasing training requirements , tsa officials told us that they will continue to conduct quarterly compliance reviews and monthly data verification in accordance with their policy . as one of the largest components of the department of homeland security , tsa obligated more than $1.4 billion through instruments called other transaction agreements ( ota ) from fiscal years 2012 to 2016 . in response to these deficiencies , tsa has taken action to strengthen oversight and compliance with its policy . to fulfill this mission , tsa must ensure that all airline passengers and their carry - on and checked baggage are screened to deter , detect , and prevent the carriage of prohibited and other dangerous items , such as explosives , on board commercial aircraft . congress granted tsa other transaction authority in 2001 , allowing it to enter into agreements other than standard government contracts or other traditional mechanisms . to address the extent to which tsa uses otas , we analyzed data from the federal procurement data system - next generation ( fpds - ng ) on obligations through contracts and otas from fiscal year 2012 to 2016 . as we and others have previously reported , the use of otas provides flexibility but carries the risk of reduced accountability and transparency , in part because such agreements are exempt from the far and the related controls and oversight mechanisms that apply to contracts . in addition , tsa has continued to include otas in its quarterly compliance review process . starting in fiscal year 2015 , four years after it issued its 2011 ota policy , tsa began to include otas in its contract compliance review program . in addition , tsa also recently increased oversight of the cor program to support efficient ota and contract oversight and administration . you asked us to review tsa's use of otas . officials noted that their efforts to increase training , oversight , and enforcement of ota policies and procedures have resulted in increased awareness of reporting requirements and greater compliance . nonetheless , tsa's own 2015 internal compliance review found significant gaps in ota documentation and reporting . compliance reviews are conducted quarterly based on a selection of contracts and otas awarded in the previous quarter and intended to improve contracting operations , ensure compliance with applicable standards and policies , and identify best practices . five reimbursement programs used otas to partially or fully reimburse airports and law enforcement agencies for the allowable costs associated with tsa security programs .
to help increase efficiency when defining fms requirements to be placed on contract , we recommend that the secretary of defense issue department - wide guidance for the military departments and dod components to expand the use of requirements checklists to develop more comprehensive letters of request for fms cases . the house report 114-537 that accompanied the national defense authorization act of fiscal year 2017 included a provision for gao to review certain aspects of department of defense's ( dod ) acquisition process , including contract type selection , to determine their effect , if any , on foreign military sales ( fms ) . the department of state ( state ) has overall responsibility for the program , including the approval of sales . each year , the u.s. government reports billions of dollars in sales of defense articles and services to foreign governments through the foreign military sales ( fms ) program . further , in the fiscal year 2017 national defense authorization act ( ndaa ) , congress required dod to revise its acquisition regulations to place new requirements on fms contracting and to seek ways to accelerate contracting and pricing for fms . over the past decade , dod and congress have established various reform efforts designed to expedite the fms process , yet there is continued concern that the process remains slow . for instance , the defense security cooperation agency ( dsca ) , which is responsible for overseeing and administering the fms program within dod , reported implementation of the lead nation procurement initiative in july 2016 , which is aimed at maximizing purchasing power for north atlantic treaty organization ( nato ) members through joint procurement of defense articles and services . although checklists , when developed and available for use , help fms customers and military departments define requirements more efficiently , they have not been developed for all systems that are procured under the fms program . the fms acquisition process continues to be hindered by insufficiently defined requirements that do not fully articulate the desired equipment , training , and other services and can , from the outset , impede timely delivery to fms customers . more importantly , these tools can help ensure dod is well - positioned , at the outset , to deliver equipment and services to the foreign government within agreed - upon timeframes . the fms program is a central component of the u.s. government's efforts to assist foreign governments by providing u.s. military equipment and related services . we provided a draft of this report to the department of defense ( dod ) for comment . the fms program is considered an integral component of u.s. national security and foreign policy that enhances the capabilities of our allies and supports increased interoperability with the u.s. military , while also helping to sustain the defense industrial base . however , the department of defense ( dod ) administers the fms program and manages procurements executed by acquisition programs within the military departments and other dod components on behalf of foreign governments . this report addresses 1 ) how the use of firm - fixed - price contracts compares to other contract types awarded for fms procurements and the reasons they were used and 2 ) the factors that may contribute to delays and potentially increase costs for fms procurements .
specifically , we provided the excerpts to officials in alaska ; arizona ; california ; colorado ; florida ; houston , texas ; iowa ; kansas ; los angeles county , california ; louisiana ; oklahoma ; and texas . specifically , the act appropriated $394 million to cdc , $152 million to the national institutes of health ( nih ) , and $387 million to hhs's public health and social services emergency fund ( phssef ) , of which $386 million was allocated to additional hhs agencies — the biomedical advanced research and development authority ( barda ) within the office of the assistant secretary for preparedness and response , the centers for medicare & medicaid services ( cms ) , and the health resources and services administration ( hrsa ) . this means that cdc will consider these approved applicants for future funding if an emergency occurs and funding becomes available . in response to the outbreak , congress appropriated $932 million in september 2016 through the zika response and preparedness act to the department of health and human services ( hhs ) and its agencies for activities such as responding to the zika virus , developing vaccines , and reimbursement for health care costs related to the zika virus . the zika virus outbreak in 2015 affected individuals infected with the virus in ways that had not been seen with other infectious disease outbreaks . agencies have until september 30 , 2022 , to disburse , or spend , the funding . however , in this outbreak , the zika infection in pregnant women has been linked to adverse pregnancy and birth outcomes: the virus can be passed to the fetus and cause a birth defect of the brain called microcephaly and other severe brain defects , according to the centers for disease control and prevention ( cdc ) . the agencies had until september 30 , 2017 , to obligate the funding , for example , by awarding a contract or a grant to an entity ( awardee ) . in this report , we describe 1. the status of obligations and disbursements of zika supplemental funding by hhs agencies ; and 2. how selected awardees used their zika supplemental funding , and their experiences with applying for and managing the funding . we interviewed officials from each agency to discuss the status of the agencies' obligations and disbursements of the zika supplemental funding , the different mechanisms used to award the funding , and the various factors that influenced the obligation and disbursement of the funding to awardees . zika — a virus primarily transmitted through mosquito bites — can cause symptoms that include fever , rash , conjunctivitis ( red eyes ) , and joint and muscle pain , though many infected individuals do not have symptoms or will only experience mild symptoms . to describe the status of obligations and disbursements of zika supplemental funding by hhs agencies , we analyzed barda , cdc , cms , hrsa , and nih obligation data as of september 30 , 2017 — the date funding had to be obligated — and disbursement data as of december 31 , 2017 — the first full quarter of data available at the time of our review .
 ( recommendation 3 ) . medicaid section 1115 demonstrations , which allow states to test and evaluate new approaches for delivering medicaid services , have become a significant feature of the medicaid program , increasing both in number and cost over the years and affecting millions of beneficiaries . for example , the centers for medicare & medicaid services ( cms ) , the agency within the department of health and human services ( hhs ) that oversees the medicaid program , has approved states' proposals to extend medicaid coverage under demonstrations to populations or for services that would not otherwise be covered under medicaid . in november 2016 , nearly three - quarters of states operated at least part of their medicaid program under section 1115 demonstrations , and , in fiscal year 2015 , federal demonstration expenditures amounted to $109 billion or about one - third of medicaid program expenditures that year . cms has also allowed states to use medicaid funds to finance costs that would not otherwise be eligible for federal funds , such as incentive payments to providers to improve access to and quality of care . because medicaid section 1115 demonstrations ( hereafter referred to as demonstrations ) are intended to test new approaches to providing coverage and delivering medicaid services , evaluations of the demonstrations are essential to determining whether the new approaches are having their intended effect . evaluations are also critical to ensuring that information on the effects of demonstrations , such as on beneficiary access to care , quality of care , and costs of care is available to inform federal and state policy decisions about new approaches to coverage and care . under section 1115 of the social security act , the secretary of health and human services may waive certain federal medicaid requirements and approve new types of expenditures that would not otherwise be eligible for federal medicaid matching funds for experimental , pilot , or demonstration projects that , in the secretary's judgment , are likely to promote medicaid objectives .  ( recommendation 2 ) the administrator of cms should establish and implement a policy for publicly releasing findings from federal evaluations of demonstrations , including findings from rapid cycle , interim , and final reports ; and this policy should include standards for timely release . the medicaid section 1115 demonstrations ( referred to as demonstrations ) in our eight selected states varied in terms of the number of years the demonstrations had been in effect and cost , among other things . the limitations in state - led evaluations — including methodological weaknesses and gaps in results — have , in part , hindered cms's use of them to inform its policy decisions . in addition , cms has initiated its own federal evaluations of selected medicaid demonstrations . cms's efforts since 2014 to improve the usefulness of evaluations in informing state and federal medicaid policy decisions have promise . cms has long required states to conduct evaluations of demonstrations . despite these challenges , targeted and well - designed evaluations offer the potential to identify policies that improve outcomes for beneficiaries and reduce costs to medicaid . from those , we selected eight states to achieve variation with regard to ( 1 ) total spending on the demonstrations , including as a percent of the state's total medicaid spending , ( 2 ) the number of years the state's most comprehensive demonstration had been in place , and ( 3 ) geography .
 ( recommendation 3 ) . for fiscal year 2017 , the department of homeland security ( dhs ) requested over $34 billion for o&s . operations and support ( o&s ) costs make up the majority — sometimes over 70 percent — of an acquisition program's total lifetime costs . this report assesses , for selected major acquisition programs , the extent that ( 1 ) dhs's budget management and reporting affects operations and oversight ; and ( 2 ) o&s life - cycle cost estimates ( lcces ) are comprehensive and accurate , as well as regularly updated . however , if information on such costs is vague or inconsistent , congress's ability to conduct oversight would be limited , which in turn can affect its funding decisions for major acquisition programs . the house homeland security subcommittee on oversight and management efficiency asked us to evaluate operations and maintenance ( o&s ) activities for the department of homeland security's ( dhs ) major acquisition programs . we found in april 2015 that dhs's funding plans for major acquisition programs did not reflect all of the estimated costs for certain programs , particularly for o&s , resulting in potential operational shortfalls . this report assesses , for selected major acquisition programs , the extent that ( 1 ) dhs budget management and reporting affects operations and oversight ; and ( 2 ) life - cycle cost estimates ( lcces ) are comprehensive and accurate , as well as regularly updated . if programs experience o&s funding shortfalls , they may fall short of operational goals or not be able to address maintenance needs .  ( recommendation 2 ) the dhs chief financial officer should reverse the exclusion of o&s funding at a major acquisition program level in its future years homeland security program report for all components .  ( recommendation 1 ) the secretary of homeland security should work with congress to include o&s data in monthly execution reports at a major acquisition program level within current program / project activity accounts . until dhs takes concrete action to reverse the exclusion of o&s funding at a major acquisition program level in its future years homeland security program reports , congress will lack important information necessary for oversight . we made a recommendation to dhs , with which the department concurred , to account for all o&s funding dhs plans to allocate to each of the coast guard's major acquisition programs . we are making the following three recommendations to dhs: the secretary of homeland security should work with congress to add information to its annual congressional budget justification to show o&s funding requests for major acquisition programs within current program / project activity accounts . also , as a system becomes operational , users rely on o&s funds for support through the duration of the system's lifetime . dhs and the coast guard are continuing to address this recommendation . dhs first used its common appropriations structure — which dhs proposed and congress enacted — to address appropriations and budget management inconsistencies in its fiscal year 2016 budget submission .
 ( recommendation 1 ) . further , the department of education ( education ) has found instances of disparities or potential disparities in the benefits and services provided to girls' and boys' teams , including equipment , facilities , and schedules for practices and games . we have also reported that girls began playing high school sports in large numbers only after the passage of title ix of the 1972 education amendments ( title ix ) , which prohibits discrimination on the basis of sex in any education programs and activities by recipients of federal financial assistance . the objectives of this study were to examine: ( 1 ) what measures public high schools and athletics administrators have taken to encourage equal athletic opportunities for boys and girls , and ( 2 ) what factors affect boys' and girls' participation levels in public high school sports programs . this report examines ( 1 ) what measures public high schools and athletics administrators have taken to encourage equal athletic opportunities for boys and girls , and ( 2 ) what factors affect boys' and girls' participation levels in public high school sports programs . better information about title ix coordinators' awareness and use of ocr's guidance could help ocr support schools' and districts' efforts to provide equal opportunities in their sports programs . it also means that its reviews of the agency's communication practices may be hampered by incomplete information on how best to encourage title ix coordinators to use these tools and work with athletics administrators to ensure equal opportunities . the department of education's assistant secretary for civil rights should determine the extent to which title ix coordinators at the k - 12 level are aware of and using the tools recommended in ocr's existing guidance and any barriers preventing their use of this guidance , and use this information in ocr's efforts to encourage them to work with athletics administrators on ensuring equal athletic opportunities . we have previously reported that sports participation yields many benefits for youth , ranging from positive health outcomes to improved academic achievement to increased self - esteem , and schools are uniquely positioned to provide students with opportunities to participate in sports . ocr's core activities include responding to civil rights complaints filed by the public and conducting agency - initiated investigations to enforce federal civil rights laws ; providing technical assistance to help institutions achieve compliance with the civil rights laws that ocr enforces ; and issuing regulations and policy guidance to ensure equal access to educational opportunity . we also interviewed subject matter specialists at nine organizations , including national associations of athletics and title ix administrators ( whose membership includes title ix coordinators ) ; organizations that advocate for sports and gender equity issues ; and research centers that study these issues . you asked us to examine how public high schools encourage equal athletic opportunities for members of both sexes . standards for internal control in the federal government state that agencies should both obtain quality information from and communicate quality information to external parties to help achieve the agency's objectives and address risks . ocr's guidance suggests that uninvolved title ix coordinators are associated with serious title ix violations , but ocr does not collect information about coordinators' level of involvement with districts and schools outside of its complaint investigations and compliance reviews .
our objectives were to ( 1 ) identify the major entities that collect , store , and process medicare beneficiary data and that connect with centers for medicare and medicaid services ( cms ) systems and networks ; ( 2 ) determine whether requirements for the protection of medicare beneficiary data align with federal guidance ; and ( 3 ) assess the programs cms has in place to oversee the implementation of security protections for medicare beneficiary data .  ( recommendation 3 ) . our objectives were to ( 1 ) identify the major entities that collect , store , and process medicare beneficiary data and that connect with cms systems and networks ; ( 2 ) determine whether requirements for the protection of medicare beneficiary data align with federal guidance ; and ( 3 ) assess the programs cms has in place to oversee the implementation of security protections for medicare beneficiary data . the centers for medicare & medicaid services ( cms ) within the department of health and human services ( hhs ) is the agency responsible for overseeing the medicare program , which covers nearly 58 million aged and disabled americans , who represent approximately 18 percent of the total u.s. population . federal program spending for medicare benefits totaled approximately $696 billion for fiscal year 2016 .  ( recommendation 2 ) develop processes and procedures to ensure that qualified entities and researchers have implemented information security controls effectively throughout their agreements with cms . recent data breaches at hospitals , insurance companies , and other entities in the health care industry have highlighted the importance of ensuring the security of health information , including personally identifiable information ( pii ) , about medicare beneficiaries . if fully and effectively implemented , the intended actions should help hhs to address weaknesses in processes and procedures for ensuring the protection of medicare beneficiary data used by the department's contractors .  ( recommendation 1 ) develop processes and procedures to ensure that findings from all mac assessments are classified consistently and tracked appropriately . without more effective oversight programs in place , cms lacks full assurance that external entities are appropriately implementing security protections for medicare beneficiary data . we are making three recommendations to the administrator of the centers for medicare and medicaid services: develop and distribute guidance for researchers defining minimum security controls and implementation guidance for those controls that is consistent with nist guidance . further , cms has not established an oversight program for qualified entities and researchers to assess whether they are implementing security controls as they are required . until cms provides more comprehensive , risk - based guidance on implementing security controls to all of its external partners , there is an increased risk that researchers will not fully implement appropriate protections for medicare beneficiary data . while cms has established assessment programs for macs , the agency has much more limited security oversight mechanisms in place to ensure that qualified entities and researchers with access to medicare beneficiary data implement appropriate security controls . these include researching and monitoring the efficacy of health care treatments , payments , and analyzing the cost of health care treatments . medicare beneficiary data are created , stored , and used by a wide variety of entities , such as health care providers , insurance companies , financial institutions , academic researchers , and other federal / state agencies for a wide variety of purposes .
however , over many years , va has experienced challenges in managing its it projects and programs , raising questions about the efficiency and effectiveness of its operations and its ability to deliver intended outcomes needed to help advance the department's mission . these challenges have spanned a number of critical initiatives related to sharing electronic health record data and developing major systems , in addition to improving the efficiency of operations by closing and optimizing data centers and decommissioning antiquated legacy systems . in addition , it discusses our prior work on the department's development and use of its benefits claims processing system , the veterans benefits management system ( vbms ) , as well as our recent reports that addressed va's data center consolidation and legacy systems . thank you for the opportunity to participate in today's hearing on the information technology ( it ) modernization projects and programs at the department of veterans affairs ( va ) . as you know , the use of it is crucial to helping va effectively serve the nation's veterans and , each year , the department spends billions of dollars on its information systems and assets . at your request , my testimony today summarizes findings from a number of our reports that addressed va's efforts toward exchanging electronic health records with the department of defense ( dod ) and highlighted it challenges that have contributed to our designation of va health care as a high - risk area . we have previously reported on these and other it management challenges at the department . in developing this testimony , we relied on our previous reports , as well as information provided by the department on its actions in response to our previous recommendations . however , the department faces challenges in several key areas , including its approach to pursuing electronic health record interoperability with dod . the ipo is responsible for monitoring and reporting on va's and dod's progress in achieving interoperability and coordinating with the departments to ensure that these efforts enhance health care services . in addition , va's continued operation of two of the oldest legacy it systems in the federal government raises concern about the extent to which the department continues to spend funds on it systems that are no longer effective or cost beneficial . while we recognize that va has initiated steps to mitigate the it management weaknesses we have identified , sustained management attention and organizational commitment will be essential to ensuring that the transformation is successful and that the weaknesses are fully addressed . system availability: although vba had improved its performance regarding system availability to users , it had not established system response time goals . as such , va's approach to addressing its electronic health record system needs remains uncertain . although va has proceeded with its program to modernize vista ( known as vista evolution ) , the department's long - term plan for meeting its electronic health record system needs beyond fiscal year 2018 is uncertain . beyond modernizing vista , va has undertaken numerous initiatives with dod that were intended to advance electronic health record interoperability between the two departments . since 1998 , va has undertaken a patchwork of initiatives with dod to allow the departments' health information systems to exchange information and increase interoperability .
to assist providers , ocr has worked with onc to develop a model notice of privacy practices to help providers adequately communicate access rights to patients in a standardized , easy - to - understand way . we assessed the reliability of these data by ( 1 ) performing electronic testing of required data elements , ( 2 ) reviewing existing information about the data and the system that produced them , and ( 3 ) consulting agency officials who are knowledgeable about the data . we conducted interviews with relevant stakeholders , including representatives from seven release - of - information ( roi ) vendors and nine individuals or entities with expertise in hipaa , including hipaa lawyers in both private practice and who work in health policy . ocr ( 1 ) investigates complaints it receives from patients and others regarding access to patient medical records , ( 2 ) audits a sample of providers to determine the extent to which their policies and procedures are compliant with hipaa , ( 3 ) reports to congress on compliance with hipaa , and ( 4 ) educates patients and providers about patients' rights to access their medical records . we also interviewed officials from hhs's ocr , office of the national coordinator for health information technology ( onc ) , and office of inspector general ( oig ) . in 2016 , the department of health and human services' ( hhs ) office for civil rights ( ocr ) , which is responsible for enforcing the rights established under hipaa , issued guidance about the right of access . specifically , we interviewed individuals or entities with expertise in the topic of patients' access to health information ( referred to hereafter as experts ) , six patient advocates , representatives from four organizations that represent providers ( provider representatives ) , and representatives from seven roi vendor companies . to describe what is known about the fees charged for accessing patients' medical records , we reviewed selected hipaa requirements and implementing regulations and guidance . ocr has developed provider education videos that aim to educate providers on the rights of patients to access their medical records and how such access can enable patients to be more involved in their own care . in this report we describe 1. what is known about the fees charged for accessing patients' medical 2. challenges identified by patients and providers when patients request access to their medical records , and 3. efforts by ocr to ensure patients' access to their medical records . the report , which is issued by ocr , includes information on the patient access complaints ocr has received , the number of investigations it has conducted , and the fines ocr has levied . the hitech act directs hhs to submit an annual report to congress on compliance with hipaa that includes details about complaints of alleged violations of the privacy rule and the resolution of these complaints . the health insurance portability and accountability act of 1996 ( hipaa ) , as amended , and its implementing regulations , require hipaa - covered entities ( e.g. , providers and insurers ) to provide individuals , upon request , with access to their medical records , which contain protected health information ( e.g. , information on diagnoses , billing , medications , and test results ) .
generally , health care insurers set three types of cost - sharing parameters: ( 1 ) deductibles — costs a beneficiary is responsible for before the health insurance plan will start to pay any costs ; ( 2 ) coinsurance or copayments ( per - service payments ) once the deductible is met ; and ( 3 ) caps — limits on the maximum cost - sharing amount a beneficiary can be responsible for during a year for covered services . specifically , groups have proposed that medicare ffs's cost - sharing design be simplified and include features found in private plans ( including in medicare advantage ( ma ) , the private plan alternative to medicare ffs ) , which have evolved over time to promote prudent use of health care services and protect beneficiaries from catastrophic care costs . the direct effect of modernizing the medicare fee - for - service ( ffs ) cost - sharing design ( i.e. , the effect when holding utilization and enrollment constant ) on beneficiaries' cost - sharing responsibilities would depend on the specific revisions and the time horizon examined . gao and others have long noted concerns about the design of medicare fee - for - service ( ffs ) cost - sharing — the portion of costs for covered services that beneficiaries are responsible for when they receive care . this report describes 1. implications of the current medicare ffs cost - sharing design and options for modernizing while maintaining medicare's and beneficiaries' aggregate share of costs ; 2. how modernized cost - sharing designs could directly affect beneficiaries' cost - sharing responsibilities ; and 3. how modernized cost - sharing designs could indirectly affect beneficiaries' out - of - pocket costs . modernizing medicare's cost - sharing design would have both direct and indirect effects on beneficiaries' costs . to address these concerns , various groups have proposed revising medicare ffs's cost - sharing design , which has been largely unchanged from when medicare was enacted in 1965 . medicare ffs's cost - sharing is complicated and not well designed to discourage unnecessary use of services . these studies and experts identified several types of behavioral responses that would influence the net effect of a modernized design on beneficiaries' out - of - pocket costs , including changes in beneficiaries' demand for , and insurers' supply of , supplemental insurance ; changes in beneficiaries' utilization of services ; changes in medicare beneficiaries' enrollment in ffs versus ma ; and interactions among these and other behavioral responses , including effects on the price of supplemental insurance . the indirect and direct effects together would determine how a modernized design would affect beneficiaries' total out - of - pocket costs for covered services ( the amount of cost - sharing paid directly by the beneficiary plus the premiums ( monthly fees ) that beneficiaries pay for their medicare coverage and other supplemental insurance they may have ) . some studies have examined how modernizing medicare's cost - sharing design would affect beneficiaries financially ; however , they have primarily focused on first - year effects and may have understated the advantages to beneficiaries of adding an annual cost - sharing cap .
however , despite some improvements in the federal government's management of its personnel in recent years , strategic human capital management — and more specifically , the need for the office of personnel management ( opm ) and agencies to address skills gaps in mission critical occupations — continues to be a gao high risk area . our work has shown that a careful consideration of federal pay is essential to fiscal stewardship and is necessary to support the recruitment and retention of a talented , agile , and high - performing federal workforce . for example , of the 34 areas on our 2017 high - risk list ( excluding strategic human capital management ) , skills gaps played a role in making 15 areas high - risk , and included information technology management , and acquisitions , and veterans' health care , among others . it is congress's policy that pay for federal workers in the general schedule ( gs ) , the pay system covering the majority of federal workers , be in line with pay for comparable nonfederal workers . in 2014 , we recommended that opm ( 1 ) work with stakeholders to examine ways to modernize the classification system , ( 2 ) develop a strategy to track and prioritize occupations for review and updates , and ( 3 ) develop cost - effective methods to ensure agencies are classifying correctly . in my remarks today , i will discuss ( 1 ) lessons learned in creating a more market - driven , results - oriented approach to federal pay , and ( 2 ) opportunities in addition to pay and benefits that opm and agencies could use to be more competitive in the labor market and address skills gaps . my testimony is based on our large body of work on federal human capital management issued primarily between june 2012 and march 2017 . indeed , more effective use of hiring flexibilities , adopting leading human capital management practices , and strengthening the capacity of agencies' human resource offices could significantly improve executive branch personnel management , and thus help agencies to better carry out their missions in an era of highly constrained resources . high - performing organizations have found that the full life - cycle of human capital management activities — including workforce planning , recruitment , on - boarding , compensation , engagement , succession planning , and retirement programs — need to be fully aligned and focused on the cost - effective achievement of an organization's mission . as we noted in our 2017 high - risk update , agencies can drive improvements to their high risk areas — including strategic human capital management — through such steps as: sustained leadership commitment , including developing long - term priorities and goals , and providing continuing oversight and accountability ; ensuring agencies have adequate capacity to address their personnel issues , including collaborating with other agencies and stakeholders as appropriate ; identifying root causes of problems and developing action plans to address them , including establishing goals and performance measures ; monitoring actions by , for example , tracking performance measures and progress against goals ; and demonstrating progress by showing issues are being effectively managed and root causes are being addressed .
this testimony addresses , for calendar years 2014 through 2016 , ( 1 ) the amounts and percentages of u.s. assessed contributions to the four organizations , ( 2 ) the extent to which u.s. agencies included and documented key monitoring provisions as part of their assistance agreements , and ( 3 ) the extent to which the organizations' strategic goals align with those of u.s. agencies . state , the department of health and human services ( hhs ) , the u.s. agency for international development ( usaid ) , and the u.s. department of agriculture ( usda ) also provide project - specific voluntary contributions to the oas , paho , and iica through assistance agreements , which include grants and cooperative agreements . these organizations include the organization of american states ( oas ) , the pan american health organization ( paho ) , the inter - american institute for cooperation on agriculture ( iica ) , and the pan - american institute of geography and history ( paigh ) . in our december 2017 report , we recommended that ( 1 ) usda ensure inclusion of all monitoring provisions as part of agreements and ( 2 ) usaid and usda ensure full documentation of monitoring activities . the united states belongs to several inter - american organizations that , among other things , promote democracy , security , health care , agricultural development , and scientific exchange in the western hemisphere . we identified key monitoring provisions agencies are to include as part of their agreements as provisions that ensure oversight of the use of funds by requiring monitoring activities , such as financial and progress reports . for calendar year 2016 , the united states' assessed contributions to these four organizations totaled over $130 million , and voluntary contributions to the oas , paho , and iica totaled $32 million . according to the department of state ( state ) , the oas is the premier multilateral forum in the western hemisphere for regional dispute resolution and promotion of democratic governance . however , state took corrective action in may 2017 to address its gaps in documentation , and according to hhs officials , the food and drug administration addressed its gap in documentation by implementing its agreement monitoring program in fiscal year 2018 . for example , in 2016 , usaid approved an assistance agreement for $2 million to oas to support international observation of government elections in haiti . oas , paho , iica , and paigh have established mechanisms for overseeing their use of these funds , such as external auditors and internal audit boards as required by the standards of the institute of internal auditors . the united states also works with paho , iica , and paigh to provide technical support and guidance in areas including public health , agriculture , and cartography . for example , state did not include two of the key monitoring provisions ( a risk assessment and a monitoring plan ) in one of its agreements . in october 2013 , the united states enacted the organization of american states revitalization and reform act of 2013 ( reform act ) . the united states uses its membership in these organizations to promote u.s. interests in the western hemisphere .
in addition , we have found numerous challenges facing interior's bureau of indian education ( bie ) and bia and the department of health and human services' ( hhs ) indian health services ( ihs ) in administering education and health care services , which put the health and safety of american indians served by these programs at risk . in our prior work , we identified concerns associated with bia management of energy resources and categorized them into five broad areas: ( 1 ) oversight of bia activities ; ( 2 ) collaboration and communication ; ( 3 ) bia workforce planning ; ( 4 ) technology ; and ( 5 ) bia's data . we are adding this high - risk area in response to serious and long - standing problems in federal management of indian energy resources and administration of indian education and health care programs , which are highlighted in several of our prior reports , along with reports and testimony from inspectors general , tribal nations , special commissions , and others . in particular , we have found that the department of the interior's bureau of indian affairs ( bia ) has inefficiently managed indian energy resources and the development process and thereby limited opportunities for tribes and their members to use those resources to create economic benefits and improve the well - being of their communities . this would be consistent with the expressed view of congress as to the federal government's trust responsibilities , and strengthen confidence in the performance and accountability of our federal government . to conduct our prior work , we reviewed relevant laws , regulations , and policies ; reviewed and analyzed federal data ; and interviewed tribal , federal , and industry officials , among others . in 2016 , congress found in the indian trust asset reform act that “through treaties , statutes , and historical relations with indian tribes , the united states has undertaken a unique trust responsibility to protect and support indian tribes and indians.” as further stated in that act , the fiduciary responsibilities of the united states to indians arise in part from commitments made in treaties and agreements , under which indians surrendered claims to vast tracts of land , and this history of federal - tribal relations and understandings has benefitted the people of the united states and established “enduring and enforceable ederal obligations to which the national honor has been committed.” through improvements to federal management of programs that serve tribes and their members , agencies can improve the efficiency of federal programs under which services are provided to tribes and their members . bia's management of indian energy resources and oversight of development is to be conducted pursuant to federal law , in a manner that is consistent with the federal government's fiduciary trust responsibility to federally recognized indian tribes and their members . some tribes and their members hold abundant energy resources and have decided to develop these resources to meet the needs of their community , in part because energy development provides opportunities to improve poor living conditions , decrease high levels of poverty , and fund public services for tribal members . in addition , i will highlight several key actions that we recommended in those reports that federal agencies can take to help overcome challenges associated with the management of indian energy resources .
 ( recommendation 4 ) . according to the environmental protection agency ( epa ) , more than 300,000 indians — roughly 12 percent of the approximate total indian population of the united states — live within 3 miles of a site that has released or may release a hazardous substance . additionally , data on sites that have nai are not accurate or complete due , in part , to unclear guidance for how regions should determine whether a site has nai .  ( recommendation 2 ) the director of epa's office of superfund remediation and technology innovation should clarify agency guidance regarding tribal consultation for the superfund program to clearly identify the circumstances under which the agency should consider consulting with tribes . this report ( 1 ) examines the extent to which epa has reliable data identifying npl sites that are located on tribal property or that affect tribes , ( 2 ) examines the extent to which epa has reliable data on the agency's consultation with tribes regarding npl sites , and ( 3 ) describes what actions , if any , epa has taken to address the unique needs of tribes when making decisions about cleanup actions at npl sites . although epa has documented guidance , it is not clear about how epa officials should make determinations about designating sites as having nai . we are making the following four recommendations to epa: the director of epa's office of superfund remediation and technology innovation should develop a regular review process to ensure the quality of sems data identifying npl sites on tribal property and revise automated reports used to check the accuracy of sems data to include on tribal property data . releases of hazardous substances into the environment can create significant risks to human health and the environment , and indian tribes can face unique challenges associated with exposure to such substances . to examine the extent to which epa has reliable data identifying npl sites that are located on tribal property or that affect tribes , we obtained epa data on npl sites currently proposed , final , or deleted , that ( 1 ) epa data indicate are associated with indian tribes , ( 2 ) the agency has determined to have native american interest ( nai ) , and ( 3 ) epa officials told us may be within 10 miles of tribal property . epa policies and guidance epa policy for the administration of environmental programs on indian reservations ( 1984 ) .  ( recommendation 1 ) the assistant administrator of epa's office of land and emergency management should clarify guidance to regional offices on how to determine whether sites have nai , including by adding criteria for when a site should be designated as having nai in the sems database and how , if at all , to adjust sems data if a tribe is no longer interested in a site . this appendix provides information on the site - wide cleanup status of national priorities list ( npl ) sites with known native american interest ( nai ) , as of december 2017 . without developing such a review process , epa will not have reasonable assurance that regional officials have accurately identified the sites that are on tribal property .
our objectives were to evaluate ( 1 ) the department of homeland security's ( dhs ) process for developing and overseeing the implementation of binding operational directives ( directives ) and ( 2 ) the effectiveness of the directives , including agencies' implementation of directive requirements . recognizing the importance of effective policies for securing federal information and systems , congress passed the federal information security modernization act of 2014 ( fisma ) , which granted new authorities to the department of homeland security ( dhs ) for administering the implementation of agency information security policies and practices . the specific objectives of our review were to evaluate ( 1 ) dhs's process for developing and overseeing the implementation of binding operational directives and ( 2 ) the effectiveness of the binding operational directives , including agencies' implementation of the directive requirements . federal agencies depend on information technology ( it ) systems to carry out critical operations and to process essential data . since 2015 , dhs has issued eight such directives to address vulnerabilities impacting federal civilian agencies .  ( recommendation 4 ) . the federal government's development , implementation , and enforcement of policies that mitigate unauthorized access to these systems and unauthorized disclosure of the information they contain are vital to securing federal information systems . the challenges included ( 1 ) outdated systems that require costly updates or replacements before they can be brought into full compliance ; ( 2 ) the lack of specialized expertise to address technical requirements ; ( 3 ) the complexity of achieving full dmarc compliance ; and ( 4 ) general issues associated with addressing weaknesses in agency hvas .  ( recommendation 2 ) the secretary of homeland security should ensure that the binding operational directive performance metric for addressing vulnerabilities identified by high value asset assessments aligns with the process dhs has established . federal civilian agencies have made many significant improvements in cybersecurity by implementing the directives' requirements . these directives require agencies to safeguard federal information and information systems from a known or reasonably suspected information security threat , vulnerability , or risk . specifically , fisma authorized the secretary of homeland security , in consultation with the director of the office of management and budget ( omb ) , to develop and oversee the implementation of compulsory directives to federal civilian agencies — referred to as binding operational directives ( directives ) . given these shortcomings , dhs has been reassessing key aspects of the hva program . however , the risks to these systems are increasing , including insider threats from malicious or unwitting employees , escalating cyber threats from around the globe , and the emergence of new and more destructive attacks . further , dhs has only completed about half of the required assessments for fiscal year 2019 . however , an important performance metric for addressing vulnerabilities identified by hva assessments does not align with the process dhs has established . without such a schedule and plan , agencies may continue to face increased and prolonged cybersecurity threats . in addition , dhs does not plan to issue the guidance , standards , and methodologies on tier 2 and 3 systems until at least the end of fiscal year 2020 .
this report addresses ( 1 ) the progress the department of defense ( dod ) has made to implement selected oversight reforms for major defense acquisition programs ; ( 2 ) how dod has used middle - tier acquisition pathways and the extent to which dod has developed guidance on middle - tier program oversight ; and ( 3 ) challenges dod faces related to reform implementation . this report addresses ( 1 ) the progress dod has made to implement selected oversight reforms related to major defense acquisition programs ; ( 2 ) how dod has used middle - tier acquisition pathways and the extent to which dod has developed guidance on middle - tier program oversight ; and ( 3 ) challenges dod faces related to reform implementation . many of the department of defense's ( dod ) major defense acquisition programs face challenges delivering innovative technologies to the warfighter to keep pace with evolving threats . in the national defense authorization acts for fiscal years 2016 and 2017 , congress included numerous reforms that could help to streamline acquisition oversight and field capabilities faster .  ( recommendation 4 ) . this report also includes an assessment of dod's efforts to implement our previous portfolio management recommendations and identifies opportunities and challenges related to portfolio management that dod may face as it continues to implement acquisition reforms . second , dod has yet to address persistent portfolio management challenges that affect its ability to effectively manage its portfolio of weapon system investments . dod is beginning to monitor the implementation of certain reforms , but has yet to establish processes to assess the overall effectiveness of its reform efforts . in congressional hearings in 2017 and 2018 , the chairmen of the senate and house armed services committees emphasized the importance of these reforms and expressed concerns that without improving the speed of and increasing the amount of innovation in the dod acquisition process , the u.s. military would lose its technological advantage . middle - tier acquisition programs are generally exempt from dod's traditional acquisition and requirements development policies . to assess the progress dod has made to implement selected oversight reforms for major defense acquisition programs , we analyzed three selected reforms that affect processes related to dod's oversight of major defense acquisition programs: designating military departments to be the milestone decision conducting independent technical risk assessments ; and establishing cost , fielding , and performance goals . lastly , dod has yet to develop processes to assess the effectiveness of recent reforms . collectively , the reforms congress put forth fundamentally altered roles and responsibilities for major defense acquisition program oversight to give significantly more authority for managing acquisition programs to the military departments . you asked us to examine dod's efforts to implement provisions to streamline acquisition oversight included in the national defense authorization acts for fiscal years 2016 and 2017 . further , the reforms included an alternative acquisition process for programs intended to field capabilities within 2 to 5 years — a process referred to as middle - tier acquisition . in fact , these recommendations may take on more importance for dod in light of the implementation of acquisition reforms that will further diffuse responsibility for initiating and overseeing acquisition programs .
the objectives of this report were to ( 1 ) examine the extent to which high schools of different poverty levels offer courses to prepare students academically for college and ( 2 ) describe challenges that students in high - poverty schools face in being prepared to attend college . specifically , we ( 1 ) examined the extent to which high schools of different poverty levels offer courses to prepare students academically for college , and ( 2 ) described challenges that students in high - poverty schools face in being prepared to attend college . education and the department of justice ( justice ) promote equitable access to education resources as part of their missions in two key ways: ( 1 ) conducting investigations of discrimination complaints ; ( 2 ) issuing guidance on ways to address potential disparities ; and ( 3 ) providing technical assistance . however , the low rates of degree attainment for low - income students raises questions about whether the students who wish to pursue higher education have access to courses that support their admission to college . to determine the extent to which schools offer courses to prepare students academically for college , we analyzed u.s. department of education ( education ) data on course offerings , among other things , on the nation's public schools . you asked us to review the spectrum of college preparatory course offerings available in high - poverty schools and challenges students in these schools face preparing for college . students from low - income families earn bachelor's degrees at rates that are significantly lower than their more affluent peers . college initiatives to improve access and retention . this is concerning because higher levels of education are associated with higher lifetime earnings , and a bachelor's degree , in particular , can be a powerful tool for lifting individuals out of poverty . specifically , we analyzed data from education's school year 2015-16 , the most recent available , civil rights data collection ( crdc ) , which collects data on course offerings in schools , among other things , such as characteristics of students attending schools ( e.g. , race , sex , disability ) , school type ( e.g. , traditional , charter ) , and school size . similarly , another study found that adults with a bachelor's degree or higher are more likely to report that they are at least doing okay financially than those with a high school degree or less . specifically , living in poverty is linked with negative conditions for children at home , in schools , and in neighborhoods and communities , and can include substandard housing , homelessness , inadequate nutrition and food insecurity , inadequate home - based child care , increased health care costs , and unsafe neighborhoods . poverty can adversely affect academic and other outcomes in profound ways . not all students are interested in pursuing a 4-year college degree . california state university ( csu ) – los angeles , as well as other csu campuses , has a program to help improve access and retention of low - income and educationally disadvantaged students . one study found that among individuals who started out in the lowest 20 percent income group , those earning a college degree were over four times more likely to move to the highest income group than those who did not finish college .
 ( recommendation 13 ) . the department of defense ( dod ) operates public industrial installations that maintain , overhaul , and repair its multitude of complex weapon systems and equipment . the objectives of this report are to evaluate: 1 ) the condition of depot facilities and equipment , their relationship to depot performance , and the services' tracking of the relationship to depot performance ; and 2 ) the extent to which dod and the services have developed an approach for guiding depot investments to address key challenges . finally , having regular reporting of progress will help ensure dod leadership and the congress have the information needed to help make critical funding and policy decisions . to maintain these systems and equipment , dod uses a combination of private - sector contractors and public industrial installations that are government - owned and government - operated . this mix of weapon systems and their maintenance needs is continually changing as new weapon systems replace older ones and systems in the field are modified with newer and better technologies . in fiscal year 2007 , congress enacted a law requiring each military department to invest in the capital budgets of its depots no less than 6 percent of the average total dollar value of the combined maintenance , repair , and overhaul workload to its depots for the preceding 3 fiscal years . dod annually requests appropriations from congress for investment in these depots and , from fiscal year 2007 to fiscal year 2017 , the army , navy , air force , and marine corps have collectively invested over $13 billion in their depots . for our first objective , we analyzed service reports and performance metrics for the 21 depots from fiscal year 2007 through fiscal year 2017 . improving readiness is one of dod's top priorities . recognizing that existing depot facilities may not be ideally configured to efficiently and effectively support the services' readiness needs , senate report 115-262 , accompanying a proposed bill for the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2019 , included a provision directing the secretaries of the army , navy and air force to submit an engineering master plan for optimal placement and consolidation of facilities and major equipment , as well as an investment strategy addressing the facilities , major equipment and infrastructure requirements of depots under the jurisdiction of each service . senate report 115-125 , accompanying a proposed bill for the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2018 , included a provision for us to examine the investment in and performance of the service depots . an approach focused on the implementation of efforts aimed at desired outcomes could better position dod and the services to make sustained progress . dod has not developed a process to oversee the implementation of the services' depot optimization plans or provide reporting on depot investment effectiveness to dod decision makers and congress . however , these reports do not inform congress about several key points , including whether the service depots are becoming more effective and efficient or the extent to which dod has managed to address depot investment backlogs . reporting on progress towards desired outcomes also could assist in ensuring that there is accountability within the department for reversing years of decline and reaching the challenging goals set by the secretary of defense for improving mission capability rates and reducing operating and support costs .
my statement today focuses on the status of va's efforts to address its high - risk designations and open gao recommendations in the following areas: ( 1 ) managing risks and improving va health care ; ( 2 ) va acquisition management ; ( 3 ) improving and modernizing federal disability programs ; and ( 4 ) other government - wide high - risk areas that have direct implications for va and its operations . however , important recommendations remain unimplemented ( open ) , and we continue to identify similar deficiencies in recent and ongoing work . we categorized these recommendations into nine areas: ( 1 ) veterans' access to timely health care ; ( 2 ) veterans' community care program ; ( 3 ) human capital management ; ( 4 ) information technology ; ( 5 ) appeals reform for disability benefits ; ( 6 ) quality of care and patient safety ; ( 7 ) national policy documents ; ( 8 ) contracting policies and practices ; and ( 9 ) veterans' access to burial options . to address these deficiencies , we have made over 1,200 recommendations to va since 2000 ; va has implemented approximately 70 percent of them . we , along with va's inspector general and other entities , continue to identify significant deficiencies in va's governance structures and operations — all of which can affect the care provided to our nation's veterans . i am pleased to be here today to discuss the department of veterans affairs' ( va ) efforts to address longstanding management challenges . fully addressing these open recommendations could significantly improve va operations ; however , the recommendations highlight issues that are symptomatic of broader , systemic management and oversight challenges that will only be addressed through transformative action . va is in need of transformation . this list focuses attention on government operations that are most vulnerable to fraud , waste , abuse , or mismanagement , or in need of transformation . congress has also acted to drive overarching change by , for example , passing the va mission act of 2018 ( va mission act ) . for example , va is currently implementing its modernization plan , a framework through which the department intends to systemically overhaul its structure , culture , governance , and systems through organizational improvements . as a result of these challenges , we added several va programs to our high - risk list . in march 2019 , we sent a letter to the secretary of va that detailed 30 open recommendations that we deem the highest priority for implementation ( priority recommendations ) . secretary wilkie has said that va is committed to addressing our high - risk concerns and has launched several transformational efforts . specifically , more than 125 recommendations related to va health care remain open , including 17 recommendations that have remained open for 3 years or more ; 15 recommendations related to improving va acquisition management remain open , including 1 recommendation that has remained open for 3 years or more ; and 12 recommendations related to management of disability claims workloads . this statement also describes va's ongoing efforts to transform and modernize the department .
 ( recommendation 9 ) . fema and the u.s. army corps of engineers ( usace ) — components of the department of homeland security ( dhs ) and the department of defense ( dod ) , respectively — used advance contracts to procure goods and services provided in response to the catastrophic disasters the united states experienced in 2017: hurricanes harvey , irma , and maria ; and the california wildfires . the post - katrina emergency management reform act of 2006 ( pkemra ) required the federal emergency management agency ( fema ) to establish advance contracts — those that are established prior to disasters and that are typically needed to quickly provide life - sustaining goods and services in the immediate aftermath of disasters . these weaknesses were: ( 1 ) challenges in fema's acquisition planning ; ( 2 ) limited record keeping or management of certain fema contracts ; and ( 3 ) incomplete reporting on fema's advance contract actions to certain congressional committees .  ( recommendation 8 ) fema's administrator should ensure the head of the contracting activity communicates information on available advance contracts through the centralized resource to states and localities to inform their advance contracting efforts . contracts play a key role in immediate disaster response and longer - term community recovery . this report specifically addresses the use of advance contracts , assessing the extent to which ( 1 ) fema and usace used advance contracts , ( 2 ) the planning , management , and reporting of selected fema and usace advance contracts met certain contracting requirements , and ( 3 ) fema and usace identified any lessons learned and challenges with their use of these contracts . these include the need for: ( 1 ) additional advance contracts for certain goods and services ; ( 2 ) flexibility to increase contract ceilings ; ( 3 ) use of usace's debris removal advance contracts to respond to the california wildfires ; and ( 4 ) federal coordination and information sharing with state and local governments on advance contracts . this report reviews the federal government's contracting efforts for preparedness , response , and recovery efforts related to the three 2017 hurricanes and california wildfires . in september 2015 , we found issues related to the use of advance contracts , specifically that fema's contracting officers had limited awareness about advance contract requirements and how to coordinate advance contracting efforts with state and local governments . we also found that dhs and dod accounted for about 97 percent of those obligations . you asked us to review the federal government's contracting efforts for preparedness , response , and recovery efforts related to the three 2017 hurricanes and california wildfires . this report specifically addresses the use of advance contracts , assessing the extent to which ( 1 ) the federal emergency management agency ( fema ) and the u.s. army corps of engineers ( usace ) used advance contracts , ( 2 ) the planning , management , and reporting of selected fema and usace advance contracts met certain contracting requirements , and ( 3 ) fema and usace identified any lessons learned and challenges with their use of these contracts . in february 2018 , we found that early estimates for hurricanes harvey , irma , and maria placed them among the costliest hurricanes in terms of federal contract obligations since 2005 , when tracking this information by hurricane began .
the objectives of this study were to determine: ( 1 ) what are the incidence and amount of retirement savings being withdrawn early ; ( 2 ) what is known about the factors that might lead individuals to access their retirement savings early ; and ( 3 ) what strategies or policies , if any , might reduce the incidence and amount of early withdrawals of retirement savings . this report examines: ( 1 ) the incidence and amount of retirement savings being withdrawn early ; ( 2 ) what is known about the factors that might lead individuals to access their retirement savings early ; and ( 3 ) what strategies or policies , if any , might reduce the incidence and amount of early withdrawals of retirement savings . federal law encourages u.s. workers to save for retirement by authorizing tax incentives for the predominant forms of retirement savings in the united states — employer - sponsored defined contribution ( dc ) plans like 401 ( k ) plans and individual retirement accounts ( ira ) .  ( recommendation 1 ) . federal law also allows workers to access assets in employer - sponsored 401 ( k ) plans before retirement under certain circumstances , such as financial hardship . you asked us to examine various aspects of early withdrawals of retirement savings from both iras and 401 ( k ) plans . to examine the incidence and amount of early withdrawals from individual retirement accounts ( ira ) and 401 ( k ) plans , we analyzed the most recent nationally representative data available in three relevant federal data sources , focusing our analysis on individuals in their prime working years ( ages 25 to 55 ) , when possible . in 2017 , dc plans and iras reportedly held investments worth nearly $17 trillion dollars . second , to examine the incidence and amount of early withdrawals from 401 ( k ) plans , we analyzed the most recently available data on individuals collected in 2013 for the 2014 panel of the u.s. census bureau's survey of income and program participation ( sipp ) , along with its social security administration ( ssa ) supplement . while such withdrawals occur for various reasons and can help workers facing financial difficulties , they can also affect a worker's long - term retirement security by reducing account assets and subjecting withdrawn amounts to additional taxation . without clear data on the incidence of these loan offsets , which plan sponsors are generally required to include , ( but not itemize ) on the form 5500 , the overall extent of unrepaid plan loans in 401 ( k ) plans cannot be known . to examine the incidence and amount of early withdrawals from iras and 401 ( k ) plans , we analyzed the most recent nationally representative data available from three relevant federal sources focusing on individuals ages 25 to 55 , when possible . they noted that any of these proposed strategies , if implemented , could ( 1 ) increase the costs of administering iras and plans , ( 2 ) require changes to federal law or regulations , and ( 3 ) involve tradeoffs between providing access to retirement savings and preserving savings for retirement .
the environmental protection agency ( epa ) is responsible for reviewing the environmental and health effects of chemicals in commerce and chemicals that have yet to enter commerce . epa's ability to effectively implement its mission of protecting public health and the environment depends on its credible and timely assessments of the risks posed by chemicals . epa stated that during these meetings they discuss their organizations' operations and performance , including tsca implementation status , using performance charts to track progress on mission measures , identify and update countermeasures , and resolve problems . rather , the company has decided to pursue commercialization in europe , which will enable the company to deliver the benefits of this new technology to their customers in the european market sooner than is possible in the united states . this report describes ( 1 ) the extent to which the iris program has addressed identified challenges and made progress toward producing chemical assessments and ( 2 ) the extent to which epa has demonstrated progress , if at all , implementing tsca , and the key challenges that remain . epa also faces challenges in developing guidance to ensure consistency in implementing the law . the agency's integrated risk information system ( iris ) program identifies and characterizes the health hazards of chemicals and produces chemical assessments that contain this information . in its written comments , epa stated that while the draft comprehensively describes the challenges facing the tsca and iris programs , it does not appropriately address epa's extensive progress in implementing tsca , and epa recommended that our final report include information regarding its accomplishments under the new law . however , epa does not expect a budget shortfall in fiscal year 2019 because , according to officials , they ( 1 ) have funds available from 2018 to support fiscal year 2019 needs , ( 2 ) receive support from other epa offices like the office of general counsel and the office of research and development , ( 3 ) expect fiscal year 2019 costs to be lower than the 3-year average described in the fees rule , and ( 4 ) expect some indirect costs to be covered by non - tsca budget categories . specifically , we report on the steps epa has taken to respond to the requirements of the law because in many instances , whether epa's response is legally sufficient is in litigation , and gao does not typically express a view on legal or factual matters in dispute before a court . the toxic substances control act of 1976 ( tsca ) provides epa with the authority to review chemicals already in commerce ( existing chemicals ) and chemicals yet to enter commerce ( new chemicals ) , obtain more information on the effects of chemicals on human health and the environment , and regulate those that epa determines pose unreasonable risks to human health or the environment . the iris program has addressed many process challenges , such as by making changes to address the length of time it takes to develop chemical assessments and to increase transparency , but epa has not made progress toward producing chemical assessments . currently more than 40,000 active chemical substances exist in commerce in the united states , with more new chemicals submitted to epa for review every year .
since its establishment , the department of homeland security ( dhs ) has had authority to issue regulations with respect to the issuance and refusal of visas . other federal entities , such as the office of the director of national intelligence's ( odni ) national counterterrorism center ( nctc ) and the department of justice's ( doj ) federal bureau of investigation ( fbi ) , also contribute to the niv screening and vetting process by providing intelligence and information against which applicants are screened , among other activities . the data fields we analyzed included month and year of adjudication ; type of niv ; location of application ; applicant nationality ; outcome of application ( e.g. , issuance and refusal ) ; and , if applicable , reason for refusal . consequently , this version only includes information on objectives ( 1 ) outcomes and characteristics of adjudicated niv applications from fiscal years 2012 through 2017 , and ( 2 ) key changes to the niv screening and vetting process in response to executive actions taken in calendar year 2017 and related guidance . vetting: researching and investigating screened applicants with possible matches in those databases or based on other criteria . key visa adjudication process terms screening: reviewing visa application information for matches to derogatory information in relevant databases . had been fragmented across several u.s. government databases . among other things , the responsibilities included: ( 1 ) a review of information needed for visa adjudication ; ( 2 ) the development of uniform screening standards for immigration programs ; and ( 3 ) implementation of enhanced visa screening and vetting protocols and procedures . federal agencies have reported that they have taken actions to address these weaknesses in the security of the niv process . further , recent events have also highlighted the increased threat of one group of high - risk individuals , namely foreign fighters — individuals who leave home , travel abroad to terrorist safe havens , and join or assist violent extremist groups . dhs , odni , and state deemed some of the information in that report to be sensitive but unclassified , law enforcement sensitive , or for official use only , which must be protected from public disclosure . there are many nonimmigrant visas ( niv ) , which are issued to foreign nationals such as tourists , business visitors , and students seeking temporary admission into the united states . in light of continued concerns about the security of the visa process , you asked us to review the niv screening and vetting process . according to dhs office of policy officials , efforts to implement national security presidential memorandum 9 , such as the development of an implementation plan , are ongoing as of june 2018 . the department of state ( state ) is responsible for the adjudication of niv applications , and manages the application process at u.s. embassies and consulates overseas in coordination with several departments and agencies . to identify outcomes and characteristics of adjudicated niv applications from fiscal years 2012 through 2017 , we analyzed state niv data for fiscal years 2012 through 2017 — the most recently available full year data . implementation of new visa screening and vetting protocols and procedures .
this report examines ( 1 ) how prices compared for selected categories of consumer goods that are differentiated for men and women , and potential reasons for any significant price differences ; ( 2 ) what is known about the extent to which men and women may pay different prices in , or experience different levels of access to , markets for credit and goods and services that are not differentiated based on gender ; ( 3 ) the extent to which federal agencies have identified and taken steps to address any concerns about gender - related price differences ; and ( 4 ) state and local government efforts to address concerns about gender - related price differences . while manufacturing , marketing , or other cost differences may contribute to gender - related price differences , some policymakers have raised concerns that gender bias may play a role . gender - related price differences can occur when manufacturers differentiate their products to appeal separately to female and male consumers , such as with clothing , personal care products , toys , and other consumer goods . this report examines ( 1 ) how prices compared for selected categories of consumer goods that are differentiated for men and women , and potential reasons for any significant price differences ; ( 2 ) what is known about the extent to which men and women may pay different prices in , or experience different levels of access to , markets for credit and goods and services that are not differentiated based on gender ; ( 3 ) the extent to which federal agencies have identified and taken steps to address any concerns about gender - related price differences ; and ( 4 ) state and local government efforts to address concerns about gender - related price differences . we selected a random sample of gender - related consumer complaints from three databases managed by the bureau of consumer financial protection ( bcfp ) , the federal trade commission ( ftc ) , and the department of housing and urban development ( hud ) , respectively , and counted the number of complaints alleging a perceived gender - related price difference . in addition , businesses may offer different prices to female and male consumers for services , such as dry cleaning or haircuts , to account for different costs , different consumer preferences , or other factors associated with providing services to different genders . you asked us to review gender - related price differences for goods and services sold in the u.s. marketplace . we used a multivariate regression model to estimate the effect of gender ( to which a product is targeted to ) on the price of that product while controlling for other factors that may also affect the product's price . in addition , we interviewed agency officials from bcfp , ftc , hud , and the department of justice ( doj ) , as well as industry experts and academics , on gender - related price differences . moreover , if female and male consumers pay different prices for similar products that they purchase frequently , such as personal care products , this could result in substantial differences in expenditures by gender over time . to learn about the potential extent of consumer concerns about price differences that could be based solely on gender or sex , we analyzed federal data on consumer complaints and investigations .
 ( recommendation 6 ) . this review addresses ( 1 ) the extent to which fema and the red cross effectively coordinated mass care in response to the 2017 hurricanes , and ( 2 ) the extent to which fema supported and used state and local assessments of mass care capabilities for the 2017 hurricanes . hurricanes harvey , irma , and maria — which all made landfall within a 4-week time period — caused a combined $265 billion in damage , and each ranks among the five costliest hurricanes on record , according to the federal emergency management agency ( fema ) , a component of the department of homeland security ( dhs ) .  ( recommendation 3 ) to ensure more accurate mass care capability assessments , fema should require grantees to solicit capabilities information from key mass care service - delivery providers in making capability estimates and identify these providers in their submissions . this report is also part of gao's comprehensive evaluation of the federal government's preparedness , response , and recovery efforts related to hurricanes harvey , irma , and maria . fema has an opportunity to use its review of capability assessments to improve its ability to assist with future disasters .  ( recommendation 4 ) to build the emergency preparedness capabilities of grantees , fema should develop systematic , documented protocols to determine the conditions under which it will follow up and provide feedback to grantees about mass care capability assessments . three catastrophic hurricanes affected over 28 million people living in texas , florida , puerto rico , and the u.s. virgin islands during the summer and fall of 2017 . fema and the american red cross ( red cross ) are the primary agencies responsible for coordinating mass care under the federal disaster response framework . we are making a total of six recommendations , including the following recommendation to the secretary of homeland security: to strengthen the mass care response to future disasters , the secretary of homeland security should direct fema to periodically review the current structure of esf - 6 leadership roles and responsibilities for coordinating mass care . fema reported that the extraordinary scale and rapid succession of these hurricanes led to unprecedented demands to feed and shelter those affected by the storms , and complicated efforts to distribute supplies , which are key components of mass care after disasters . department of homeland security - federal emergency management department of homeland security - federal emergency management support agencies with roles directly related to mass care ( feeding , sheltering , supply distribution , and family reunification ) : corporation for national and community service department of defense / u.s. army corps of engineers department of health and human services department of homeland security department of veterans affairs national center for missing & exploited children national voluntary organizations active in disaster ( national voad ) .  ( recommendation 5 ) we are also making the following recommendation to the american red cross: to ensure assistance reaches all survivors , red cross should develop mechanisms for it and its partners to leverage local community groups , such as conducting regular outreach to communicate and regularly share aggregate information with these groups . however , stakeholders have raised questions about the provision of mass care services by federal , state , local , and voluntary responders , particularly for populations such as low - income families , the elderly , and individuals who have disabilities .
 ( recommendation 6 ) . at a minimum , this strategy should establish time frames and performance metrics for addressing risks related to ( 1 ) unfilled real property positions , ( 2 ) a lack of a department - wide approach to improving its data , and ( 3 ) implementation of osd's expanded data platform . the department of defense ( dod ) manages a portfolio of real property assets that reportedly included about 568,000 facilities with a combined plant replacement value of about $1 trillion and nearly 27.2 million acres of land in fiscal year 2016 . for this report , we evaluated the extent to which ( 1 ) rpad accurately and completely reflects dod's real property assets ; ( 2 ) dod has processes to help ensure the accuracy and completeness in recording and reporting real property data ; and ( 3 ) dod has addressed the risks that may affect use of real property information for managing its assets .  ( recommendation 5 ) the secretary of defense should ensure that the undersecretary of defense for acquisition and sustainment , in collaboration with the military services , develops a strategy that identifies and addresses risks to data quality and information accessibility . each of the military services and dod's washington headquarters services ( whs ) maintains its own data systems that include information about each of the real property assets . in january 2018 , the under secretary of defense ( comptroller ) testified that reform efforts within dod , such as those occurring in real property management , were dependent upon accurate data and that not having accurate data complicates those efforts . dod has begun to implement actions in response to our recommendations but has not fully completed the corrective actions . dod's efforts to reform its real property management is complicated by not having quality data on its large inventory of assets — over 568,000 facilities with an estimated combined plant replacement value of about $1 trillion . dod also has not developed a strategy that establishes time frames and performance metrics to address risks to data quality and information accessibility . in written comments , dod concurred with four recommendations and partially concurred with three recommendations . specifically , dod faces risks related to unfilled real property positions , a lack of a department - wide approach to improving data , and a limited plan for implementation of osd's expanded data platform . an accurate and complete inventory of its assets is essential for dod to make informed management decisions about its real property . without a strategy to address these risks , dod is missing an opportunity to ensure that the information needed for effective decision making , such as budget decisions and oversight by congress , is available to meet real property accountability and reporting objectives and to avoid inefficient and potentially costly workarounds , such as additional data calls to installations . for example , in 1997 , we added dod's defense support infrastructure to our list of high - risk areas in the federal government — due in part to long standing challenges it faces in managing its infrastructure — to include the need to improve the quality of its information in its inventory data systems .
the department of homeland security ( dhs ) invests billions of dollars each year in major acquisition programs to assist in executing its many critical missions . this report discusses ( 1 ) how often selected department of homeland security ( dhs ) programs changed requirements ; and assesses the extent to which the selected components have ( 2 ) developed policies for requirements development , ( 3 ) established independent requirements organizations , and ( 4 ) taken steps to assess and train a requirements workforce .  ( recommendation 25 ) . in november 2014 , in response to a gao recommendation , the department reestablished the joint requirements council ( jrc ) that the department had dissolved in 2006 , to review requirements submitted by dhs's component agencies ( e.g. , the transportation security administration ) . this report discusses ( 1 ) how often selected programs changed requirements ; and assesses the extent to which the selected components have ( 2 ) developed policies for requirements development , ( 3 ) established independent requirements organizations , and ( 4 ) taken steps to assess and train a requirements workforce . the purpose of the council is to validate and prioritize operational requirements — those capabilities that are necessary to conduct dhs's mission — for all major acquisitions and to ensure that objective , analytical rigor supports these requirements . we subsequently found that several programs did not meet their key performance parameters — the most important requirements a capability must meet — after initial approval by dhs and deployed capabilities prior to meeting all of their key performance parameters , leaving their true capabilities in doubt . in its comments , dhs concurred with all 25 of our recommendations and identified actions it plans to take to address them . dhs leadership acknowledged that the department has had difficulty defining key performance parameters , and said that the office of program accountability and risk management has improved its ability to help programs define key performance parameters .  ( recommendation 24 ) in addition , the secretary of dhs should ensure that training for requirements development is consistent by establishing training and certification standards for dhs and the components' requirements development workforces . national flood insurance program pivot ( not an acronym ) : federal emergency management agency officials told us that the current attempt is the third effort to modernize its information technology systems after two failed attempts . to inform each of our objectives , we interviewed officials at various levels throughout dhs to understand both their relationship to and role in components' requirements development , including: ( 1 ) department - level , ( 2 ) component - level , ( 3 ) program - level , and ( 4 ) program end users . poorly defined key performance parameters can increase the risk that end users — such as border patrol agents or first responders in a disaster — receive capabilities that do not meet their missions . dhs initially established its acquisition process in policy in november 2008 . however , dhs remains at risk until such training and certification are fully implemented throughout dhs and its components . once programs begin , requirements should not change without assessing their potential disruption to the program .
this report examines ( 1 ) how the size and scope of federal trust funds and other dedicated funds in the federal budget have changed over time , ( 2 ) the extent to which federal trust funds and other dedicated funds are supported by their dedicated collections , and ( 3 ) the extent to which federal trust funds and other dedicated funds support mandatory programs , including major entitlement programs . this report examines: ( 1 ) how the size and scope of federal trust funds and other dedicated funds in the federal budget have changed over time , ( 2 ) the extent to which federal trust funds and other dedicated funds are supported by their dedicated collections , and ( 3 ) the extent to which federal trust funds and other dedicated funds support mandatory programs , including major entitlement programs . for example , collections from federal fuel taxes are credited to the highway trust fund and used to build and maintain the nation's highways and bridges . some of the largest federal programs , including medicare , social security , and postal services , are funded through trust funds and other dedicated funds , which link collections that have been dedicated to a specific purpose with the expenditures of those collections . trends and projections in the inflows , outflows , and balances of these funds can provide signals about the financial health of individual funds and the impact of these funds as a group on the overall federal fiscal condition . entitlement authority is a provision of law that requires payments to any person or unit of government that meets the eligibility criteria established by law ( see textbox ) . mandatory spending is a large and growing part of the federal budget . although trust funds and other dedicated funds have their own dedicated collections and the ability to retain accumulated balances , these collections do not necessarily fund the full current or future cost of the government's commitments to the designated beneficiaries . to provide a complete count of these funds , including accounts with small balances that fall below omb's $1 million reporting threshold , we used data from the department of the treasury ( treasury ) fiscal year 2018 combined statement of receipts , outlays , and balances of the united states government ( combined statement ) . to examine trends in the size and scope of federal trust funds and other dedicated funds , we used omb budget data to identify the income , outgo ( i.e. , outlays and transfers to another government account ) , and balances for all trust funds and other dedicated funds reported in omb's budget database for fiscal years 2014 to 2018 in nominal terms . you asked us to review issues related to federal trust funds and other dedicated funds . trust funds and other dedicated funds may receive income from general revenues — collections that are not dedicated by law for a specific purpose — in addition to their dedicated collections . we previously reported that , in fiscal year 1999 , trust fund collections represented nearly half of all federal budget collections and that most trust funds and other dedicated funds had mandatory budget authority , which , in general provides authority to spend collections without further appropriation .
 ( recommendation 2 ) . highway and transit projects that use federal funds are subject to federal requirements , including requirements under the national environmental policy act ( nepa ) , to analyze the potential environmental effects of proposed projects ; such evaluations are called environmental impact statements or environmental assessments , which we refer to in this report as “environmental reviews” . our work focused on federal - aid highway and transit projects and the provisions included in the past three surface - transportation reauthorizations that are intended to streamline the environmental consulting and permitting processes performed by the three federal resource agencies: fish and wildlife service ( fws ) , national marine fisheries service ( nmfs ) , and the u.s. army corps of engineers ( corps ) . in addition , other environmental protection laws sometimes require “federal resource agencies” — such as the u.s. army corps of engineers ( corps ) , the u.s . the past three surface transportation reauthorization acts — the safe , accountable , flexible , efficient transportation equity act: a legacy for users ( safetea - lu ) in 2005 , the moving ahead for progress in the 21st century act ( map - 21 ) in 2012 , and the fixing america's surface transportation act ( fast act ) in 2015 — contain a number of provisions aimed at accelerating the environmental review process for highway and transit projects . this report: addresses the extent to which identified streamlining provisions have had an impact on the time frames for the environmental consulting and permitting processes ; identifies actions taken by federal resource agencies to streamline their consulting and permitting reviews and identifies additional streamlining opportunities , if any ; and describes the actions taken by ceq to accelerate highway and transit projects . fish and wildlife service ( fws ) , and the national marine fisheries service ( nmfs ) — to issue permit decisions or perform consultations before a project can proceed . for transportation projects , including highway and transit projects , additional streamlining provisions have been enacted for environmental reviews . the fast act included provisions for us to assess , among other things , the extent to which the streamlining provisions in the three most recent transportation reauthorization acts have improved and accelerated the environmental permitting and consulting processes for highway and transit projects . in addition , the council on environmental quality ( ceq ) , an executive office of the white house established in nepa , is responsible for overseeing nepa implementation and issues regulations and guidance that , among other things , are intended to make environmental reviews more efficient . fws and nmfs do not have adequate internal control procedures in place to ensure accurate and reliable data and cannot accurately assess their ability to meet statutory and regulatory requirements for completing consultations and issuing biological opinions . furthermore , agency and government - wide efforts to track major infrastructure projects , such as the planned office of management and budget performance tracking system , will be hindered without accurate and reliable data . although fws and nmfs are in the process of upgrading their data systems , the agencies do not have documented plans or time frames that identify what controls they will use to ensure accurate data on the time taken for consultation reviews .
 ( recommendation 3 ) . in january 2016 , the department of justice ( doj ) justice management division ( jmd ) completed a review of usms hiring and promotion policies and procedures and found several deficiencies .  ( recommendation 2 ) develop and implement an agency - wide action plan to more fully understand and address areas where employees express negative perceptions of the merit promotion process . between february 2015 and november 2016 more than 85 united states marshals service ( usms ) employees made allegations that usms officials engaged in improper promotion practices — such as routinely pre - selecting favored candidates and offering detail assignments to certain individuals based on non - merit factors — among others .  ( recommendation 1 ) develop and implement a mechanism to provide specific feedback to employees on the results of the promotion process , including their readiness for promotion . specifically , investigations in 2014 and 2015 found evidence of nepotism and employee misconduct . in recent years , several internal and external investigations have substantiated several allegations . we recommend that the director of the usms take the following actions: develop specific documented guidance — both for the current and new processes — to enhance raters' ability to consistently interpret and apply experience - based benchmarks for gs - 14 and gs - 15 positions and competency - based benchmarks for gs - 13 positions when evaluating candidate qualifications . we reviewed all job vacancy announcements for fiscal years 2015 , 2016 , and part of fiscal year 2017 ( october 2016 through april 2017 ) to determine the extent to which usms has documented steps in accordance with office of personnel management ( opm ) requirements . what steps , if any , has the usms taken to understand and address employee concerns about its merit promotion policies and processes ? . more actively engaging employees could also bolster ongoing usms efforts to improve the promotion process and enhance agency performance . for example , based on this review usms revised its scoring process to remove points awarded to candidates for service in an acting ( temporary promotion ) capacity . jmd made recommendations to bring usms into compliance with applicable statutes , regulations , and policies . in light of ongoing congressional questions , you asked us to assess the extent to which usms's promotion processes and policies ensure the selection of candidates based on merit as well as any effects that usms promotion practices may have on employee morale . while the new competency assessment process has the potential to reduce the risk of rater conflicts of interest and bias , usms could still do more to further improve its process . usms has taken limited steps to understand and address employee concerns about its merit promotion process . since 2016 , usms has been implementing changes to its merit promotion process in response to multiple internal and external investigations , which substantiated allegations made by whistleblowers . consistent with opm guidance in this area , the plan should specify time frames for accomplishing the actions , who will be responsible for implementing the actions , who will be affected by the actions , the resources required , and a plan to communicate these actions to managers and employees .
to address the objectives , we selected four agencies with responsibility for assessing their own facilities — dhs's u.s. customs and border protection ( cbp ) ; the department of transportation's federal aviation administration ( faa ) ; and the united states department of agriculture's ( usda ) agricultural research service ( ars ) and forest service . to help federal agencies protect and assess risks to their facilities , the interagency security committee ( isc ) , an organization chaired by the department of homeland security ( dhs ) , developed physical security standards for non - military federal facilities in the united states . this report examines: ( 1 ) how selected agencies' assessment methodologies align with the interagency security committee's ( isc ) risk management standard for identifying necessary countermeasures and ( 2 ) what management challenges , if any , selected agencies reported facing in conducting physical security assessments and monitoring the results . in light of these incidents and other emergent threats , it is important that agencies use risk - based methodologies to assess the physical security needs of the approximately 113,000 executive - branch , non - military federal buildings . several incidents — such as armed citizens taking over a federal wildlife refuge in oregon for about 40 days in 2016 ; the active shooter incident at the washington navy yard in washington , d.c. , in 2013 that resulted in several deaths ; and the fatal shooting at the anderson federal building in long beach , california , in 2012 — demonstrate that government facilities and their employees continue to be targets of potential harm . security assessments of facilities can uncover vulnerabilities and threats and recommend protective measures — called countermeasures — such as fences , access control systems , and closed - circuit television systems to mitigate those threats . with regard to our recommendation to update the security policy and procedures handbook , dhs stated that cbp is updating the handbook to include: ( 1 ) a discussion and diagram of the isc risk management process and its application within cbp's assessment processes ; ( 2 ) specific guidance for conducting risk assessments in accordance with the isc's risk management process for federal facilities ; and ( 3 ) a requirement and guidance for data collection and analysis in support of a robust physical security program . at least 30 federal agencies are responsible for protecting about 45 percent of civilian federal facilities and their occupants from potential threats . secretary of transportation direct the faa administrator to take the following three actions: develop a plan that provides sufficient details on the activities needed and time frames within the date when faa will implement an improved methodology ; update faa's policy to require the use of a methodology that fully aligns with the isc's risk management process for federal facilities for assessing all undesirable events , considering all three factors of risk , and documenting all deviations from the standard countermeasures ; and update faa's policy to include ongoing monitoring of physical security information . this report examines ( 1 ) how selected agencies' assessment methodologies align with the isc risk management standard to identify necessary countermeasures , and ( 2 ) what management challenges , if any , selected agencies reported facing in conducting physical security assessments and monitoring the results .
 ( recommendation 1 ) . the james webb space telescope ( jwst ) is one of the national aeronautics and space administration's ( nasa ) most complex projects and top priorities . for this report , we assessed ( 1 ) the considerations that nasa took into account when updating the jwst project's cost and schedule commitments , ( 2 ) the technical and integration challenges , if any , that are affecting the execution of the jwst project , and ( 3 ) the extent to which nasa has taken steps to improve oversight and performance of the jwst project . in june 2018 , nasa approved new cost and schedule commitments for jwst with a cost of $9.7 billion and a launch readiness date of march 2021 . between now and its system integration review planned for august 2019 , the jwst program will have to continue to address technical challenges and mitigate risks . 112-284 included a provision for gao to assess the jwst program annually and to report to the committees on appropriations on key issues relating to program and risk management , achievement of cost and schedule goals , program technical status , and oversight mechanisms . the project has experienced significant cost and schedule growth in recent years due to problems discovered during integration and testing . we are making the following recommendation to nasa: the nasa administrator should direct the jwst project office to conduct a jcl prior to its system integration review . the innovative technologies within the telescope , as well as the sheer size of some of its components — such as the tennis - court - sized sunshield — illustrate some of the immense development challenges . we discussed these changes and the implementation of related irb recommendations with goddard space flight center and nasa headquarters project officials ; northrop grumman and space telescope science institute contractor officials ; irb members ; and defense contract management agency officials who are responsible for providing oversight of software and quality assurance processes at the northrop grumman facility on behalf of nasa . since then , the project made progress by completing two of five phases of integration and test , but has also experienced significant cost growth and schedule delays . conducting a jcl would better inform decision makers on the status of the project as they determine whether the project can complete remaining project development with acceptable risk and within its cost and schedule constraints . given the project is now on its third iteration of cost and schedule commitments , conducting a jcl is a small step that nasa can take to demonstrate it is on track to meet these new commitments . this represents a total of 95 percent of cost growth and 81 months of schedule delays since the project's cost and schedule baselines were first established in 2009 . congress must authorize continuation of the jwst program if formulation and development costs increase over the $8 billion cost cap . finally , to assess the extent to which nasa has taken steps to improve oversight and performance of the jwst project , we reviewed documentation on changes that nasa made to contractor oversight and project oversight activities between april and november 2018 .
 ( recommendation 2 ) .  ( recommendation 1 ) the administrator of fra should work with railroads to engage state and local governments to ( a ) identify community - specific impacts of train operations , including longer trains , where streets and highways cross railroad rights - of - way and ( b ) develop potential solutions to reduce those impacts . we are making the following two recommendations to fra: the administrator of fra should develop a strategy for sharing fra's research results with internal and external stakeholders and implement that strategy for its research on the safety impacts of very long trains . the nation's freight railroad network is vital to the functioning of the economy . in 2017 , the united states' freight rail system moved over 1.5- billion tons of goods across the country , including hazardous materials , bulk goods such as grain and coal , and consumer goods . this report examines what is known about changes in freight train length over time , views of selected stakeholders on safety considerations for operating longer trains and the potential impact of these trains on communities , and the extent to which fra is assessing any safety risks of operating longer trains . while freight - rail traffic has grown following the 2008 recession , train accidents have declined , according to the federal railroad administration's ( fra ) data , with train accidents per million - train - miles decreasing by about 14 percent between 2008 and 2017 . as fra has stated , it expects that future growth in rail and highway traffic will increase incidences of blocked crossings and the risk of grade - crossing incidents . fra does not have any other documented policies in place for how it will use or disseminate the results of its study . without examining the potential impacts of longer trains on local communities , including on blocked grade crossings , fra may lose an opportunity to identify what , if any , additional actions should be taken to ensure the safety of longer trains and the communities through which they travel . fra , however , is uniquely positioned to assess whether these concerns have merit . as traffic continues to grow — including railroads' potential increased use of longer trains — having better information could be useful to fra and other stakeholders . in recent years , railroad workers and communities have expressed concerns regarding the safety of railroads operating longer freight trains , some of which are nearly 3 miles long . some recent accidents involving longer freight trains are under investigation by fra , the federal rail - safety - regulating agency , and the national transportation safety board ( ntsb ) , an independent federal agency that investigates serious transportation accidents , including those involving rail . as these issues continue to evolve and fra works to identify locations where blocked crossings are reported , working with railroads and local communities to identify any potential impacts of longer trains on grade crossings would help fra to determine whether and how longer trains are affecting these communities and what could be done to address those impacts . five of the seven railroads provided data on average train - length in feet over time ; however , only two railroads provided data for a period of at least 10 years .
over two - thirds of the 39 million beneficiaries enrolled in medicare's traditional fee - for - service program in 2017 had two or more serious health conditions , such as diabetes and heart disease . the bipartisan budget act of 2018 ( 2018 bba ) defines longitudinal comprehensive care planning ( lccp ) as a service that includes the following five components: a conversation with a beneficiary diagnosed with a serious or life - shared decision - making through an interdisciplinary team that includes a physician , registered nurse , and social worker ; development of a longitudinal comprehensive care plan ( care plan ) that is discussed with the beneficiary that addresses the progression of the disease and treatment options ; a care plan that addresses the beneficiary's goals , values , and a care plan that discusses the availability of other resources or social supports that may help mitigate the beneficiary's health risks . the 2018 bba included a provision that we examine medicare physician fee schedule billing codes established by the centers for medicare & medicaid services ( cms ) — the agency within the department of health and human services ( hhs ) that administers the medicare program — that may be used for care planning services provided to beneficiaries diagnosed with a serious or life - threatening illness or illnesses . providers have historically billed medicare for care planning and coordination services using one or more of the over 8,000 billing codes in the program's physician fee schedule . the often complex nature of these types of conditions and the treatments for them generally necessitate care planning and coordination among providers in different medical specialties . to examine existing medicare physician fee schedule billing codes that providers may use to bill for lccp - type services , we reviewed relevant information from cms and the american medical association ( ama ) and interviewed key stakeholders . we report spending and utilization trends in the aggregate as well as by provider specialty ( for example , internal medicine or family practice ) , and by setting ( for example , facility settings such as hospitals and hospices , and nonfacility settings such as physicians' offices ) . for example , a beneficiary with diabetes and heart disease may be simultaneously under the care of a primary care physician , an endocrinologist , a cardiologist , and a podiatrist , highlighting the need for planning and coordination of care to ensure that services are not being duplicated and that all providers involved in the patient's care share important clinical information and have clear expectations about their roles in the patient's care . to determine trends in medicare spending on lccp - type services , we analyzed medicare part b claims data from 2013 through 2017 for the specific billing codes we identified as covering lccp - type services . we examined trends in spending and utilization on these services , including the number of beneficiaries receiving these services and the number of providers billing for these services . however , certain physician specialties ( largely those specializing in primary care ) have raised longstanding concerns that e / m codes do not adequately account for the amount of time they spend in planning and coordinating care for beneficiaries with complex medical needs .
 ( recommendation 1 ) . in these written comments , fcc stated that it agreed with our recommendation and noted steps it plans to take to assess the potential benefits , costs , and challenges of making off - premises broadband access eligible for e - rate program support . according to the national telecommunications and information administration ( ntia ) , part of the department of commerce , the internet has taken on an increasingly prominent role in schools , and students who lack access are at risk of missing opportunities to advance their education . our objectives for this report were to examine: ( 1 ) challenges lower - income school - age children who lack in - home fixed internet face in doing homework that involves internet access and ( 2 ) what selected school districts are doing to expand wireless internet access for their students , and the federal role in such efforts . we are making the following recommendation to fcc: the chairman of the federal communications commission should determine and execute a methodology for collecting and analyzing data — such as conducting a new pilot program regarding off - premises wireless access or analyzing other data — to assess the potential benefits , costs , and challenges of making off - premises wireless access eligible for e - rate program support , and publish the results of this analysis . determining the best way to collect and analyze data on the potential benefits , costs , and challenges of making off - premises wireless access eligible for e - rate program support ; conducting such analysis ; and publishing the results could provide relevant information and transparency to external stakeholders . while school districts have made efforts to address the homework gap , such efforts may be inhibited by existing restrictions in fcc's e - rate program . to examine challenges lower - income school - age children who lack in - home fixed internet face in doing homework that involves internet access , we analyzed data on internet access and use from the census bureau's november 2017 current population survey ( cps ) : computer and internet use supplement , sponsored by ntia . we also interviewed officials with fcc and education to determine and review federal efforts related to school initiatives to expand wireless access for students . the consolidated appropriations act , 2018 included a provision for us to review wireless internet for low - income school - age children . doing so could also enable fcc to make a determination on whether it would be appropriate to ease restrictions on off - premises access , a step that may give school districts more flexibility in addressing the homework gap . internet access is crucial for communication , economic activity , and education , including for students at the elementary and secondary school levels . we reviewed documentation from fcc and education regarding relevant federal efforts , including rulemaking documents and documents about fcc's schools and libraries universal service support mechanism ( also known as the e - rate program ) , which provides schools with discounts on telecommunications and internet services . this report examines: challenges lower - income school - age children who lack in - home fixed internet face in doing homework that involves internet access , and what selected school districts are doing to expand wireless internet access for their students , and the federal role in such efforts .
in the coming decades , the need for long - term services and supports ( ltss ) to assist individuals with limited abilities for self - care is expected to increase , in part due to the aging of the population . medicaid , a federal - state health financing program for low - income and medically needy individuals , is the nation's primary payer of ltss . in recent years the congress , the centers for medicare & medicaid services ( cms ) — the federal agency within the department of health and human services ( hhs ) responsible for overseeing states' medicaid programs — and states have taken steps to expand the use of hcbs and shift the provision of ltss away from institutional settings . in addition , states may seek permission from cms to provide hcbs under waivers of traditional medicaid requirements ; for example , in order to provide services to a specific population , such as individuals with intellectual or developmental disabilities , or to limit the number of beneficiaries who can receive hcbs . for example , the patient protection and affordable care act , enacted in 2010 , created new options and provided additional funding for states to make hcbs available to eligible medicaid beneficiaries . you asked us to review the approaches states use to provide coverage for hcbs in the medicaid program . ltss comprise a broad range of health care , personal care , and supportive services to help individuals with physical , developmental , or cognitive disabilities maintain their quality of life . this report describes 1. decisions that influenced the structure of selected states' medicaid 2. selected states' challenges providing hcbs to medicaid beneficiaries and efforts to respond to these challenges . given the variety of options available for providing hcbs and the wide variation in hcbs spending among states , questions arise about how states are structuring their hcbs programs , as well as challenges they may face in providing access to these services . in fiscal year 2016 , the most recent year of data available , medicaid spent an estimated $167 billion on ltss . however , the extent to which states cover hcbs in their medicaid programs varies , as does the proportion of ltss spending used for hcbs ; the proportion of medicaid ltss spending on hcbs ranged from 27 percent to 81 percent among states in 2016 , a three - fold difference . cms's recent report on the growth of mltss also notes states' desire for improvements in quality of care and outcomes ; increased access to hcbs providers ; and better care coordination , among other factors . in concert with these efforts , the proportion of ltss spending for hcbs has increased nationwide . states have a number of different options to provide medicaid coverage of hcbs . as a result , states vary in the structure of their hcbs programs . the use of mltss has increased over time ; mltss spending rose from $10 billion in fiscal year 2012 to about $39 billion in 2016 . states can provide certain types of hcbs under their state medicaid plans . ltss delivered outside of institutional settings are known as home - and community - based services ( hcbs ) , and include adult day care , personal care services , and services provided in assisted living .
today i will provide information from our ongoing and prior work , focusing on ( 1 ) snap e&t programs , including program participants , design , and fns oversight , and ( 2 ) fns's efforts to address program integrity , including improper payments and snap recipient and retailer fraud . fns is responsible for authorizing and monitoring retailers from which recipients may purchase food , and states are responsible for determining applicant eligibility and investigating possible program violations by recipients . jointly administered by usda's food and nutrition service ( fns ) and the states , snap helps low - income households obtain a better diet by providing them with benefits to purchase food from authorized retailers . thank you for inviting me here today to discuss our work on the u.s. department of agriculture's ( usda ) supplemental nutrition assistance program ( snap ) — the largest federally - funded nutrition assistance program . specifically , for our discussion of snap e&t programs , we analyzed data on snap e&t expenditures and participation collected by fns from the states for fiscal year 2007 through fiscal year 2016 , the most recent data available . we also reviewed relevant federal laws and regulations ; reviewed guidance and research from fns ; interviewed fns officials , as well as select state and local snap e&t staff from five states ; and reviewed our prior work on snap e&t programs . in fiscal year 2017 , snap provided approximately $63 billion in benefits to about 42 million individuals in over 20 million households . the food , conservation , and energy act of 2008 ( known as the 2008 farm bill ) gave usda authority to impose higher monetary penalties , and the authority to impose both a monetary penalty and program disqualification on retailers found to have violated relevant law or regulations ( which includes those found to have trafficked ) . to address the areas discussed in this testimony statement , we drew on our ongoing work on snap e&t programs , recipient fraud , retailer trafficking , as well as our prior work on improper payments . in response to requests from the chairman and other members of this committee , we currently have work underway on snap e&t programs , as well as on snap recipient and retailer fraud . the federal government pays the full cost of snap benefits and shares the costs and responsibility of administering the program and ensuring program integrity with the states . in addition , we analyzed published fns quality control data on snap recipients and work registrants for fiscal year 2008 through fiscal year 2016 . we currently have ongoing work to assess the steps fns and states have taken to address our recommendations related to recipient and retailer fraud and other program vulnerabilities . as we have reported in our prior work , both fns and states face challenges in addressing recipient and retailer fraud . we also drew on our 2006 work on retailer trafficking , in which we reviewed fns reports on trafficking estimates ; visited fns field offices ; analyzed fns retailer data ; and interviewed federal officials , among others .
 ( recommendation 5 ) . the u.s. airspace system is one of the safest in the world , but incidents and near misses at and around u.s. airport runways and taxiways still occur . what efforts have faa and others implemented to improve terminal area safety , and how does faa assess their effectiveness ? . you asked us to review faa's safety oversight of airport terminal areas — runways , taxiways , and ramp areas ( the area from the gate to the taxiway or runway , where aircraft are prepared for departure and arrival ) — and update our prior work , including our 2011 report on terminal area safety . faa's guidance on the runway safety program states that faa may evaluate the effectiveness of its runway safety programs , and the extent to which they are helping faa meet its safety goals . in addition , in fiscal year 2018 , the federal aviation administration ( faa ) recorded over 1,800 incidents of planes , vehicles , or pedestrians entering runways when they were not authorized to do so .  ( recommendation 4 ) 5 . faa data show runway incidents nearly doubled between fiscal years 2011 and 2018 . to address both objectives , we reviewed our prior work and other published work on faa's runway and taxiway safety efforts , including those from faa , the department of transportation's ( dot ) inspector general , and the national transportation safety board ( ntsb ) .  ( recommendation 1 ) 2 .  ( recommendation 2 ) 3 . to identify faa's and other stakeholders' efforts , including technologies , to improve terminal area safety and determine how faa assesses their effectiveness , we reviewed documentation of faa , airports' and airlines' current or planned terminal area initiatives . despite these efforts , reported runway incidents have continued to increase . since establishing runway safety as a strategic objective in 2002 , faa has undertaken many efforts to address this issue , including collecting and sharing information on incidents and deploying technologies that can alert air traffic controllers of potential collisions . faa has taken steps to improve terminal area safety , but has not assessed the effectiveness of many of its runway and taxiway safety efforts . we also found that faa may be missing opportunities to improve its terminal - area safety efforts , including improving communication within faa . additionally , faa has implemented a data - driven , risk - based safety oversight approach that is designed to identify hazards , manage risks , and take corrective action before an accident occurs . in some instances , faa has taken steps to evaluate its terminal - area safety efforts . in addition , establishing a plan to evaluate all of its runway and taxiway safety efforts would help faa direct its resources toward activities and technologies proven to enhance safety and identify ways to strengthen those efforts . the runway safety manager should establish a plan to assess the effectiveness of all of faa's terminal area - safety efforts , including airport surface detection equipment , model x ( asde - x ) and the runway safety program .  ( recommendation 3 ) 4 . by assessing the effectiveness of its primary efforts , faa may be better positioned to make decisions about how to target its limited resources within and among these efforts .
the indian health service ( ihs ) is responsible for providing health care for over two million american indians and alaska natives ( ai / an ) who are members or descendants of federally recognized tribes . in the years since the patient protection and affordable care act ( ppaca ) authorized states to expand access to medicaid and offer health insurance through the exchanges in 2014 , the percent of american indian and alaska native ( ai / an ) in the general population with health insurance has increased . these facilities may also bill public programs such as medicaid ( the federal - state health insurance program for certain low - income individuals ) , medicare ( the federal health insurance program for persons aged 65 and over , and certain others ) , and the department of veterans affairs ( which provides health care services for veterans ) , as well as private insurance , for care provided to patients . in addition , officials from two ihs area offices noted that prc has been able to pay for services such as patients' long - awaited knee and hip replacements , which have enabled patients to return to normal activities of life and reduce their need for pain management . in february 2017 , gao added federal management of programs that serve indian tribes and their members to our high risk list because inadequate oversight hindered ihs's ability to ensure that indian communities have timely access to quality health care , among other reasons . this ihs data reflect care provided through ihs - administered prc programs , which represented 39 percent of total prc appropriations in fiscal year 2018 ; similar data on the scope of care provided through tribally - administered prc programs , which account for the remaining portion of prc appropriations , were not available because such data are not required to be reported to ihs . beginning in 2014 , the patient protection and affordable care act ( ppaca ) provided opportunities to expand coverage of ai / an through medicaid and private health insurance . for example , medicaid collections grew 47 percent , from $496 million in fiscal year 2013 to $729 million in fiscal year 2018 . in this report we describe , for fiscal years 2013 through 2018 , 1. trends in health insurance coverage among ai / an populations served by federally operated and tribally operated facilities as well as trends in third - party collections at these facilities , and 2. the effects of any changes in health insurance coverage and third - party collections on federally operated and tribally operated facilities . you asked us to review how ppaca has affected ai / an access to health care . health insurance may also provide ai / an with options to obtain care outside of federally operated or tribally operated facilities , including more comprehensive health services , if such options exist in their community . medicaid collections accounted for 65 percent of the total $360 million increase , though collections from medicare , private insurance , and veterans affairs also increased during this period . to describe trends in health insurance coverage among ai / an populations served by federally operated and tribally operated facilities , we analyzed ihs data representing the self - reported health insurance status of patients seeking care at all 73 federally operated ihs hospitals and health centers that were in operation from fiscal years 2013 through 2018 .
generally , dod supports civil authorities through its defense support of civil authorities ( dsca ) mission . the department of defense ( dod ) recognizes that a disruptive , manipulative , or destructive cyberattack could present a significant risk to u.s. economic and national security if lives are lost ; property , destroyed ; policy objectives , harmed ; or economic interests , affected and that the department must be prepared to support civil authorities in all domains — including in cyberspace . dod was required to develop its plan by may 2016 ( 180 days after the national defense authorization act was signed into law ) ; however , the department did not complete its plan until april 2017 . the presidential policy directive on united states cyber incident coordination states that significant cyber incidents are occurring with increasing frequency , impacting public and private infrastructure in the united states . with the president's decision to elevate cybercom to a unified combatant command , such actions will also help as dod continues to plan to support civil authorities in response to a cyber incident and where cybercom has a significant role . we are making the following two recommendations to dod: the assistant secretary of defense for homeland defense and global security , in coordination with the chairman of the joint chiefs of staff and other appropriate dod components , should update the department's cyber incident coordination training to incorporate the tenets of ppd - 41 . taking action to improve the areas we have highlighted should help dod sustain the progress it has already made . for example , u.s. northern command's ( northcom ) defense support of civil authorities response concept plan states that northcom would be the supported command for a mission to support civil authorities in responding to a domestic cyber incident . section 1648 of the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2016 included a provision that dod develop a comprehensive plan for cybercom to support civil authorities in responding to cyberattacks by foreign powers against the united states . we previously reported on dod's preparation efforts for providing support to civil authorities in response to cyber incidents . the chairman of the joint chiefs of staff should maintain a list of senior dod officials from organizations that could represent dod during a cyber unified coordination group and that are trained in the national incident management system . however , without complying with the training requirements outlined in ppd - 41 and the dod significant cyber incident coordination procedures , the department cannot reasonably ensure it has the personnel with expertise to manage and respond to a significant cyber incident . in april 2016 , we reported that dod's guidance — such as dod directive 3025.18 , defense support of civil authorities — did not clearly define the roles and responsibilities of key dod entities for domestic cyber incidents . dod partially addressed three of the six elements required by the statute — to provide ( 1 ) descriptions of the roles , responsibilities , and expectations of the active and reserve components of the armed forces ; ( 2 ) the department's plans for coordination with heads of other federal agencies and state and local governments ; and ( 3 ) a list of exercises previously conducted that are used in the formulation of the plan .
 ( recommendation 1 ) . when designed effectively , performance measures help decision makers ( 1 ) determine the contributions that training makes to improve results , ( 2 ) identify potential gaps in performance , and ( 3 ) determine where to focus resources to improve results . since its inception , tsa has frequently adapted its standard operating procedures ( sop ) to address new and evolving threats to aviation security . since the terrorist attacks of september 11 , 2001 , the transportation security administration ( tsa ) has been tasked with screening airline passengers and their carry - on and checked baggage for prohibited and other potentially dangerous items that could pose a threat to aircraft and passengers . this report: ( 1 ) describes the reasons why tsa established tso basic training ; ( 2 ) discusses factors otd considers when updating the tso basic training curriculum ; and ( 3 ) assesses the extent to which tsa evaluates its tso basic training program . with regard to performance goals , tsa plans to establish broad goals that include successful screening and improved morale , among others . with regard to developing performance measures that can be used to assess program outcomes , tsa intends to leverage existing mechanisms through its kirkpatrick model evaluations to measure program success . in 2015 and 2017 , the department of homeland security ( dhs ) inspector general identified vulnerabilities in tsa checkpoint screening , after agents carried metallic ( inoperable handguns ) and nonmetallic ( simulated explosive ) test items concealed on their body through tsa passenger security checkpoints and into the sterile areas of airports . the screening of airport passengers and their property is a critical component in securing our nation's commercial aviation system . in 2016 , the transportation security administration ( tsa ) established the tso basic training program at the tsa academy , located at the federal law enforcement training centers in glynco , georgia . dhs agreed with our recommendation that tsa establish specific goals for the tso basic training program and develop performance measures that can be used to assess if the program is achieving desired outcomes . by taking these steps , tsa will be better positioned to determine if the program is improving trainees' skills , knowledge , and abilities and whether additional skill development , or other training modifications , may be needed . specifically , the administrator of tsa should establish specific goals for the tso basic training program and develop performance measures that can be used to assess if the program is achieving desired outcomes and help ensure accountability for training results on a regular basis . according to tsa , in fiscal year 2017 , more than 771 million passengers were screened at 440 airports across the united states . while tsa reported potential benefits of tso basic training in its business case and implemented the kirkpatrick model to assess training , it has not yet identified specific goals that the tso basic training program is expected to achieve , nor has it developed performance measures to evaluate progress toward goals . although tsa has implemented a framework to assess participant reactions to the training and their knowledge of course content , it has not yet established goals for the tso basic training program or measures to gauge effectiveness of the training tsos receive to determine the extent to which they can fulfill their crucial role in ensuring passenger safety .
 ( recommendation 3 ) . since the 1970s , the federal transit administration's ( fta ) capital investment grants program has been the primary source of federal financial assistance to new “fixed - guideway” projects or extensions to existing fixed - guideway systems across the united states . the moving ahead for progress in the 21st century act ( map - 21 ) , enacted in 2012 , included a provision for us to biennially review fta's processes and procedures for evaluating and rating projects seeking funding through the capital investment grants program . however , we also reported that the fixing america's surface transportation act ( fast act ) , enacted in 2015 , contained new provisions for fta to address . program funding is provided through the annual appropriations process , and over the last 10 fiscal years fta has awarded over $19 billion to cities , states , and other localities across the country . fta's progress in addressing outstanding statutory provisions as amended by map - 21 and the fast act , and how fta's evaluation and rating process enables it to verify that statutory requirements are met before recommending a core capacity project for funding . we reported that fta was taking steps to implement map - 21 , such as by implementing a provision directing fta to issue policy guidance outlining the review and evaluation process for new fixed - guideway projects and core capacity improvement projects ( hereafter core capacity projects ) , and reported that fta intended to take action to address other provisions over the next few years . we also reviewed fta's policy guidance ; other pertinent agency documents , such as fta's instructions for applying to the program , its templates for evaluating and rating projects in the program , and its annual reports to congress with funding recommendations ; and prior gao reports . however , in march 2018 the consolidated appropriations act , 2018 , provided the program with more than $2.6 billion , and required fta to continue to administer the capital investment grants program in accordance with the program's procedural and substantive requirements . in april 2016 , we issued our most recent report in response to the provision , focusing on fta's efforts in implementing changes that map - 21 made to the program's processes , changes that were aimed at expediting project delivery . projects that compete for funding through this program are planned and implemented locally , and include capital investments in heavy and light rail , commuter rail , streetcars , and ferries as well as bus rapid transit . fta evaluates and rates projects seeking funding through this program based on statutory criteria , recommends to congress which projects to fund , and awards funding to projects . consequently , fta recommended that congress limit future funding for the capital investment grants program . in conducting this review , we focused on reviewing fta's progress addressing statutory provisions that were outstanding at the time of our previous biennial review as well as the evaluation and rating requirements specified in statute for core capacity projects . by not addressing those provisions , fta runs the risk of failing to implement provisions of federal law , and the federal government or project sponsors may be missing opportunities to deliver transit projects more efficiently .
thank you for the opportunity to participate in today's hearing on the department of defense ( dod ) and department of veterans affairs ( va ) interagency program office and the office's role regarding va's electronic health record modernization ( ehrm ) program . such initiatives include modernizing va's electronic health information system — the veterans health information systems and technology architecture ( vista ) . in developing this testimony , we relied on our previous reports and testimonies related to the interagency program office , as well as va's and dod's electronic health record system programs and modernization efforts . the use of information technology ( it ) is crucial to helping the departments effectively serve the nation's veterans and , each year , the departments spend billions of dollars on information systems and assets . the testimony also discusses the roles this office has played in va's and dod's efforts to increase interoperability and electronic health record capabilities , and any challenges the office has faced in doing so . both va and dod have long recognized the importance of advancing the use of shared health information systems and capabilities to make patient information more readily available to their health care providers , reduce medical errors , and streamline administrative functions . we also subsequently produced reports that have discussed the interagency program office in relation to va's efforts to develop a lifetime electronic health record capability for servicemembers and veterans , develop a joint electronic record capability with dod , and promote increased electronic health record system interoperability . to expedite the departments' efforts to exchange electronic health care information , congress included in the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2008 , provisions that required va and dod to jointly develop and implement electronic health record systems or capabilities and to accelerate the exchange of health care information . as you know , these departments operate two of the nation's largest health care systems , which provide coverage to millions of veterans and active duty service members and their beneficiaries . over many years , however , the departments have experienced challenges in managing a number of critical initiatives related to modernizing major systems . in particular , what role , if any , that the office is to have in va's acquisition of the same electronic health record system that dod is currently acquiring is uncertain . in addition , the act included a provision that gao report on the progress that va and dod have made in achieving the goal of fully interoperable personal health care information . these have included initiatives to share viewable data in existing ( legacy ) systems ; link and share computable data between the departments' updated health data repositories ; develop a virtual lifetime electronic health record to enable private sector interoperability ; implement it capabilities for the first joint federal health care center ; and jointly develop a single integrated system . we also incorporated information on the departments' actions in response to recommendations we made in our previous reports . the office was given the function of implementing , by september 30 , 2009 , electronic health record systems or capabilities that would allow for full interoperability of personal health care information between the departments .
misuse and abuse of prescription opioids ( such as oxycodone ) , which are used to treat both acute and chronic pain , has become a serious public health problem in the united states , including among medicare beneficiaries . for example in the 2020 medicare advantage and part d draft call letter , cms reported that between 2012 and 2017 , there was a 33 percent decrease in the number of part d enrollees meeting or exceeding 90 mme for at least one day , with the largest decrease ( 14 percent ) in 2017 . the centers for disease control and prevention ( cdc ) reported that from 1999 to 2013 the rate of deaths from prescription opioids nearly quadrupled . in april 2018 , the centers for medicare & medicaid services ( cms ) , which administers the medicare program , finalized regulations implementing dmps for part d medicare's prescription drug option , through which private health insurers known as plan sponsors provide prescription drug coverage to medicare beneficiaries . in this report , we: 1. describe how medicare identifies beneficiaries at risk of opioid misuse and abuse , and how it attempts to mitigate that risk ; 2. identify factors likely to affect the success of the medicare drug management programs . for medicare , the comprehensive addiction and recovery act of 2016 ( cara ) established drug management programs ( dmp ) to limit access to frequently abused drugs for beneficiaries considered to be at risk for their abuse , among other things . cara included a provision for gao to review the implementation of medicare dmps . we also interviewed officials from cms , department of health and human services office of inspector general ; america's health insurance plans — a trade association representing health insurers — and from the five largest medicare part d plan sponsors , as measured by enrollment , that together cover about 70 percent of medicare beneficiaries with prescription drug coverage . finally , cms tracks the utilization of opioids by medicare part d enrollees using part d data and the overutilization monitoring system . to identify the factors likely to affect the success of the medicare dmps , we reviewed the literature on opioid misuse and abuse , and interviewed officials from cms and other stakeholders , including the five largest medicare part d plan sponsors , and officials with six organizations representing medicare plan sponsors , physicians ( including pain specialists ) , pharmacy benefit managers , state medicaid programs , and patients suffering chronic pain . the regulations include standards that part d plan sponsors , as well as sponsors of medicare advantage plans that also may offer drug coverage ( hereafter collectively referred to as plan sponsors ) , may use to identify potentially at - risk beneficiaries . to describe how medicare identifies beneficiaries that are at risk of opioid misuse and abuse , and how it attempts to mitigate that risk , we reviewed the recommendations contained in cdc's guideline for prescribing opioids for chronic pain and cms's opioid misuse strategy , as well as cms regulations , and other relevant cms guidance . in 2017 , 47,600 overdose deaths in the united states involved an opioid , and prescription opioids were involved in many of these deaths .
according to fema — a component within the department of homeland security ( dhs ) — these disasters affected 47 million people , or about 15 percent of the nation's population . once a major disaster has been declared by the president , federal contracts play a key role in its immediate aftermath and in long - term community recovery by providing life - sustaining goods and services to survivors . implementing our recommendations to update its planning guidance and advance contract strategy ; assess acquisition workforce needs ; improve coordination with state , local , and federal partners ; and improve tracking of disaster contracting actions will help fema overcome key challenges it faces in contracting during a disaster , and improve future response efforts . the post - katrina emergency management reform act ( pkemra ) of 2006 required fema , among other things , to establish advance contracts . fema obligated about $2.9 billion of this total through advance contracts , and roughly an additional $1.6 billion through post - disaster contracts . according to our analysis of federal procurement data system - next generation ( fpds - ng ) data , federal agencies had obligated about $9.5 billion in response to the three 2017 hurricanes and the california wildfires as of june 30 , 2018 — the most recent and complete data available . yet fema faced continued challenges and inconsistencies in its coordination with states and localities over the use of advance contracts . the federal acquisition regulation ( far ) requires agencies to perform acquisition planning activities for all acquisitions to ensure that the government meets its needs in the most effective , economical , and timely manner possible . for the reports cited , among other methodologies , we reviewed fpds - ng data through june 30 , 2018 — the most recent and complete data available — to identify fema contract obligations for the 2017 disasters . i am pleased to be here today to discuss the federal emergency management agency's ( fema ) contracting practices in response to the catastrophic 2017 disasters — hurricanes harvey , irma , and maria , and the california wildfires . fema may also award new contracts to support disaster response efforts following a disaster declaration . this statement is primarily based on reports we issued in december 2018 and april 2019 on fema's disaster contracting activities in response to the 2017 hurricanes and california wildfires . advance contracts are established prior to disasters to quickly provide life - sustaining goods and services in the immediate aftermath of a disaster . our prior work also showed that fema's ability to adequately plan for and manage its disaster contracts is further complicated by persistent acquisition workforce challenges , including attrition and staffing shortages . fema has obligated billions of dollars on contracts in response to the 2017 disasters . we also analyzed fema guidance and documentation and interviewed fema officials to discuss the use of contracts to respond to the 2017 disasters . we recommended fema assess its workforce needs to address these shortcomings and develop a plan , including timelines . but fema had not assessed its contracting workforce — including regional contracting workforce needs — since at least 2014 . without planning and guidance on its use of advance contracts , fema lacks reasonable assurance that it is maximizing their use to the extent practicable and cost - effective to quickly provide goods and services following a disaster .
and , we suggested several improvements to the draft plan , including that dod ( 1 ) more completely state strategies for achieving its goals and include schedules of significant actions ; ( 2 ) link and discuss how external factors could affect its ability to achieve its goals ; ( 3 ) discuss how program evaluations were used in developing its goals and identify key issues for future evaluations ; ( 4 ) discuss planned or ongoing actions to resolve persistent management problems , including time frames and required resources ; and ( 5 ) identify and discuss coordination efforts for programs that crosscut with other agencies' programs . among the remaining critical challenges are ( 1 ) clearly establishing a strategic direction for agencies by improving goal - setting and measurement ; ( 2 ) improving the management of crosscutting program efforts by ensuring that those programs are appropriately coordinated to avoid duplication , fragmentation , and overlap ; and ( 3 ) ensuring that agencies have the data systems and analytic capacity in place to better assess program performance and costs , improve management and performance , and establish accountability . these twin demands are the broad forces behind the move to a performance - based approach to management in public sector organizations — the most important effort to improve government management in over a generation . the small business administration ( sba ) improved its ability to assess progress toward its strategic goals by stating when specific performance objectives would be met . these improvements include ( 1 ) explaining interagency coordination for crosscutting issues and ( 2 ) addressing previously identified management problems . in recent years , governments around the world , including ours , have faced a citizenry that is demanding that government become at the same time more effective and less costly . as agreed , we focused our reviews on the progress of agencies' strategic planning efforts , specifically their efforts to improve their strategic plans , with particular attention to the key planning challenges that are most in need of sustained attention . the office of management and budget ( omb ) is also to prepare the annual federal government performance plan that is based on the performance plans of individual agencies . to do these reviews , we used the results act supplemented by omb's guidance on developing the plans ( circular a - 11 , part 2 ) as criteria to determine whether the plans contained the six elements required by the act . this report is based on our reviews of 24 major agencies' strategic plans that were formally submitted to congress and omb by september 30 , 1997 . congress enacted the government performance and results act of 1993 , commonly referred to as “gpra” or “the results act,” in conjunction with the chief financial officers ( cfo ) act and information technology reform legislation , such as the clinger - cohen act of 1996 , to address these twin demands and to instill performance - based management in the federal government . the widespread lack of available program performance information is equally troubling . the results act seeks to shift the focus of government decisionmaking and accountability away from a preoccupation with the activities — such as grants and inspections made — to a focus on the results of those activities — such as real gains in employability , safety , responsiveness , or program quality .
also included are recommendations that the federal reserve update its guidance to better address sales practice issues and that the securities and exchange commission ( sec ) and the commodity futures trading commission ( cftc ) collect information on the extent to which securities firms are following the sales practice provisions of voluntary guidance related to otc derivatives . this report presents the results of our review of sales practices for over - the - counter ( otc ) derivatives , mortgage - backed securities , and structured notes . this report includes recommendations to the president's working group on financial markets to ( 1 ) develop a formal mechanism for collecting data on sales practice issues and ( 2 ) consider assisting dealers and end - users in resolving their disagreements over the nature of their relationship as a part of otc derivatives transactions . on the basis of your request that we review sales practice issues related to otc derivatives , we report on the applicable federal requirements , extent of end - user satisfaction with dealer sales practices , end - user and dealer views on the nature of their relationship , and actions taken by market participants and regulators to address sales practice issues . because disputes and concerns were also prevalent for transactions involving mortgage - backed securities and structured notes , we included these products in our review as well . as agreed with you , unless you publicly release its contents earlier , we plan no further distribution of this report until 7 days from its issue date . at that time , we will provide copies to interested members of congress , appropriate congressional committees , cftc , the department of the treasury , the federal reserve board , the office of the comptroller of the currency , sec , the national association of securities dealers , and the new york stock exchange . if you have any questions , please call me at ( 202 ) 512-8678 . major contributors to this report are listed in appendix x . to address congressional concerns associated with sales practices for otc derivatives , mbs , and structured notes , our objectives were to analyze ( 1 ) the federal sales practice requirements applicable to these products and the dealers marketing them ; ( 2 ) the extent of end - user satisfaction with sales practices , product use , and related disputes and the costs of these disputes ; ( 3 ) the views of end - users and dealers on the nature of their relationship and responsibilities ; ( 4 ) the actions dealers and end - users have taken to reduce the potential for sales practice disputes ; and ( 5 ) the actions regulators have taken to address sales practice issues . to date , attempts to address these differences have not been successful . these benefits do not come without risk because using otc derivatives , similar to using other financial products , can result in losses from adverse market movements , credit defaults , or operations errors . these included direct costs from litigation or regulatory fines and indirect costs , such as reduced revenues and income . review of regulatory and other data indicated that cases involving sales practice disputes were not widespread .
101-624 ) gave the u.s. department of agriculture responsibility for managing agricultural commodity assistance to developing countries provided under title i ( trade and development assistance ) . this report contains the results of our evaluation and discusses the impact of title i assistance on broad - based , sustainable development and long - term market development for u.s. agricultural commodities in recipient countries . among the alternatives available to congress are ( 1 ) refocusing the program on more specific economic and / or market development objectives by eliminating some of the multiple and competing requirements of the present framework ; ( 2 ) restructuring the program to concentrate on a single objective , such as market development ; ( 3 ) eliminating the program and transferring its resources to existing programs with compatible purposes ; and ( 4 ) eliminating the program and replacing it with a new program or programs unencumbered with a history of competing objectives and outdated program requirements . international assistance using agricultural commodities , or food aid , has been an important part of u.s. agricultural and foreign policy since 1954 . the 1990 act also required gao to evaluate the title i program . 480 program objectives has shifted over time to reflect the changing needs of domestic farm policy and emerging foreign policy developments , the importance of the title i program as a u.s. export program and u.s. food aid program has diminished significantly since the program's inception in 1954 . 480 legislation , as amended , authorizes international food assistance under three different programs: government - to - government concessional loans that offer long - term , low - interest - rate credit ( title i program ) ; donations ( title ii program ) ; and grants ( title iii program ) . for this review , we assessed the impact of title i assistance on ( 1 ) broad - based , sustainable development in recipient countries and ( 2 ) long - term market development for u.s. agricultural goods in those countries . title i commodity exports , which once represented a significant share of the total value of u.s. food aid and u.s. agricultural exports , have declined dramatically — representing about 14 percent of the total value of u.s. food aid and less than 1 percent of u.s. agricultural exports in fiscal year 1993 . 480 programs . 480 programs . the agricultural trade development and assistance act of 1954,commonly known as public law ( p.l. ) . 480 and is administered by the u.s. department of agriculture ( usda ) . the objectives of our review were to assess the impact of title i assistance on ( 1 ) broad - based , sustainable development and ( 2 ) long - term market development for u.s. agricultural commodities in recipient countries . the honorable pat roberts chairman the honorable e ( kika ) de la garza ranking minority member committee on agriculture house of representatives the honorable benjamin gilman chairman the honorable lee h. hamilton ranking minority member committee on international relations house of representatives the 1990 food , agriculture , conservation and trade act ( p.l . this type of food aid program is unique to the united states: no other country offers a food assistance program using long - term , low - interest concessional loans ( i.e. , repayment terms of 10 years or more and interest rates below prevailing market rates ) .
you also asked us determine the disclosure and sales practices of banks and thrifts with respect to mutual funds , and to evaluate the framework for regulation and oversight of bank and thrift mutual fund operations . this report presents the results of our review of bank and thrift sales of mutual funds . you requested that we report on the extent to which banks and thrifts have expanded into mutual fund activities . this report recommends that the banking and securities regulators develop a common approach for conducting examinations of bank and thrift mutual fund activities . as agreed with you , unless you publicly release its contents earlier , we plan no further distribution of this report until 30 days from its issue date . at that time , we will provide copies to interested members of congress , appropriate committees , the federal deposit insurance corporation , the board of governors of the federal reserve system , the office of the comptroller of the currency , the office of thrift supervision , the national association of securities dealers , the securities and exchange commission , other interested parties , and the public . if you have any questions , please call me at ( 202 ) 512-8678 . major contributors to this report are listed in appendix x . in addition to the requirements of the securities regulators , the banking regulators' guidance states that advertisements and other promotional and sales material about nondeposit investment products sold to retail customers of depository institutions should conspicuously disclose that these products are not insured by fdic ; are not a deposit or other obligation of , or guaranteed by , the institution ; and are subject to investment risks , including possible loss of principal . our objectives were to ( 1 ) determine the extent and nature of bank and thrift involvement in mutual fund sales , ( 2 ) assess whether the sales practices followed by banks and thrifts provide bank customers adequate disclosures of the risks of investing in mutual funds , and ( 3 ) analyze whether the existing framework for regulation and oversight of bank and thrift mutual fund sales practices and proprietary fund operations adequately protects investors . but there were no signs there . the mutual fund industry's growth in the last decade has been phenomenal . similarly , about 60 percent of thrifts with assets of $1 billion or more had sales programs , but only about 3 percent of thrifts with assets less than $100 million sold mutual funds . however , fee income may become more important after sales begin . the banking regulators have recognized the importance of closely monitoring institutions' mutual fund sales programs and have adopted procedures to be included in periodic safety and soundness examinations , which they are currently implementing . very poor job of disclosing risks and uninsured nature . specifically , when nondeposit investment products are either recommended or sold to retail customers , the disclosures must specify that the product is ( 1 ) not insured by fdic ; ( 2 ) not a deposit or other obligation of the institution ; ( 3 ) not guaranteed by the institution ; and ( 4 ) subject to investment risks , including possible loss of the principal amount invested .
the health and safety of pregnant women in the custody of the department of homeland security ( dhs ) have been a concern in recent years for a number of policymakers , medical associations , and advocacy groups . this report examines ( 1 ) what available data indicate about pregnant women detained or held in dhs facilities ; ( 2 ) policies and standards that dhs has to address the care of pregnant women , and the extent to which they are applicable across all facilities ; and ( 3 ) what is known about the care provided to pregnant women in dhs facilities . specifically , this includes information on our analyses of u.s. immigration and customs enforcement ( ice ) data and inspection findings and department of homeland security ( dhs ) complaints used to address these questions: 1 . in addition , some members of congress have introduced bills to , in part , limit the use of restraints on pregnant women , set healthcare standards , and require the use of alternatives to detention for pregnant women . specifically , on january 25 , 2017 , the president issued an executive order instructing federal agencies , including dhs , to employ all lawful means to ensure the enforcement of the immigration laws of the united states against all removable foreign nationals . in 2017 , the president issued a series of executive orders related to border security and immigration , including an executive order that addressed dhs's immigration enforcement priorities . with regard to the three complaints that involved allegations against both ice and cbp , one remained open as part of an on - going investigation , while the other two complaints were found to be unsubstantiated . to address all three objectives , we interviewed dhs officials from ice and u.s. customs and border protection ( cbp ) in headquarters and four field locations , pregnant detainees , and non - governmental organizations ( ngo ) to obtain their perspectives on the care of pregnant women in dhs custody . the letter reported that the maternal psychological state in detention can negatively affect fetal and child development and that shackling during pregnancy can have serious physical and mental health impacts on pregnant women . for example , a march 2018 letter written to dhs by various medical groups noted their concerns about the health risks associated with detaining pregnant women . dhs cannot practicably pursue immigration enforcement action against all persons who may be subject to removal from the united states , and , therefore , dhs must continue to exercise prosecutorial discretion in the enforcement of u.s. immigration law , given the administration's removal priorities and available resources . you asked us to review issues related to dhs's detention of pregnant women . policies and detention standards we analyzed included ( 1 ) ice policies and detention standards that govern the conditions of confinement at ice detention facilities , and ( 2 ) cbp policies for border patrol and ofo , and cbp's national standards . dhs also provided technical comments , which we incorporated as appropriate . in accordance with the executive order and memorandum , dhs is no longer required to allocate resources according to tiered immigration enforcement priorities , which had previously placed threats to national security , border security , and public safety in the highest priority category .
over the past few years , the postal service's introduction of new products has stirred controversy . 22 and the postal service's proposed reform legislation could have on new products . some members of congress have said that the service is unfairly expanding its product line to compete in nonpostal - related markets and have introduced legislation to curtail such activity . some private sector companies have also complained about the service's entry into nontraditional postal markets . as agreed with the subcommittee , this report addresses the following objectives: identify the statutory and regulatory authorities and constraints covering all major groups of new products . this report responds to your request for information on new postal service products . they were concerned that the postal service could use its governmental status to an unfair advantage when introducing products that compete with private sector companies . in examining these concerns , you requested that we review several issues related to the postal service's development and marketing of new products and provide information on expenses and revenues associated with new products the service introduced in recent years . identify the potential impact that enactment of h.r . provide information on the postal service marketing department's new product development process and determine , for three selected products , how closely that process was followed . postal service . provide information , including financial data , on all new postal and nonpostal products the service marketed and / or had under development during fiscal years 1995 , 1996 , and 1997 . you indicated this information would be useful to the subcommittee in its deliberations to reform the u.s . 22 and the postal service's proposed reform legislation to determine how existing statutory and regulatory authorities and constraints governing new products may be affected by enactment of either of these legislative proposals . some members of congress and some private sector companies have said that the postal service is unfairly expanding its product line to compete in nonpostal - related markets , and they have manifested their concerns in various forms . 198 was referred to the committee on government reform and oversight with no further legislative action . representative northup sought to stop the postal service from expanding one of its international mail services — global package link — through an amendment to the fiscal year 1998 treasury , postal service , and general government appropriations bill . new products typically fall into one of the following major groups — capital , philatelic , postal , and nonpostal products . although the proposed amendment did not become part of the fiscal year 1998 appropriations act , the conferees agreed to study the issue . this move , however , has created controversy . h.r 3690 was not enacted and was reintroduced as h.r . 3690 ) on june 20 , 1996 , to prohibit the service from making available to the public any commercial nonpostal service that it did not have available on january 1 , 1994 . new products originate from several different sources within the postal service organization , and various review and approval processes are used for the introduction of new products — the source and type of approval process used generally being related to the type of product .
 ( recommendation 5 ) . our report examined: ( 1 ) the extent to which the department of energy's ( doe ) office of environmental management ( em ) has managed cleanup of the three gaseous diffusion plants ( gdp ) compared with relevant program management leading practices and the status of the cleanup effort ; ( 2 ) what em has spent on cleanup at the three gdps and the extent to which em's cost estimates for completing gdp cleanup are reliable ; and ( 3 ) the extent to which the decontamination and decommissioning ( d&d ) fund is sufficient to cover em's estimated cleanup costs of the gdps and challenges , if any , that could affect the sufficiency of the d&d fund . completing cleanup at the department of energy's ( doe ) three former uranium enrichment sites will cost billions of dollars and span decades . this report examines ( 1 ) the extent to which doe's em has managed the cleanup of the three gdps compared with relevant program management leading practices and the status of the cleanup effort ; ( 2 ) what em has spent on cleanup at the three gdps and the extent to which em's cost estimates for completing gdp cleanup are reliable ; and ( 3 ) the extent to which the d&d fund is sufficient to cover em's estimated cleanup costs of the gdps and challenges , if any , that could affect the sufficiency of the fund .  ( recommendation 3 ) the secretary of energy should direct the assistant secretary of the office of environmental management to work — in conjunction with epa and kentucky and tennessee state regulators — with an independent , third - party facilitator to help resolve disagreements over cleanup priorities , cleanup remedies , and cost estimation assumptions . we are making five recommendations to doe: the secretary of energy should direct the assistant secretary of the office of environmental management to take steps to manage the three gdps as an integrated program and follow relevant program management leading practices ( developing a gdp - wide program management plan ; an integrated master schedule ; and a reliable , integrated , comprehensive life - cycle cost estimate. ) . to inform all three objectives , we reviewed the energy policy act of 1992 , as amended ; doe triennial reports to congress on gdp cleanup efforts ; and prior reports issued by us , doe's office of inspector general ( both performance audits and financial statement audits on the d&d fund ) , and the national academies of sciences , engineering , and medicine ( national academies ) .  ( recommendation 4 ) the secretary of energy should regularly report on the status of the d&d fund and cleanup efforts at the three gdps with current information that contains details on challenges in reaching agreement with regulators and a clear scope of work . cleanup activities include assessing , treating , and disposing of contamination ; decontaminating and decommissioning ( d&d ) buildings and facilities ; and cleaning up soil , surface water , and groundwater , which are considered remediation activities .
the department of defense's ( dod ) military health system ( mhs ) exists to ensure that servicemembers , including medical providers , are ready to deploy and accomplish missions .  ( recommendation 6 ) . in february 2020 , the department of defense ( dod ) submitted its implementation plan ( “the plan” ) to congress in response to section 703 ( d ) of the national defense authorization act ( ndaa ) for fiscal year 2017 . § 1073d and considered complete information , and ( 2 ) dod has positioned itself to execute transition planning for restructuring its mtfs . dod's budget request for the defense health program has decreased from $33.7 billion in fiscal year 2019 to $33.1 billion in fiscal year 2021 . these practices include establishment of ( 1 ) a process for monitoring progress , ( 2 ) roles and responsibilities , ( 3 ) committed leadership from all levels of an organization , and ( 4 ) a dedicated team vested with necessary authority and resources to help set priorities , make timely decisions , and move quickly to implement decisions . dod also has not defined objectives in a measurable way with related thresholds and goals to enable monitoring of progress and challenges . this report addresses the extent to which ( 1 ) dod's methodology for determining mtf restructuring actions in the plan prioritized cross - cutting elements from 10 u.s.c . for example , as previously discussed , dod's three general priorities , or objectives , for restructuring mtfs include ensuring ( 1 ) the medical readiness of servicemembers and readiness of medical providers , ( 2 ) that civilian health care facilities and providers adequately support the health care needs of beneficiaries near each mtf , and ( 3 ) the cost - effectiveness of mtf and purchased care . until dod takes action to address these gaps by using more complete and accurate information about civilian health care quality , access , and cost - effectiveness , dod leaders may not fully understand risks to the achievement of their objectives in restructuring future mtfs . as the cost of the mhs increased over the past 2 decades as a share of dod's base budget , dod leaders have sought to improve readiness while curtailing the growth of the defense health program that funds the mtfs and purchased care . dod guidance states that beneficiaries should have a choice of health care providers that is sufficient to ensure access to appropriate , high - quality health care . to that end , dod's hospitals , medical centers , and clinics — referred to collectively as military medical treatment facilities ( mtf ) — are critical to the mhs . in response to other provisions in the ndaa for fiscal year 2017 , dod has made reforms aimed at improving the mhs focus on readiness . these elements include the ( 1 ) support an mtf provides to servicemembers' medical readiness and the readiness of medical personnel , ( 2 ) adequacy of civilian health care in proximity to each mtf , and ( 3 ) cost - effectiveness of direct care services at mtfs versus purchased care in nearby civilian provider networks .
 ( recommendation 1 ) . the objectives of our review were to examine ( 1 ) the potential impacts of climate change and the effects of these impacts on drinking water and wastewater infrastructure ; ( 2 ) technical assistance selected federal agencies provided to selected utilities to help make drinking water and wastewater infrastructure more resilient to the impacts of climate change , and options experts identified for providing additional technical assistance to utilities ; and ( 3 ) financial assistance federal agencies provided to selected utilities to help make drinking water and wastewater infrastructure more resilient to the impacts of climate change , and options experts identified for providing additional financial assistance to utilities . this report examines ( 1 ) the potential impacts of climate change and the effects of these impacts on drinking water and wastewater infrastructure ; ( 2 ) technical assistance selected federal agencies provided to selected utilities to help make drinking water and wastewater infrastructure more resilient to the impacts of climate change , and options experts identified for providing additional technical assistance to utilities ; and ( 3 ) financial assistance selected federal agencies provided to selected utilities to help make drinking water and wastewater infrastructure more resilient to the impacts of climate change , and options experts identified for providing additional financial assistance to utilities . in addition , a 2017 drinking water and wastewater sector work group report cochaired by the environmental protection agency ( epa ) found that natural disasters are among the most significant risks to our nation's drinking water and wastewater infrastructure .  ( matter for consideration 1 ) . such changes could also help limit the fiscal exposure to the federal government for future recovery costs . the five agencies are epa , noaa , the department of housing and urban development ( hud ) , the department of homeland security's ( dhs ) federal emergency management agency ( fema ) , and the u.s. department of agriculture's ( usda ) rural utilities service . significant risks from natural disasters can result from acute disasters related to extreme weather events , such as floods and hurricanes , and chronic hazards related to climate change , such as drought and sea level rise . human health and well - being require clean and safe water , and the lack of access to such water is a significant threat to human health , according to a 2014 study by the water research foundation . our work over the last decade has identified key federal roles in recognizing and managing risks in order to limit the federal government's fiscal exposure to the potential impacts of climate change . you asked us to review what federal actions may be taken to reduce the potential impacts of climate change and related effects on drinking water and wastewater infrastructure . federal agencies such as epa , fema , hud , and usda provide financial assistance to help ensure the long - term success of drinking water and wastewater utilities . such changes could help ensure that drinking water and wastewater infrastructure projects that receive federal financial assistance adequately address risks from climate change and ensure that utilities carry out their critical operations . climate change impacts have the potential to negatively affect drinking water supplies , water and wastewater conveyance , and treatment infrastructure , as well as stormwater management systems .
this report responds to your requests for a review of the procurement practices of the district of columbia financial responsibility and management assistance authority ( authority ) . as you are aware , the authority was established by congress in 1995 to repair the district's failing financial conditions and to improve the effectiveness of its various entities . to accomplish this , the authority was given a wide range of statutory authority and responsibility , including awarding contracts itself and the review and approval of contracts awarded by the district , to ensure the most efficient and effective service delivery . the other two contracts were awarded by the district's chief procurement officer ( cpo ) and totaled over $1 million . based on concerns regarding allegations of procurement improprieties at the authority , you requested that we determine whether applicable procurement regulations and procedures were followed in awarding and administering selected contracts on behalf of the authority's former chief management officer ( cmo ) and to thompson , cobb , bazilio and associates , a private accounting firm that is responsible for auditing the authority's financial statements . ten of the contracts were awarded by the authority and totaled $13 million . although we reviewed a total of 10 contracts that were awarded by the authority , we only assessed whether 9 of them were awarded and administered in accordance with the authority's procurement regulations because 1 of the contracts in our review , thompson , cobb , bazilio and associates ( contract number fy96 / fra#2 ) was awarded before the authority's regulations were adopted in march 1996 . they do not fully address findings that the authority did not fully define the roles and responsibilities of its procurement staff or provide guidance to its staff on how to ( 1 ) determine best value ; ( 2 ) develop performance standards for work statements ; ( 3 ) monitor contractors' performance and certify satisfactory performance ; ( 4 ) document its basis for contractor selection and justification for sole source awards ; and ( 5 ) provide its contracting staff with guidance for awarding and administering those procurement actions not specifically covered by its regulations , such as contracts between $100,000 and $500,000 , and for executing contract modifications , or contract options . we reviewed a total of 12 contracts and their associated contract actions , which we selected based on your specific concerns . the authority did not provide us with any information on what procedures were followed in awarding this contract. . as requested , we also determined whether the authority and the district received the goods and services that they contracted and paid for in the contracts that we reviewed . second , the authority had not provided its contracting staff with guidance on how to implement its procurement regulations to ensure compliance . for example , dsic reviewed over 100 authority contracts that totaled $47.2 million and were awarded between august 1995 and september 1998 . dsic attributes the authority's contracting problems , in part , to the authority's emphasis on achieving its programmatic mission in a short time period and its lack of procurement expertise . while the authority's regulations do not require independent cost estimates for all of its contracts , the regulations do authorize the authority to develop its own cost / price estimate to help assess the reasonableness of contractor proposals .
specifically , you wanted us to determine ( 1 ) if fpi has data , either from its management information systems or other sources , to support overall conclusions about how federal customers who buy and use its products and services view their timeliness , price , and quality ; and ( 2 ) whether agencies that are among the largest buyers of fpi products and services monitor fpi's performance the same way they do commercial vendors in terms of timeliness , price , and quality . to meet these objectives , we interviewed fpi officials and gathered information on their customer satisfaction efforts at fpi in washington , d.c. we also met with officials at fpi's customer service center in lexington , ky and the office of federal procurement policy ( ofpp ) ; and spoke with officials at five of fpi's major customer agencies — the defense logistics agency ( dla ) ; the general services administration's ( gsa ) federal supply service ( fss ) in arlington , va , and fort worth , tx ; the department of the army's office of the assistant secretary of the army for research , development , and acquisition in falls church , va ; the social security administration ( ssa ) in baltimore , md ; and the united states postal service ( the postal service ) in washington , d.c . this report responds to your july 8 , 1997 , request for information on whether federal prison industries ( fpi ) collects and maintains data that would enable it to make reliable , generalizable statements about the satisfaction of its federal agency customers with respect to the quality , cost , and timely delivery of fpi's products . in addition , we reviewed key laws and regulations , such as the federal acquisition regulation ( far ) pertaining to procurement from commercial vendors and fpi , especially in relation to vendor performance . we did not assess fpi's overall efforts to promote customer satisfaction , such as resolving complaints ; nor did we assess customer agencies' efforts to award and administer vendors' contracts . you also wanted to determine whether fpi's statutory status as a mandatory supplier to the government caused federal agencies to develop and use past performance information about fpi differently from how the agencies used information about private sector government contractors . in order to institutionalize within fpi an assessment of overall customer satisfaction and the use of this assessment to measure and improve performance , we recommend that the director , bureau of prisons , direct fpi's chief operating officer to ( 1 ) examine available approaches to collect and use customer satisfaction data to determine the most cost - effective approaches for fpi ; ( 2 ) develop a plan for collecting customer satisfaction data that would allow for supportable conclusions about federal customers' views on timeliness , price , and quality ; ( 3 ) develop a timetable for implementing the plan ; and ( 4 ) set performance goals for the levels of customer satisfaction that fpi wants to attain and measure results against these goals . federal agencies are generally required to buy fpi products , but not services , because under 18 u.s.c .
 ( recommendation 2 ) in addition , we are making 40 recommendations to 14 agencies to fully address the electronic recordkeeping requirements found in the managing government records directive and the presidential and federal records act amendments of 2014 in their policies and procedures . specifically , we are making the following recommendations to nara: the archivist of the united states should 1. require small and micro agencies that were determined to be at high risk of not complying with statutory and regulatory records management requirements to develop plans and timelines to address their records management weaknesses ( recommendation 1 ) 2. monitor the agencies' progress towards these efforts on a regular basis . of the 17 other agencies in our review , six agencies ( cfpb , commerce , nasa , nsf , opm , and the udall foundation ) concurred with our recommendations ; five agencies ( marine mammal commission , omb , ondcp , opic , and presidio trust ) did not state whether they agreed or disagreed with our recommendations ; and six agencies ( afrh , eac , fhfa , ftc , peace corps , and sigar ) stated that they had no comments on the report . advances in technology and electronic communications , such as email , have transformed agency operations while creating new opportunities with respect to the effective management of agency records . for example , these services can improve agency performance and promote openness and accountability through better documentation of agency actions and decisions . while nara requires agencies to self - assess their records management programs annually , it does not ensure that agencies that scored poorly on their self - assessments develop a plan to improve their programs or monitor their progress in such efforts . we requested comments on a draft of this report from nara and the 17 other agencies included in our review . however , these services also pose risks to the adequate protection of government information and have radically increased the volume and diversity of information that federal agencies must manage . our objectives were to determine the extent to which ( 1 ) selected agencies' policies and procedures address electronic recordkeeping requirements in the managing government records directive and the presidential and federal records act amendments of 2014 and ( 2 ) nara assisted selected agencies in managing their electronic records . specifically , many agencies did not address requirements related to electronic system and email implementation , including establishing controls for their electronic information systems , incorporating preservation considerations into systems , and issuing retention and management requirements for email . however , while nara oversees the selected agencies' compliance through records management self - assessments , it has not ensured that the selected small and micro agencies that were at high risk of improper records management have developed plans to address weaknesses in their records management programs . we are making 42 recommendations to 15 agencies . the directive , the federal records act ( fra ) , nara regulations , and the presidential and federal records act amendments of 2014 ( fra amendments ) , require federal agencies to take specific actions to create , manage , and preserve federal records and provide a framework for managing electronic records .
besides providing data on various indicators that irs uses to measure its filing season performance , we discuss five areas that have been problematic in past filing seasons: ( 1 ) the ability of taxpayers seeking answers to questions to reach irs via the telephone , hereafter referred to as telephone accessibility ; ( 2 ) the number of returns filed by means other than the traditional paper method ; ( 3 ) irs' efforts to deal with returns that have missing or incorrect social security numbers ( ssn ) ; ( 4 ) the use of banks , known as lockboxes , to process certain tax payments ; and ( 5 ) performance of the imaging system irs uses to process certain tax returns . this report responds to your request that we assess the internal revenue service's ( irs ) performance during the 1997 tax filing season . in march 1997 , we testified before the oversight subcommittee on the interim results of our work . i for information on our test methodology ) ; analyzed irs data on alternative filing methods , including irs surveys of telefile users and nonusers ; visited two lockbox banks , one in atlanta and one in st. louis , to review remittance processing procedures ; interviewed staff from fms , which is responsible for negotiating and administering lockbox contracts , about the use of lockboxes to process form 1040 tax payments and analyzed cost / benefit data related to lockbox processing ; interviewed officials from irs' taxpayer advocate's office about the impact of various filing season activities on taxpayers ; analyzed activity data for irs' internet world - wide web site and forms distribution centers ; and reviewed relevant irs internal audit reports . to achieve our objective , we interviewed irs national office officials and irs officials in the atlanta , cincinnati , fresno , and kansas city service centers responsible for the various activities we assessed ; analyzed filing season related data from various management information systems , including irs' management information system for top level executives ; analyzed irs data relating to its telephone assistance and conducted a test of irs' telephone accessibility during the last 2 weeks of the filing season ( see app . our objective was to assess irs' performance during the 1997 filing season , with particular emphasis on those areas that were identified as problematic in our reviews of past filing seasons . despite the improvement , however , accessibility is still low . irs uses various indicators to measure its filing season performance . to check whether accessibility had increased , we conducted an independent test to measure taxpayer access to irs' telephone system from march 31 through april 15 , 1997 . those indicators relate to workload , like the number of returns processed ; timeliness , like the number of days needed to process and issue refunds ; and quality , like the accuracy of irs' answers to taxpayers' questions and the accuracy with which irs processes individual income tax returns and refunds . despite the significant increase in 1997 , telephone accessibility is still too low . it achieved significant increases in telephone accessibility and alternative filings , and it implemented a major change in dealing with missing or incorrect ssns , all without any noticeable major problems .
this work has indicated that improved compliance with the bank secrecy act of 1970 ( bsa ) by financial institutions has forced many money launderers to find other means of disguising their illicit proceeds . the subcommittee has been reviewing new trends in money laundering activities as well as the government's ability to confront them . there have been both new legislation and recent changes to existing federal regulations that will affect currency transaction reporting for casinos . in response to your request , we are reporting on the extent of legalized gaming in the united states , especially that taking place in casinos ; currency transaction reporting requirements for casinos ; whether the same reporting requirements apply to tribal casinos ; and the level of enforcement efforts to ensure that casinos are complying with currency transaction reporting requirements . in your request letter , you expressed concern about the use of the nation's growing gaming industry to launder illicit profits . the report also makes a recommendation to the secretary of the treasury regarding efforts to deter money laundering in casinos . we have included information on these changes in this report . our initial objectives were to determine ( 1 ) the extent of legalized gaming in the united states , ( 2 ) the currency transaction reporting requirements for casinos , ( 3 ) the currency transaction reporting requirements for tribal casinos , and ( 4 ) the level of enforcement efforts to ensure that casinos are complying with currency transaction reporting requirements . as agreed with the subcommittee , our focus was on casinos with gagrs over $1 million . law enforcement officials have estimated that between $100 billion and $300 billion in u.s. currency is laundered each year . the new bsa regulations that require casinos to take a more active role in ensuring their own compliance with bsa , as well as other money laundering prevention strategies such as nevada's prohibited transactions , could be positive steps toward compliance given the limited irs resources for compliance reviews . money laundering is the use or conversion of money gained from illegal activity , such as drug smuggling , as or to money that appears legitimate and whose source cannot be traced to the illegal activity . to determine recent changes in federal regulations and legislation , we reviewed the money laundering suppression act of 1994 and recent amendments to bsa regulations ; in addition , we confirmed that treasury and nevada officials continue to have ongoing discussions regarding the differences between bsa and nevada's regulations . to determine the extent of legalized gaming in the united states , we reviewed testimony , reports , and articles concerning the gaming industry , including its extent and growth . to determine the currency transaction reporting requirements for casinos , including tribal casinos , we reviewed bsa , the bsa implementing regulations under 31 c.f.r . transaction information filed by tribal casinos is generally not accessible to law enforcement because it is reported on transaction forms that record income tax information and thus are currently subject to disclosure restrictions . irs' examination division is responsible for monitoring and enforcing compliance with bsa reporting and recordkeeping requirements for all financial institutions under its jurisdiction , commonly referred to as “non - bank financial institutions.” this monitoring includes conducting periodic compliance reviews at over 100,000 nonbank financial institutions , including casinos .
 ( recommendation 7 ) . the department of defense ( dod ) relies on professional military education ( pme ) and joint professional military education ( jpme ) to prepare its military personnel , throughout their careers , for the intellectual demands of complex contingences and major conflicts that typically involve more than a single military service . in this report , we assess the extent to which ( 1 ) the military services' pme programs have met civilian and jpme accreditation requirements , ( 2 ) the office of the secretary of defense has assessed the effectiveness of the military services' pme programs , and ( 3 ) the under secretary of defense ( comptroller ) has monitored the military services' pme program budgets . where appropriate , we also considered select training and development leading practices ( which include education ) , standards for internal control in the federal government , and the dod financial management regulation to assess ousd ( p&r ) oversight of these programs . finally , usd ( comptroller ) 's ability to monitor the military services' pme programs is limited because the services' budget request data are incomplete and lack uniformity . requiring the marine corps to report budget request data on its senior - level pme program annually , and specifying how to account for costs in the exhibits would enhance the usd ( comptroller ) 's ability to monitor the military services' pme programs and also enhance congress's ability to identify trends among these programs .  ( recommendation 5 ) the secretary of defense should ensure that the under secretary of defense ( comptroller ) updates the dod financial management regulation to require the marine corps to include a budget request data exhibit for the marine corps war college in support of dod's annual budget request . these programs include content on warfighting and leader development ; joint planning , doctrine , and joint force requirements ; national security and theater strategy ; and civil - military relations . usd ( comptroller's ) ability to monitor the military services' pme programs is limited because the military services' budget request data are incomplete and lack uniformity . the usd ( comptroller ) focuses on budgetary formulation and execution ; financial management and oversight ; and accounting policy ; among other things .  ( recommendation 3 ) the secretary of defense should ensure that the under secretary of defense for personnel and readiness , in coordination with the chairman of the joint chiefs of staff , issue and implement performance measures — to include the tracking of costs — that align with the department - wide mission statement for pme .  ( recommendation 2 ) the secretary of defense should ensure that the under secretary of defense for personnel and readiness , in coordination with the chairman of the chiefs of staff , develop and issue a department - wide mission statement for pme that will explain the program's purpose and goals , and serve as a basis for performance measures .  ( recommendation 1 ) the secretary of defense should ensure that the chairman of the joint chiefs of staff , in coordination with the under secretary of defense for personnel and readiness and the military services , develop policy concerning actions , if any , the military services can take to mitigate jpme seminar student mix shortfalls and still meet the intent of the opmep's joint acculturation requirement .
 ( recommendation 3 ) . specifically , dol reported that it will ( 1 ) ensure letters granting or renewing self - insurance authority will inform operators that their authorization expires in one year and that they must submit renewal information three months in advance of the expiration date , ( 2 ) ensure letters denying self - insurance will inform operators that they have a 30- day appeal period ( limited to one extension ) and that dol has set a goal of resolving all appeals within 90 days of the denial letter , and ( 3 ) modify existing computer systems to identify lapses or cancellations of commercial insurance coverage , and require operators identified as having lapsed or cancelled coverage to obtain or provide proof of coverage within 30 days . the federal government's black lung disability trust fund ( trust fund ) finances medical and cash assistance to certain coal miners who have been totally disabled due to pneumoconiosis ( also known as black lung disease ) . this report examines ( 1 ) how coal mine operator bankruptcies have affected the trust fund , and ( 2 ) how dol managed coal mine operator insurance to limit financial risk to the trust fund . its expenditures have consistently exceeded revenue and the trust fund has essentially borrowed with interest from the department of the treasury's ( treasury ) general fund almost every year since 1979 , which was its first complete fiscal year . in fiscal year 2019 , the trust fund borrowed about $1.9 billion to cover its expenditures , according to department of labor ( dol ) officials .  ( recommendation 2 ) the director of the office of workers' compensation programs should develop and implement a process to monitor operator compliance with commercial insurance requirements and periodically evaluate the effectiveness of this process . we commend dol's efforts to address the deficiencies of its past self - insurance process . dol commented that adopting gao's recommendations would further improve its oversight of coal mine operator insurance going forward .  ( recommendation 1 ) the director of the office of workers' compensation programs should develop and implement procedures for self - insured coal mine operator appeals that identify time lines for self - insured operators to submit documentation supporting their appeals and that identify a goal for how much time dol should take to make appeals decisions . dol's new self - insurance process may help to address past deficiencies in setting collateral and reviewing self - insured operators if implemented effectively . however , the trust fund pays benefits in certain circumstances , including in cases where no responsible mine operator can be identified or when the liable mine operator does not pay . we are making the following three recommendations to the department of labor: the director of the office of workers' compensation programs should develop and implement procedures for coal mine operator self - insurance renewal that clarifies how long an operator is authorized to self - insure ; when an operator must submit its renewal application and supporting documentation ; and the conditions under which an operator's self - insurance authority would not be renewed . this may occur , for instance , when the amount of collateral dol requires from a self - insured coal operator does not fully cover the operator's benefit responsibility should the operator become insolvent .
as part of our ongoing work examining how federal agencies have used buyouts to downsize the federal workforce , you asked that we compare the projected costs and savings of buyouts with an alternative downsizing strategy , reductions - in - force ( rif ) , over a 5-year period . because such an analysis is dependent on many factors that may vary considerably among agencies , we used a variety of assumptions and scenarios in our analysis to determine the average costs and savings of each method . we based our analysis on available workforce data and on the results of earlier studies completed by us and by other organizations . this report describes and compares the circumstances under which buyouts or rifs offer greater potential savings , but it does not calculate or compare the actual costs of either alternative in past years . these effects included the ability to use buyouts to restructure agency workforces , retain or improve workforce diversity , and avoid lowering productivity and morale . two driving forces in the reductions have been the federal workforce restructuring act of 1994 and the national performance review ( npr ) . both congress and the administration have agreed that federal employment levels should be cut as a means of reducing federal costs and controlling deficits . through a series of executive orders and legislation , goals have been established for reducing federal staffing levels . the act , passed in march 1994 , mandated governmentwide reductions of 272,900 full time equivalent ( fte ) positions through fiscal year 1999 . congress is considering new legislation that would again give non - dod agencies temporary authority to pay retirement and separation incentives . for many federal agencies , achieving reduced staffing levels cannot be attained by relying solely on attrition . over 112,500 buyouts have been paid to employees governmentwide since dod was authorized use of the authority in early 1993 . these procedures give favorable consideration in layoff decisions to employees with ( 1 ) career appointments , ( 2 ) military veteran status , ( 3 ) seniority , and ( 4 ) good job performance . dod was authorized use of the buyout authority through separate legislation . one approach that has been historically available to agencies is rifs . the npr recommended that any reductions be accomplished through agency efforts to streamline operations , reduce “management control” and headquarters positions , and improve government operations through reinvention and quality management techniques . varying assumptions have been used in past economic studies of buyouts and rifs . while economics play an important part in an agency's decision on which downsizing strategy to use , noneconomic effects were also described to us by agency officials . the studies we reviewed included our 1985 study of rifs,a 1994 dod study of buyouts and rifs , a 1993 congressional budget office study of buyouts and rifs , and a 1995 office of personnel management ( opm ) analysis of buyout and rif costs . the economics of workforce reduction strategies can vary widely among agencies depending on ( 1 ) the positions eliminated , ( 2 ) the demographics of the retirement eligible population , ( 3 ) how early in the fiscal year separations are made , and ( 4 ) whether positions are refilled , eliminated , or the work contracted out .
as part of its mission , the internal revenue service ( irs ) strives to maintain the highest possible level of tax compliance . this report responds to your request for information on the ( 1 ) number of igps nationwide and in irs' georgia district during fiscal years 1994 through 1996 , ( 2 ) descriptions and results of igps in the state of georgia during fiscal years 1994 through 1996 , and ( 3 ) controls and procedures irs has in place for igps . irs annually audits a number of tax returns to determine whether taxpayers have voluntarily complied with the tax laws and paid the proper amounts of tax . information gathering projects ( igp ) are one technique that irs uses to collect information on noncompliance and to identify returns with audit potential . in selecting returns for audit , irs' computer assigns a score to each filed return to help find those having audit potential — that is , those for which an audit would be likely to change the reported tax because of noncompliance . due to your concerns about igps being misused in auditing tax returns , you asked us to study irs' use of igps in identifying returns for audit . because such computer - aided selection techniques rely solely on information on filed returns , irs' examination division collects information from other sources to identify areas of potential taxpayer noncompliance . our past work has discussed some of the problems with attempts to research noncompliance and related solutions through igps.for example , we raised concerns about whether igps ( 1 ) focused on taxpayer populations with significant compliance shortfalls and ( 2 ) collected statistically valid data that could be generalized to a larger population . we focused on fiscal years 1994-1996 because accurate and verifiable data for prior years were unavailable . over half of these igps ( 44 ) focused on four types of taxpayers: ( 1 ) businesses that potentially underreported income or overreported expense deductions ; ( 2 ) businesses that potentially did not properly report or pay taxes , such as excise taxes on fuel , chemicals , or heavy vehicle use ; ( 3 ) individual taxpayers who potentially claimed an improper exemption for dependents , a filing status ( e.g. , head of household ) , or earned income credit ; and ( 4 ) businesses and individual taxpayers who potentially did not file required tax returns . the length of time that these 41 igps had remained open varied from 5 months to several years ; more specifically , 23 of the 41 igps lasted 2 or more years . the revised framework also includes irs' recent efforts to develop a more comprehensive and statistically valid approach to compliance research . these controls and procedures are designed to guard against any improprieties and misuse of igps , as well as to better ensure productive use of audit resources . the additional recommended tax plus penalty amounts per igp ranged from $0 ( in the 9 igps closed without any audits ) to $269 million ; of the 32 igps with audits , 11 recommended total additional tax amounts that exceeded $500,000 , and 7 recommended total amounts exceeding $1 million .
this report responds to your request that we review the internal revenue service's ( irs ) processes for handling undeliverable mail . you asked us to identify the amount of undeliverable mail and reasons why some of the mail irs sends to taxpayers was undeliverable and the impact nondelivery of this mail had on taxpayers and irs . we focused on notices irs sent taxpayers involving the assessment and collection of taxes . we also assessed irs' procedures for processing undeliverable mail . these include ( 1 ) irs' participation in a project with the postal service and other federal agencies in which the postal service will collect change of address information and provide it to the participating agencies , and ( 2 ) irs' use of the postal service's national change of address database to contact taxpayers in order to verify addresses . since the revenue act of 1928 , irs has been required to send such notifications to a taxpayer's last known address . to help irs better manage its undeliverable mail we recommend that the commissioner of internal revenue take the following actions: better encourage taxpayers to make address changes by ( 1 ) accepting changes of address over the telephone ; ( 2 ) making form 8822 , change of address , more conveniently available ; and ( 3 ) emphasizing to taxpayers the importance of keeping their addresses current with irs . the implementation of these recommendations should have a significant impact on reducing irs' undeliverable mail . a taxpayer's last known address was not defined by the revenue act nor has it been defined by department of the treasury regulations . irs recognizes this problem and generally attempts to notify taxpayers of their tax obligations by sending additional notices to addresses it believes may be more current than the addresses in its records . although previous efforts to deal with this mail were primarily limited to irs' service center collection functions , new efforts are expected to have service - wide consequences because irs agreed in august 1994 to implement the recommendations of the taxpayer ombudsman's study . it should allow taxpayers to make address changes with minimum effort by such means as telephoning irs or using the change of address form , which should be conveniently available . the taxpayer ombudsman has also recommended adopting procedures to help ensure that taxpayers' addresses are accurately updated in irs' databases . in total , 25 recommendations aimed at helping irs better deal with undeliverable mail have been made . we identified attempts by two service centers to consolidate efforts to locate taxpayers' addresses in order to reduce costs and improve effectiveness . not only will the accounts receivable inventory show a higher balance , the government is denied access to funds it is owed . the recommendations included ( 1 ) developing standardized procedures for processing undeliverable mail throughout irs and making the collection function's automated systems available to other service center functions ; ( 2 ) testing alternative methods for taxpayers to provide address changes to irs , such as the use of a tear - off return stub on notices ; and ( 3 ) adopting procedures to help ensure that taxpayers' addresses would be accurately updated in its databases .
this report presents the status of the internal revenue service's ( irs ) plans for conducting the taxpayer compliance measurement program ( tcmp ) for tax year 1994 . it also identifies the potential effects of these plans on measuring taxpayer compliance . this report was prepared , not at the request of the committee , but as part of our continuing efforts to provide information and analysis to improve tax administration . tcmp results play an important role in tax policy and administration decisions . irs uses the data for measuring compliance levels , estimating the tax gap ( i.e. , the difference between the amount of income tax owed and the amount voluntarily paid ) , identifying compliance issues , developing formulas for objectively selecting returns to audit , and allocating audit resources . congress and federal and state agencies use tcmp data for policy analysis , revenue estimating , and research . because of tcmp's importance , we have been monitoring irs' plans to develop and implement the 1994 tcmp . our objectives were to ( 1 ) determine the status of irs' 1994 tcmp planning effort and ( 2 ) identify the potential effects of this plan on measuring taxpayer compliance . in its 1994 tcmp plans , irs has gone a long way in improving its collection of compliance data . we reported that tcmp was not too costly because past tcmp results had been used to more efficiently allocate billions of dollars in enforcement resources and to recommend tax law changes that generated billions of dollars of revenue a year . congress' joint committee on taxation also opposed irs' proposed changes to tcmp , arguing that the changes were unlikely to provide data with the same quality and usefulness as those data found in prior tcmp surveys . while the concept of such computerization is commendable , the computer system has not yet been developed and tested . to mitigate these concerns , the former commissioner of internal revenue asked irs staff to redesign tcmp , reducing the sample size by over half and limiting the scope of the audits . finally , we identified ways in which irs could make tcmp results more timely . irs officials recognize that these activities are necessary to completely implement the improvements . however , irs has already missed its september 1994 milestone for defining tcmp data requirements . after the last tcmp survey for tax year 1988 , irs concluded that tcmp was too costly , too burdensome , and too time consuming . however , these data may not be sufficient for developing compliance strategies . this classification issue has plagued irs for decades . tcmp audits actually reduce overall burden on taxpayers to the extent that they reduce the number of compliant taxpayers that are selected for other irs audits . however , irs officials believe that the benefits from identifying more noncompliance will more than offset the cost associated with increased audit time . until this is done , it will not be possible for auditors to be trained in its use . in april 1993 , we reported on the importance of tcmp , indicating that the proposed changes to the size and scope of tcmp appeared unjustified and would undercut its benefits .
this report describes: ( 1 ) dod obligations to dod - sponsored ffrdcs from fiscal years 2013 through 2018 ; ( 2 ) factors that led dod to use s&a centers for research ; ( 3 ) how dod uses and assesses the outcomes of s&a center research ; and ( 4 ) dod and s&a center policies and practices related to conflicts of interest . to aid in its efforts to develop innovative solutions to immediate and diverse threats to national security , the department of defense ( dod ) utilizes 10 federally funded research and development centers ( ffrdc ) . five of these ffrdcs are study and analysis ( s&a ) centers that deliver independent and objective analysis and advice to dod in support of policy development . as described in the federal acquisition regulation ( far ) , ffrdcs meet special , long - term research or development needs of sponsoring agencies ( i.e. , the agencies responsible for the overall use of the ffrdc ) in areas integral to their missions that cannot be met as effectively by existing in - house or non - ffrdc contractor resources . to determine how dod uses and assesses the outcomes of s&a center research , we reviewed dod guidance related to the review of ffrdcs ( including dod's 2011 ffrdc management plan and dod instruction 5000.77 ) . the senate report accompanying a bill for the john s. mccain national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2019 included a provision for us to review dod's use of ffrdcs . for the purposes of reporting on dod obligations to dod - sponsored ffrdcs , we included dod's 10 ffrdcs ; for subsequent objectives , we focused our review on dod's five s&a centers , which commonly deliver studies and analyses in the form of research reports . to determine how much dod obligated to dod - sponsored ffrdcs from fiscal years 2013 through 2018 , we collected information and data on fiscal years 2013 through 2018 obligations to the 10 ffrdcs . these steps include , but are not limited to , having procedures in place to screen employees for potential conflicts of interest ; requiring disclosure of financial and other interests that might affect the employee's objectivity ; establishing policies and procedures to protect proprietary , privileged , and sensitive information from disclosure ; and reporting any conflicts of interest to the applicable contracting officer or contracting officer's representative and the primary sponsor as soon as it is identified . in another instance , a rand employee was initially staffed to a project related to an area of work a spouse worked on commercially , and rand mitigated the potential conflict by recusing the employee from the project . each of the five s&a centers we reviewed has corporate - wide conflict of interest policies and practices which incorporate various key elements of the dod instruction . to identify the factors that led dod to use s&a centers for research , we reviewed relevant far provisions related to ffrdcs as well as the dod instruction and guidance for working with ffrdcs . dod sponsors ffrdcs by establishing contracts or other agreements with entities to operate , manage , and / or administer the ffrdcs .
our objectives were to ( 1 ) assess irs' progress in converting its systems according to the guidelines in our year 2000 assessment guide , ( 2 ) identify the risks irs faces to completing the year 2000 effort on time , and ( 3 ) identify risks to the continuity of irs operations in the event of year 2000-induced system failures . although 2000 is less than 2 years in the future , irs has less than 1 year to complete all of the work that it believes is necessary to reach its goal of having all of its systems year 2000 compliant by january 1999 . this report summarizes the information we provided to your office on the results of our work to date on the internal revenue service's ( irs ) efforts to have its information systems function correctly when processing dates beyond december 31 , 1999 . these irs efforts are necessary because the irs' information systems , many of which are over 25 years old , were programmed to read two - digit date fields . irs established this goal to help ensure that it can accurately process tax returns and other tax data through multiple systems by the start of the 1999 filing season . the outcome of these efforts will also depend on the extent to which agencies have institutionalized key systems development and program management practices , as well as on their ability to execute large - scale software development or conversion projects . therefore , if unchanged , beginning january 1 , 2000 , these systems would interpret 2000 as 1900 and thus would seriously jeopardize critical tax processing and collection operations . agencies' success or failure will largely be determined by the quality of their program management and executive leadership . irs is still assessing some of its infrastructure components and faces the risk of not completing all of its year 2000 efforts by january 1999 . irs is experiencing delays in completing conversion efforts for its existing systems and major systems replacement efforts . the enormous challenge involved in making information systems year 2000 compliant is managerial as well as technical . irs' contingency management plan does not address the possibility that ( 1 ) irs may have overlooked a date dependency during its assessment phase of applications or infrastructure areas or ( 2 ) even if system conversion and replacement efforts are completed on time and fully tested , unexpected failures may occur . we recommend that the commissioner of internal revenue take the following steps to better ensure that irs has adequately assessed the vulnerabilities of its core business processes in the event of year 2000-induced system failures: solicit the input of business functional area officials to identify irs' core business processes and prioritize those processes that must continue in the event of year 2000-induced failures ; map irs' mission - critical systems to those core business processes ; determine the impact of information system failures on each core business assess any existing business continuity and contingency plans that may have been developed for non - year 2000 reasons to determine whether these plans are applicable to year 2000-induced failures , and develop and test contingency plans for core business processes if existing plans are not appropriate .
in fiscal year 1996 , excluding interest on the public debt , civilian employee pension benefits ( i.e. , civil service retirement and disability ) was the seventh largest mandatory spending program , with nearly $40 billion in payments to 2.3 million retirees and survivor annuitants . federal spending on pensions for retired civilian employees of the federal government represents a significant share of the budget . although current employees finance a portion of these benefits through the contributions they make , the federal government pays most pension costs , as do states and localities and private sector employers . as agreed with your office , our objectives were to ( 1 ) determine the number of federal retirees , if any , whose pensions have come to exceed the final salaries that they earned while working ; ( 2 ) explain why these retirees' pensions came to exceed their final salaries ; and ( 3 ) determine the difference , if any , in these retirees' pension amounts if current cost - of - living - adjustment ( cola ) policy — that is , the cola policy enacted in 1984 , which established the formula and schedule used today by the office of personnel management ( opm ) — had been in effect without interruption since 1962 , and also determine any difference in the number of retirees whose pensions would have exceeded their final salaries . thus , it is important for policymakers to understand how key features of federal retirement policy — set in statute — affect pension costs . this report addresses the part of your request that concerns pension costs and retirement policy . we collected data for the civil service retirement system ( csrs ) and the federal employees retirement system ( fers ) general employees , as well as for all former members of congress who were retired and still living as of october 1 , 1995 , using a computerized personnel database and case file information maintained by opm . at your request , we are responding to a series of questions about federal and nonfederal retirement programs . for example , although the current underlying policy has been in effect since 1984 , congress has modified this policy several times for limited periods to help reduce the deficit . also , the effects of many individual colas and cola policy changes are cumulative and compound over time . we selected retirement variables to use as independent variables because they were ( 1 ) required to be used for computing pension benefits ( e.g. , years of service ) ; or ( 2 ) known to affect pension amounts for some or all retirees ( e.g. , colas and the selection of spousal survivor benefits ) . generalization is difficult , in part because no one cola policy has ever been implemented for a sustained period . the retiree's pension would have been larger if current policy had been in effect without interruption . in particular , the effects of the cola policies of the 1960s and 1970s that overcompensated for inflation will continue to have an effect on retiree pensions for as long as those who received them are alive , just as not receiving scheduled colas in 1984 and the suspension of colas in 1986 will continue to be reflected in the pensions of anyone who retired before these years .
on our own initiative , we conducted a follow - up review to identify ( 1 ) how long federal agencies took to enter fugitives onto the wanted person file ; ( 2 ) what information the agencies had on entry times and the means used to monitor entry times ; and ( 3 ) what actions agencies took , considered , or could take to reduce any entry delays . then , we interviewed officials and reviewed various documents from the department of justice's fbi , immigration and naturalization service ( ins ) , and united states marshals service ( usms ) and from the department of the treasury's bureau of alcohol , tobacco and firearms ( atf ) and the customs service . as a result of our earlier work on interagency coordination in apprehending federal fugitives , we noted that many entries in the federal bureau of investigation's ( fbi ) national crime information center's ( ncic ) wanted person file were made long after issuance of the arrest warrants.this was generally contrary to the stated policies of the agencies that made the entries and the generally accepted view of ncic officials , the international association of chiefs of police , and others that timely use of the file facilitates apprehension and reduces risks to law enforcement personnel and the general public . these agencies accounted for 22,903 ( 78 percent ) of the 29,339 federal fugitive records on the wanted person file as of april 6 and were the principal fugitive - hunting agencies within the justice and treasury departments . responsible justice and treasury officials provided oral comments at meetings on december 5 ( treasury ) and december 11 , 1995 ( justice ) . to accomplish our objectives , we analyzed various information , including federal fugitive records on the wanted person file as of april 6 , 1994 . because the attorney general is the chief official responsible for the wanted person file and since the agencies we reviewed are under your jurisdictions , we are reporting our findings to you . we performed our work in washington , d.c. , from may 1995 to august 1995 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . we reviewed these two departments in our earlier fugitive work as well . for example , usms officials said there might have been some delays in their being notified by ( 1 ) the courts of persons who failed to make a required court appearance or ( 2 ) the drug enforcement administration regarding drug case fugitives that the usms is responsible for pursuing . generally , federal fugitives are persons whose whereabouts are unknown and who ( 1 ) are being sought because they have been charged with one or more federal crimes ; ( 2 ) have failed to appear for a required court action or for deportation ; or ( 3 ) have escaped from federal custody . our objectives , scope , and methodology are discussed in more detail in appendix i . we also interviewed them as to any ( 1 ) current information they might have on entry policies and times ; ( 2 ) means their agencies had for staying abreast of entry times and for ensuring timely entries ; ( 3 ) known or possible causes and effects of delayed entries ; and ( 4 ) actions that had been taken to address entry time problems or actions that would be or could be taken as a result of our findings .
the commerce , consumer , and monetary affairs subcommittee asked us on november 9 , 1993 , to determine ( 1 ) the adequacy of commerce's administration of its employees' acceptance and reporting of travel funds from nonfederal sources and ( 2 ) the implications , if any , of commerce's denying the office of government ethics ( oge ) access to its records of reimbursed travel in 1992 . this report presents the results of our review of the programs administered by the department of commerce and federal trade commission ( ftc ) for controlling the acceptance and reporting of travel expenses incurred by their employees and paid by nonfederal organizations . under regulations promulgated by the general services administration ( gsa ) , federal employees can accept payment of travel costs by nonfederal sources , such as private companies and universities , if the purpose of the travel is related to the employees' official duties and responsibilities and the acceptance of such travel does not present the appearance of a conflict of interest . on june 6 , 1994 , the subcommittee also asked that we include ftc in our review . federal agencies are required to establish procedures to ensure that these conditions are met before travel reimbursements are accepted . collectively , the international trade administration ( ita ) , national oceanic and atmospheric administration ( noaa ) , and national institute of standards and technology ( nist ) accounted for about 79 percent of commerce's trips . commerce and ftc have established regulations that require adherence to gsa's regulations . the overall effect of commerce's temporary denial of access was minimal in that oge eventually received access to commerce records , and oge has not been denied access to such records at any other agency . in the request for comments on the implementing regulations , gsa stated that it expected oge to review agency implementation of section 302 in connection with its ongoing reviews of agency ethics programs . an official in commerce's office of general counsel said that many of the deficiencies were due to the december 9 , 1992 , change in gsa's regulations , which is discussed on pages 2 and 3 of this report . ftc also had internal controls in place , including the use of letters of commitment to monitor expenses . section 302 of the ethics reform act of 1989 ( 31 u.s.c . these regulations , which have been in effect from march 8 , 1991 , through the present , include a definition of what constitutes conditions for accepting travel reimbursements , a description of payment methods , and a requirement that all instances of nonfederally reimbursed travel in excess of $250 be reported semiannually to oge . specific responsibilities include developing and reviewing statutes and regulations pertaining to conflicts of interest and monitoring agency ethics programs . we recommend that the secretary of commerce take actions to ensure that all commerce employees' travel requests containing all of the necessary information , such as the name of the payer and the amount and type of expenses to be paid , are reviewed and approved before a trip ; the office of general counsel , as part of its responsibilities for submitting semiannual reports to oge , ensure that these reports include the required information , including the dates and nature of events attended and expenses paid ; and commerce offices require ( 1 ) travel vouchers and ( 2 ) receipts for reimbursed expenses , except for meals since they are not required by federal travel regulations to be supported in this manner .
specifically , this report provides information about staffing and workload levels for the courts from 1989 through 1998 , assesses how the courts evaluate the sufficiency of the levels of nonjudicial staff who work on processing and disposition of cases , and compares the d.c. courts' staffing methodology to other available methodologies . this report responds in part to your request for information concerning personnel management in the district of columbia courts . 105-33 ) changed this process so that the joint committee now submits its budget directly to the office of management and budget , and the courts' estimates are included in the president's budget submission to congress , without revision but subject to the president's recommendations . the d.c. revitalization act of 1997 ( p.l . the courts were not mandated to follow these earlier recommendations . we recommend that , before planning or implementing such a review ( including selecting components to be covered and balancing costs and benefits ) , the courts consult with others who have used workload - based methodologies to evaluate court case processing staffing levels . for example , the use of therapeutic case processing alternatives , such as those used in drug court or with domestic violence cases , may extend the life of a case on a pending caseload while they also result in the rehabilitation of the offender . our objectives were to provide information on staffing and workload levels for the d.c. courts from 1989 through 1998 , assess how the d.c. courts evaluate the sufficiency of their nonjudicial case processing staff levels , and compare the d.c. courts' methodologies to other available methodologies . however , this is not to say that other jurisdictions have not conducted databased studies to assess the adequacy of their staffing levels using similar methodologies . we will respond to the other parts of your request in a future report . among these elements was that of identifying the number of employees needed to accomplish agency goals . this definition does not include judges or their law clerks and secretaries . the district of columbia court reform and criminal procedure act of 1970 established the d.c. courts in their present form . the total number of court of appeals cases available for disposition in 1998 was 18.3 percent greater than in 1989 , and the number of pending cases at year - end was 18.0 percent greater . the d.c. superior court has general jurisdiction over virtually all local legal matters . the d.c. court system does not process cases but provides administrative services to the superior court and court of appeals , including fiscal services , education and training , data processing , personnel management , and court reporting . while d.c. court officials apparently consider caseload data in judging whether staffing levels are adequate , they have not measured the amount of time required by case processing staff to process differing types of cases nor used such data to determine whether the size of the courts' workforce is inadequate , adequate , or excessive for the work of the courts . we specifically identified collecting and analyzing data on staff time required to fulfill agency goals as an important element of workforce planning . the court also has divisions that do not process cases but provide alternative dispute resolution services and handle the juvenile probation function .
in addition to providing printing services to the federal government , the government printing office ( gpo ) provides government publications to the public through its sales program at 24 bookstores across the country ; by telephone , fax , and mail order sales at its headquarters in washington , d.c. ; and through consigned sales agents in other agencies . this report responds to your request of july 21 , 1997 , that we review gpo's procedures involving the management of its inventory of publications that it determines to be excess , particularly its management of a major inventory reduction of excess publications that took place in september 1996 . specifically , our objectives were to determine the facts surrounding the september 1996 inventory reduction: whether it followed existing policies and procedures , and how 3,258 copies of the senate 1789-1989 , a four - volume set written by senator byrd , were destroyed as part of that reduction . gpo periodically reviews its inventory of publications to determine whether any can be considered excess — i.e. , no longer expected to sell — and then disposes of the excess copies . we obtained the information for this report from gpo's policies and procedures manuals , inventory and financial records , interviews with agency and contractor personnel , and observations at gpo's warehouse in laurel , maryland . gpo was established in 1861 to ( 1 ) assist congress and federal agencies in the production and replication of information products and services , and ( 2 ) provide the public with government information products and services . our review was conducted in july and august 1997 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . while gpo's initial actions could have helped prevent a recurrence , they did not appear to address all of the underlying causes of the problems associated with the september 1996 major inventory reduction . on september 5 , 1997 , we provided a draft of this report to the public printer for review and comment . gpo has taken action or has actions in process that are aimed at helping to prevent a recurrence of a situation in which excess publications are disposed of without regard to established policies and procedures . the september 1996 inventory reduction involved 2,127 publications that had a printing and binding cost of about $3 million , which was about one - third of the surplus publications expense gpo charged for publications it excessed and disposed of in fiscal year 1996 . as a result of the projected loss for fiscal year 1996 , the superintendent of documents tasked a management team with developing an action plan to increase revenue and reduce expenses , with the objective of returning the sales program to full cost - recovery in fiscal year 1997 . the sales program operates within the revolving fund and is expected to recover its costs from its sales . in may 1996 , financial projections indicated that the sales program expected a substantial loss for fiscal year 1996 , the first such loss in 15 years . gpo has taken or plans to take actions that , if effectively implemented , should prevent this situation from recurring . the inventory reduction began in early september 1996 , even before the action plan was issued , with a deadline for completion of september 30 , 1996 .
our objectives were to ( 1 ) assess the extent to which flows of money into mutual funds were affecting the amount of deposits at banks and ( 2 ) determine what impact such flows might have on the availability of finance for the economy as a whole and for residential , consumer , and business borrowers . this letter responds to the committee's request that we examine whether the movement of funds from bank deposits into mutual funds affects the availability of credit for residential , consumer , or commercial purposes . we assessed two quantitative approaches: ( 1 ) the total net flows into mutual funds and ( 2 ) ici's estimate of the impact on deposits . in addition , we did a literature search for research articles examining ( 1 ) how residential , consumer , and business borrowers obtain financing , not only from bank loans or securities issuance but also from other sources and ( 2 ) how lenders , including banks as well as nonbank providers such as finance companies , funded the financing they provided and whether they sold or securitized their finance . there remains the possibility that some borrowers from small banks might face credit availability constraints in certain circumstances , but it is not clear whether those circumstances currently exist . in addition , the relative importance of bank loans has been further diminished by the increased provision of direct loans by nonbank financial intermediaries , including securities firms , insurance companies , and finance companies . the household sector ( generally residential and consumer borrowers ) also has become less dependent on bank loans for the ultimate source of financing . in its letter , the federal reserve stated that the report provides a timely review of the flow of funds between mutual funds and bank deposits and the effect of these flows on credit availability . banks generally use their deposits either to make loans or to invest in certain debt securities , principally government bonds . to assess the impact of mutual funds' growth on the total supply of loanable and investable funds , we examined the flow of funds accounts data on the sources of finance for the economy . money from these funds , in turn , flows either directly ( through primary securities markets ) or indirectly ( through secondary securities markets ) to the issuers of such securities . for longer - term mutual funds , however , the period - to - period change in the fund's value generally does not equal the net flows during the period because the value fluctuates with ( 1 ) the flows of customer money , ( 2 ) the changing prices of the stocks and bonds held by the mutual funds , and ( 3 ) the reinvestment of dividends and interest in the fund . both mutual fund companies and banks are financial intermediaries , that is , they raise funds from savers and channel these funds back to the economy by investing them . the federal reserve said it had no further comment regarding the report or its content because the report made no recommendations to the federal reserve . this third approach also has limitations because there are a variety of factors that affect the relationship between deposits and gross domestic product ( gdp ) .
the total improper payment estimates for programs reported as noncompliant for 3 or more consecutive years decreased for fiscal 2017 primarily because the medicare fee - for - service program , with about $41 billion of improper payments in fiscal year 2016 , was reported as compliant beginning fiscal year 2017 . this report ( 1 ) summarizes federal agencies' reported improper payment estimates for fiscal years 2018 and 2019 , and the reasons they identified for substantial changes between years , and ( 2 ) discusses the extent to which chief financial officers act of 1990 ( cfo act ) agencies complied with the six ipera criteria for fiscal year 2018 , and overall ipera compliance trends evident for fiscal years 2016 through 2018 , as reported by their igs . the improper payments elimination and recovery act of 2010 ( ipera ) , among other things , requires federal agencies' inspectors general ( ig ) to annually determine and report on whether the agencies under their jurisdiction have complied with ipera criteria . the reported improper payment estimates for these programs totaled about $109 billion for fiscal year 2016 , $74 billion for fiscal year 2017 , and $78 billion for fiscal year 2018 . improper payments have been estimated to total almost $1.7 trillion government - wide from fiscal years 2003 through 2019 . to summarize federal agencies' improper payment estimates for fiscal years 2018 and 2019 , we compiled improper payment estimates from agency financial reports ( afr ) or performance and accountability reports ( par ) and the office of management and budget's ( omb ) paymentaccuracy.gov website . igs' annual ipera compliance reports help reasonably ensure that improper payment estimates are accurate , reliable , and complete and that congress has information on agencies' efforts to address improper payments . from fiscal years 2003 through 2016 , a government - wide improper payment estimate and rate had been included in the government - wide financial reports based on the programs and activities that reported estimates . we performed our work under the authority of the comptroller general to conduct evaluations on his own initiative and to assist congress with its oversight responsibilities . for such changes , we reviewed the agency's afr and par to determine the reason ( s ) , if any , that the agency identified . improper payments — payments that should not have been made or that were made in incorrect amounts — continue to be an area of fiscal concern in the federal government . however , government - wide financial reports for fiscal years 2017 and 2018 did not include a government - wide improper payment estimate or improper payment rate . as shown in figure 1 , of the $175 billion for fiscal year 2019 , about $121 billion ( approximately 69 percent ) is concentrated in three program areas: ( 1 ) medicaid , totaling about $57.4 billion ( approximately 32.8 percent ) ; ( 2 ) medicare ( comprised of three reported programs: fee - for - service ( parts a and b ) , advantage ( part c ) , and prescription drug ( part d ) ) , totaling about $46.2 billion ( approximately 26.5 percent ) ; and ( 3 ) earned income tax credit ( eitc ) , totaling about $17.4 billion ( approximately 9.9 percent ) .
our first report , issued on june 21 , 1996 , summarized reviews of the research literature on the effectiveness of treatment programs in reducing the recidivism of sex offenders . our second report , issued on july 26 , 1996 , summarized reviews of the research literature on the effectiveness of education programs designed to help children avoid becoming victims of sexual abuse . this is our third and final report responding to your request that we review and synthesize the current state of research knowledge on ways to prevent sex crimes against children . this report summarizes the results of , and discusses the methodologies used in , the studies that have been done on the cycle of sexual abuse — that is , on the likelihood that individuals who were victims of sexual abuse as children will become sexual abusers of children in adulthood . this report does not address a follow - on question that you raised concerning ways to prevent sexually abused children from becoming adult sexual offenders against children , because the existence of a cycle of sexual abuse was not established by the research studies we reviewed . in addition , researchers choosing the prospective approach still face the challenge of disentangling the effects of sexual abuse from the effects of other possible problems and stress - related factors in the backgrounds of these children ( e.g. , poverty , unemployment , parental alcohol abuse , or other inadequate social and family functioning ) . there are also questions about factors that may prevent victimized children from becoming adult perpetrators ( such as support from siblings and parents or positive relationships with other authority figures ) . a prospective approach — selecting a sample of children who have been sexually abused and following them into adulthood to see whether they become sexual abusers — overcomes some of the problems of the retrospective approach , but it is a costly and time - consuming solution . there remain many unanswered questions about the risk posed by early sexual victimization , as well as about the conditions and experiences that might increase this risk ( such as number of victimization experiences , age of the victim at the time of the abuse , and whether the abuse was perpetrated by a family member ) . these difficulties include ( 1 ) the need to determine whether members of comparison groups were victims of sexual abuse , and ( 2 ) the need to employ more than a single outcome measure of offending . answers to such questions would be useful in developing both prevention strategies and therapeutic interventions . critics have argued that empirical support for the cycle of sexual abuse is weak , and that parents are unduly frightened into thinking that little can be done to mitigate the long - term effects of sexual abuse . this requires the selection of appropriate comparison groups of children who have not been sexually abused and children who have faced other forms of maltreatment , as well as the careful measurement of a variety of other explanatory factors . initial effects reportedly have included fear , anxiety , depression , anger , aggression , and sexually inappropriate behavior in at least some portion of the victim population .
federal obligations under sba's 8 ( a ) business development program totaled about $10.9 billion in fiscal year 2019 . thank you for the opportunity to discuss our prior work on weaknesses in the small business administration's ( sba ) oversight and monitoring of alaska native corporations ( anc ) subsidiary firms ( “anc - owned firms” ) that participate in the agency's 8 ( a ) program and the actions sba has taken to address these weaknesses . my testimony today will discuss ( 1 ) highlights of the aforementioned reports related to tribal firms , including anc - owned firms , participating in the 8 ( a ) program , and ( 2 ) the extent to which sba has addressed the recommendations we made in those reports . from 2006 through 2016 , gao issued three reports detailing the limitations of sba's oversight and monitoring of anc - owned firms participating in the 8 ( a ) program . the 8 ( a ) program is one of the federal government's primary vehicles for developing socially and economically disadvantaged small businesses , including those firms owned by ancs . our subsequent reports in 2012 and 2016 also found various limitations in sba's oversight , including limitations in sba's ability to share key data across its district offices and long - standing staffing challenges specific to its alaska district office , which oversaw the majority of anc - owned firms in the 8 ( a ) program . more recent reports issued by the sba office of inspector general demonstrate that sba continues to face challenges in its oversight of the 8 ( a ) program , in general . from 2006 through 2016 , we issued three reports detailing the limitations of sba's oversight and monitoring of anc - owned firms participating in the 8 ( a ) program . implementing our remaining recommendations could help sba address its monitoring and oversight control weaknesses in a comprehensive manner . all six recommendations are important to enhancing sba's oversight of anc - owned firms in the 8 ( a ) program . one of the key benefits of this program is the ability for anc - owned firms to receive federal contract awards noncompetitively for any dollar amount . we have not evaluated the operational effectiveness of sba's actions to implement the 15 recommendations , but if effectively implemented , those actions should help sba improve its oversight and monitoring of anc - owned firms in the 8 ( a ) program . however , to date sba has not provided us with evidence that it has implemented the three following recommendations , which if implemented as intended , could significantly improve its oversight of the 8 ( a ) program . specifically , we found that sba had ( 1 ) incomplete information and documentation on anc - owned firms' compliance with regulatory requirements ; ( 2 ) limitations in its ability to track and share key program data needed to enforce revenue rules of tribal firms , including anc - owned firms ; ( 3 ) insufficient staffing in its alaska district office to carry out necessary and critical monitoring tasks of anc - owned firms ; and ( 4 ) inadequate program guidance for clearly communicating to staff how to interpret new regulations .
signed into law in december 2016 , the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2017 ( ndaa ) required the departments of defense ( dod ) , health and human services ( hhs ) , homeland security ( dhs ) , and agriculture ( usda ) to jointly develop a national biodefense strategy and associated implementation plan . for our february 2020 report , we evaluated the early strategy implementation efforts of hhs , dod , usda , and dhs ; the departments of state , justice ( specifically the fbi ) , and veterans affairs ( va ) ; and the environmental protection agency ( epa ) . these threats — whether naturally - occurring , intentional , or accidental — have the potential to cause loss of life and sustained damage to the economy , societal stability , and global security . catastrophic biological threats highlight the inextricable link between security and public health concerns . at the same time , the president issued the presidential memorandum on the support for national biodefense / national security presidential memorandum - 14 ( nspm - 14 ) , which details a governance structure and implementation process to achieve the strategy's goals . in particular , hhs ( 1 ) has not documented guidance and methods for analyzing the data , including but not limited to methods and guidance for how to account for the contribution of nonfederal capabilities ; and ( 2 ) does not have a resource plan for staffing and sustaining ongoing efforts . in our analyses and interviews , we found that parts of the process in the first year were underdeveloped , raising questions about ( 1 ) the plans to support change management practices and ensure that early - implementation limitations do not become institutionalized in future years' efforts ; ( 2 ) guidance and methods for meaningfully analyzing the data ; and ( 3 ) the clarity of decision - making processes , roles , and responsibilities . this novel virus poses a public health and economic threat , and may eventually be declared a pandemic , as seen with severe acute respiratory syndrome ( sars ) in 2003 . we made four recommendations to hhs in our report , aimed at improving the strategy's implementation . in september 2018 , the white house issued the national biodefense strategy ( strategy ) and characterized it as a new direction to protect the nation against biological threats , stating that its implementation would promote a more efficient , coordinated , and accountable biodefense enterprise . for example , the unpredictable nature of naturally - occurring disease , such as the novel coronavirus ( covid - 19 ) , poses a threat to humans . the vast and evolving biological threat landscape includes threats of naturally - occurring infectious diseases , bioterrorism , and safety and security lapses at facilities that house biological threat agents . to address these issues , we recommended the secretary of hhs direct the biodefense coordination team to ( 1 ) clearly document guidance and methods for analyzing the data collected from the agencies , including ensuring that nonfederal resources and capabilities are accounted for in the analysis , and ( 2 ) establish a resource plan to staff , support , and sustain its ongoing efforts .
with a budget of about $42.5 million , cpsc carries out its mission by ( 1 ) enforcing federal consumer product regulations ( by recalling products from store shelves , for example ) and ( 2 ) conducting projects to address products with potential hazards not covered by existing regulations . specifically , this report ( 1 ) identifies the criteria cpsc uses to select projects and reviews the information it relies upon in making these choices , ( 2 ) assesses the information cpsc draws on to perform risk assessment and cost - benefit analyses and evaluates the agency's methodology for conducting cost - benefit analyses , and ( 3 ) describes cpsc's procedures for releasing manufacturer - specific information to the public and reports whether evidence exists that cpsc violated its statutory requirements concerning the release of such information . contending that the agency is ineffectively allocating its resources , cpsc's critics have voiced dissatisfaction with the selection of certain agency projects and have questioned the validity of cpsc's risk assessment and cost - benefit analyses supporting those projects . for example , cpsc would be better able to make informed decisions on potential agency projects if it had additional statistically reliable and timely data in several areas , including ( 1 ) injuries treated outside of hospital emergency rooms ; ( 2 ) exposure to consumer products and product - related hazards ; ( 3 ) chronic illnesses related to consumer products ; and ( 4 ) hazards that disproportionately affect certain vulnerable populations , such as low - income individuals and consumers with disabilities . these projects may result in cpsc issuing new regulations concerning specific products , assisting in the development of voluntary industry standards , or providing information to consumers about how to use the products safely . we concluded that cpsc's death and injury data are generally insufficient to support the agency's project selection process for two reasons: ( 1 ) cpsc has little or no data on several project selection criteria and ( 2 ) cpsc's data on its other project selection criteria exhibit significant gaps . created to protect consumers from “unreasonable risk of injury,” the u.s. consumer product safety commission ( cpsc ) oversees these and about 15,000 other consumer products ranging from kitchen appliances and children's toys to hot tubs and garage door openers . we included not only major regulatory efforts but also smaller - scale projects . they stated that cpsc's actions are based on solid injury and death estimates and that cpsc ( 1 ) employs sound economic analyses that are appropriate for the circumstances , ( 2 ) tracks projects to monitor the progress of its work , and ( 3 ) has been successful in dramatically reducing the threat to consumers from unsafe products . cpsc has wide latitude over which potential product hazards it targets for regulatory and nonregulatory action . the lack of comprehensive data on individual product hazards and on agency initiatives raises questions about cpsc's ability to evaluate its own effectiveness — which it is now required to do under the government performance and results act of 1993 ( the results act ) . without these improved data , cpsc will remain unable to accurately apply measurable criteria in choosing projects or to rigorously assess relative risks among potential hazards .
the purpose of this report is to ( 1 ) compare the honor and conduct systems at each academy and describe how the various systems provide common due process protections and ( 2 ) describe the attitudes and perceptions of the students toward the honor and conduct systems . as part of a comprehensive review of student treatment at the department of defense ( dod ) service academies originally requested by senator nunn and senator glenn , we collected information on the honor and conduct adjudicatory systems at the military academy , the naval academy , and the air force academy . due process protections are greater in criminal proceedings than in non - criminal proceedings ( such as administrative hearings ) . courts have established that students facing expulsion from tax - supported colleges and universities have constitutionally protected interests that require minimal due process protections and established standards for student disciplinary proceedings . as arranged with your staff , unless you publicly announce its contents earlier , we plan no further distribution of this report until 1 day from its date of issue . while these standards and guidelines have been used in devising due process requirements for academy adjudicatory proceedings , courts have ruled that the government's interest in assuring the fitness of future military officers permits the academies greater freedom in providing due process protections than is accorded civilian institutions or authorities . in reviewing judicial and administrative proceedings , we identified 12 categories of due process protections commonly used to ensure fairness in hearings . we believe the due process protections and limitations applicable to academy adjudicatory proceedings can be best understood by comparing them with the broadest range of due process protections available in civilian proceedings . these 12 categories of due process rights include several rights derived from criminal hearings . the courts have generally found that the academies' adjudicatory systems provide students with the due process protections required by existing law for administrative systems . over the last several decades , the authority of academy officials to impose sanctions other than dismissal has increased . the congress , through the uniform code of military justice ( ucmj ) , provides commanders with quasi - judicial responsibility when they act in an administrative ( nonjudicial ) punishment capacity , and judicial authority when they act as a court - martial convening authority . all midshipmen still maintain their american rights. . a primary objective of adjudicatory systems , from the point of view of those subject to the systems , is “fairness.” to try to ensure fairness , adjudicatory systems are typically designed in ways that minimize or structure the discretion of the adjudicator ( s ) by imposing standardized procedures and mandating certain protections for the accused . since the courts view due process as a concept that should be flexibly applied to fit the needs of a particular context , a body of case law has developed regarding the applicability of procedural due process protections to specific subgroups and particular settings . unless excluded by statute , all statutory provisions applicable to military members are also applicable to cadets . the former chairman of the senate committee on armed services and the former chairman of its subcommittee on manpower and personnel asked us to review various aspects of student treatment , including the adjudicatory systems , at the three department of defense ( dod ) service academies .
the 1990s have been a time of rapid and sweeping change at the small business administration ( sba ) . in response to the clinton administration's initiative to reinvent the federal government , sba underwent a major reorganization and downsizing . from august 1993 to march 1997 , sba's workforce was cut by about 15 percent . in addition , new administrators were appointed at the agency in 1993 , 1994 , and 1997 , which brought about further changes in sba's executive offices , and following the change in control of congress in 1995 , sba provided noncompetitive , career appointments to some displaced congressional staff members under the ramspeck act then in effect . questions arose that improper personnel practices - - such as political favoritism and the improper hiring of district office directors and improper salary setting for political appointees - - had taken place at the agency . because of the changes that were occurring , the reorganization and downsizing in particular , the 1990s have been turbulent times for sba employees . the regional office structure , a layer of management between sba headquarters and district offices , was a prime target of this reduction . in response , the committee asked us to examine several events related to personnel reassignments , appointments , and activities at sba . sba participates in interagency details of employees but did not have adequate procedures to ( 1 ) accurately identify when it should bill agencies for the reimbursable details of sba employees and ( 2 ) monitor the actual length of details . sba has recognized that its hr staff need further guidance on pay setting and recruitment bonuses and has drafted a new set of procedures to provide that guidance . these authorizations and vouchers were for fiscal year 1997 and part of fiscal year 1998 . sba provided us the names of ( 1 ) sba field personnel and the offices to which they were assigned , both before and after sba's reorganization and downsizing ; ( 2 ) district directors who were appointed between january 1 , 1993 , and december 31 , 1998 ; ( 3 ) political and ramspeck act appointees who were appointed between october 1 , 1991 , and september 30 , 1998 ; and ( 4 ) employees detailed from sba to other federal agencies during the period october 1 , 1991 , through september 30 , 1998 . sba officials agree that an improved system of internal controls is necessary and have taken steps in that direction . significant personnel changes have occurred at sba since the early 1990s , some of which resulted from the considerable reorganization and downsizing that sba experienced . regional offices were greatly affected by reorganization and downsizing . consequently , sba had not developed a recruitment bonus plan , as required by regulations . as indicated earlier , sba has since decided to initiate a recruitment bonus policy . such procedures should ensure that the specifics of each detail are appropriately documented and monitored and that in the case of cost - reimbursable details , all costs are accounted for and promptly reimbursed . it is unclear from sba's comments whether this new procedure is to apply to all details or to only those details that are extended or terminate early .
in response to the request of the previous chairman of the subcommittee for information on how well kinship care is serving foster children , this report describes ( 1 ) the quality of care that children in kinship care receive compared with that received by other foster children , as measured by a caseworker's assessment of a caregiver's parenting skills , the extent to which a foster child is able to maintain contact with familiar people and surroundings , and a caregiver's willingness to enforce court - ordered restrictions on parental visits ; ( 2 ) the frequency with which state child welfare agencies pursue various permanent living arrangements ( that is , permanency planning goals ) and the time children in kinship care have spent in the system compared with other foster children ; and ( 3 ) recent state initiatives intended to help ensure that children in kinship care receive good quality foster care and are placed in permanent homes in a timely manner . 105-89 ) , which includes provisions to ensure foster children's safety and to speed up the process for finding permanent homes for them when they cannot return to their parents . 104-193 ) required the states to consider giving priority to relatives when deciding where to place the quarter of a million children who enter foster care each year while they are in the child welfare system . research has shown , however , that foster children in kinship care may not always receive good quality care , remain in the system longer than other foster children , and are less likely to find a permanent home outside the foster care system when they cannot return to their parents . the personal responsibility and work opportunity reconciliation act of 1996 ( p.l . these findings are especially significant in light of the adoption and safe families act of 1997 ( p.l . the department of health and human services ( hhs ) is responsible for the administration and oversight of federal funding to states for services to foster children under title iv - e of the social security act . differences in permanency goals and time in foster care , therefore , may depend more on state policies and practices than on foster care setting . in conducting this work , we reviewed recent research , federal statutes and regulations , and california and illinois legislation and initiatives regarding kinship care . we selected these two states because they have large kinship care populations , have different child welfare administration structures , and are located in different geographic areas . moreover , both states have taken initiatives either to make homes with relatives a viable permanency option or to facilitate permanency planning . in addition , we surveyed samples of foster care cases in california and illinois that were in their foster care systems on september 15 , 1997 , and had been there since at least march 1 , 1997 . however , california child welfare officials provided oral comments , limited to technical issues related to information about their programs . hhs generally agreed with the report and also described a number of activities of its administration for children and families that it believes will help inform both policy and the child welfare field .
this report discusses the impact that peace operations have on u.s. military forces , force structure limitations that may affect the military's ability to respond to other national security requirements while engaged in peace operations , and options for increasing force flexibility and response capability . we examined ( 1 ) the impact that peace operations have on u.s. military forces , ( 2 ) force structure limitations that may affect the military's ability to respond to other national security requirements while engaged in peace operations , and ( 3 ) options for increasing force flexibility and response capability . with the end of the cold war , the number , scope , and size of operations other than war have increased dramatically , and the united states has become an active participant in some of these operations . u.s. military forces have been participating in peace operations for almost 50 years , with limited numbers of personnel . the continuing force drawdown has compounded challenges for the u.s. military in responding to extended peace operations . senior administration officials have testified that multilateral peace operations are an important part of this administration's national security strategy,albeit not the centerpiece of u.s. foreign policy . these options have their own advantages and disadvantages and will require choices on the use of the nation's resources . all four services have experienced reductions in personnel and equipment that have forced military planners to reevaluate how the services will respond to peace operations and major regional conflicts ( mrc ) . armored combat divisions have had limited involvement . however , as the number , size , and scope of peace operations have increased dramatically in the past several years , the nature and extent of u.s. participation have changed markedly . while u.s. participation in peace operations has increased , the size of the armed forces has declined over the past 8 years . this in turn demands that the united states encourage the successful conduct of multilateral peace operations and , when it is in the united states' interests , participate in these operations . peace operations tend to be sustained rather than short - term operations and sometimes have required extended force commitments from the u.s. military services . operational and environmental challenges further tax support forces . these officials have stated that the united states must be willing to act to preserve peace and stability in order to advance and protect u.s. interests in the world . although no one option addresses all the problems we have identified , a combination of these options could substantially ease the problems . recently , the united states has used much larger numbers of combat and support forces to respond to events in a number of locations , including somalia , macedonia , bosnia , haiti , rwanda , and iraq . combat forces also have played a significant role in peace operations . dod is to review peace operations and report in detail on the force structure required to fight and win two mrcs nearly simultaneously while responding to other ongoing or potential operations . we did not assess whether the united states should participate in peace operations . consequently , we are not making recommendations regarding reassessing the impact of participation in peace operations in this report .
in reviewing bhc merger applications , the federal reserve board ( frb ) has a statutory responsibility , established by the bank holding company act of 1956 ( bhc act ) and the community reinvestment act of 1977 ( cra ) , to take into account an institution's record of community credit performance when evaluating the application . as you requested , this report discusses large bank holding company ( bhc ) mergers and the impact of such mergers on lending in low - and moderate - income ( lmi ) areas . as agreed with your offices , our objectives were to analyze ( 1 ) frb's legal responsibilities in assessing bhc mergers for cra performance ; ( 2 ) frb's process for assessing the cra performance of six large bhc merger applicants , including how frb addressed the principal public concerns related to the cra performance ; and ( 3 ) the premerger and postmerger mortgage lending in lmi and minority communities for three large bhc mergers . in addition , the bhc act requires that frb take into account the convenience and needs of the community to be served when reviewing bhc merger applications . to meet the first two objectives , we focused on six of the largest bank mergers in the period of 1995-98 . our legal analysis included a review of the bank holding company act of 1956 ( bhc act ) and the community reinvestment act of 1977 ( cra ) . in addition , a more transparent process may contribute to more focused public comments from community organizations and provide commenters with knowledge of how frb analyzes an institution's cra record , such as its home mortgage lending performance . to enhance the transparency and improve the efficiency with which cra concerns are addressed in the bhc merger application process , we recommend that frb develop written guidelines that summarize how public comments raising cra concerns are used with cra examination information in frb's merger application decisions for large bhcs . frb faced limitations in its legal authority to address branch closure concerns . enhanced transparency could improve the bhc applicants' understanding of what information is expected of them , what role public comments play in frb's cra review , and what information frb focuses on in response to different cra concerns . a more transparent process is needed regarding how frb balances the cra ratings of banks , particularly those with good cra ratings , such as the banks in our study , with public comments raising cra concerns . a more transparent process could be useful for both bhc applicants and public commenters . to assess frb's process for reviewing bhc merger applications for cra performance , we used a case study approach . we also did not verify the accuracy of data and other inputs relied upon by frb in its review of the six merger applications . such guidelines could also include when and how concerns raised in public comments will be considered , the types of analyses frb is likely to conduct and rely upon in reaching its conclusions , and the situations in which hmda statistics are limited . we did not assess the quality of previous cra examinations conducted by primary banking regulators or the accuracy of public comments .
our objectives were to determine ( 1 ) what state regulators were doing to oversee the year 2000 readiness of the insurance industry , ( 2 ) how the regulatory oversight of the insurance industry's year 2000 readiness compared with the oversight of the banking and securities industries , ( 3 ) the current status of the insurance industry's year 2000 readiness , and ( 4 ) the nature and extent of year 2000 liability exposures that insurers face and the mitigation efforts taken to address such exposures . this report responds to your request that we study the readiness of the insurance industry to meet the year 2000 date change . the effectiveness of insurers' efforts to mitigate their exposures remains unclear as some mitigation measures face legal and marketplace challenges . although many insurers have taken actions to reduce their potential liability exposures , the effectiveness of these mitigation efforts remains uncertain . the insurance industry , with policy reserves of approximately $2.5 trillion , is an important component of the financial system . ultimately , insurers' year 2000-related liability exposures will depend on decisions made to resolve key legal questions and numerous pending legislative initiatives . the effectiveness of these efforts , however , remains uncertain because insurers face various potential marketplace and legal challenges . other uncertainties remain over how several state and federal legislative initiatives will affect insurers' potential year 2000-related liability exposures . uncertainties also remain over the outcomes of several state and federal legislative initiatives that were recently undertaken to address year 2000 liability exposure issues . regarding year 2000 issues , naic has assumed a key role as facilitator of states' efforts to oversee the industry's readiness . thus , a regulator of financial institutions could use this , or other similar guidance , as general criteria for assessing the state of preparedness of its regulated institutions . many other state and federal legislative initiatives are currently being considered , some of which propose alternative dispute resolution methods to help resolve disputes involving year 2000-related mishaps . although it has no regulatory function , naic is responsible for ( 1 ) serving as a clearinghouse for exchanges of information , ( 2 ) providing a structure for interstate cooperation in examinations of multistate insurers , ( 3 ) distributing model insurance laws and regulations for consideration by state legislatures and insurance departments , and ( 4 ) reviewing state insurance departments' regulatory activities as part of a national accreditation program . these reserves are held in trust for policyholders , much like bank deposits are held for depositors . uncertainties continue as numerous legislative initiatives addressing resolution methods and damage awards for year 2000-related disputes are still being debated . one difference is that policy reserves are paid out when policyholders experience an insured loss . while there are important similarities between insurance companies and other financial intermediaries , there are important differences as well . some experts have expressed uncertainty over whether courts will uphold the year 2000 exclusions due to public policy concerns . this role includes acting as a coordinator of information pertaining to state oversight efforts , the status of the industry's readiness , and state regulators' actions to become internally prepared for 2000 .
we provide information on the number , results , and duration of correspondence audits as well as the characteristics of the audited returns and examine the processes and requirements that irs has put in place to govern correspondence audits . this report responds to your request that we review the internal revenue service's ( irs ) program to audit income tax returns through correspondence . this report also includes our recommendations on improving the correspondence audit program . we are sending copies of this report to representative william j. coyne , ranking minority member , subcommittee on oversight , house committee on ways and means ; senator william v. roth , jr. , chairman , and senator daniel patrick moynihan , ranking minority member , senate committee on finance ; various other congressional committees ; the honorable robert e. rubin , secretary of the treasury ; the honorable charles o. rossotti , commissioner of internal revenue ; the honorable jacob lew , director , office of management and budget ; and other interested parties . copies will also be made available to others upon request . if you have any questions about this report , please call me or mr. short on ( 202 ) 512-9110 . for example , in recent years , earned income credit ( eic ) claims and individual retirement account penalties have been highlighted by the service centers . other major contributors are listed in appendix vi . irs has two quality review functions to see whether correspondence audits comply with its requirements and standards . in recent years , congress has been concerned about irs' use of its enforcement tools , particularly about whether the tools are used fairly and in a manner that does not impose excessive burdens on taxpayers . in reviewing irs' correspondence audit processes and requirements , we found weaknesses that undermine its ability to ( 1 ) identify and audit all questionable tax issues on tax returns , ( 2 ) support its audit recommendations for additional taxes , ( 3 ) consistently accept justification for eic claims , ( 4 ) review adherence to audit requirements and quality standards , and ( 5 ) solicit taxpayers' responses about the tax issues being audited . the act included provisions affecting audits . concerns such as these led , in part , to the passage of the irs restructuring and reform act of 1998 . improving controls over the audit processes as well as collecting more information about the weaknesses would help to accomplish these ends . irs does not require supervisory reviews to be documented . this selection process results in a determination of whether a return has audit potential . the results of these reviews are to be entered into the correspondence examination quality management system ( ceqms ) database and used to identify procedural and systemic weaknesses and to develop improvements where needed . this elapsed time is significant in two respects . gao recommends that the irs commissioner improve controls to better ensure that irs' correspondence audit processes adhere to existing audit requirements and standards on classifying filed returns , and in particular , referring returns with complex schedules that may have potential tax changes to staff with sufficient knowledge to classify them ; documenting the support for audit findings and recommendations in the ensuring consistency in the treatment of audited eic claims by collecting and using the information required , including verification from third parties , to justify the claims ; and including all types of closed audits across the 10 service centers in the samples for measuring audit quality .
va implemented two key management changes to support its health care reform efforts . second , va began phasing in a new national resource allocation method , the veterans equitable resource allocation ( vera ) system as part of its broader efforts to provide incentives for the networks and medical centers to improve operational efficiency and access . it also discusses va's monitoring of the health care that its networks are providing . first , it decentralized the management structure of its veterans health administration ( vha ) to coordinate the organization of hospitals , outpatient clinics , and other facilities into 22 veterans integrated service networks ( visn ) . va receives approximately $17 billion annually for delivering health care services to veterans . in the mid - 1990s , the department of veterans affairs ( va ) began to fundamentally change the way it delivers health care to veterans to increase the efficiency of its health care system and to improve access to medical services . va has testified before your subcommittee that these reform efforts have unleashed unprecedented changes in its health care system . adequate monitoring of the outcomes of these changes is essential to assure va's stakeholders that veterans are receiving health care that is timely and appropriate . lack of adequate performance information will hinder va headquarters' ability to take corrective action if networks' program changes are inconsistent with va's organizational goals . va is making unprecedented changes to its health care system . applying lessons learned from the private sector's experiences with managed health care , va began emphasizing certain managed care practices , such as primary , outpatient , and preventive care , and de - emphasizing practices such as inpatient care . va expected that this reform , along with an emphasis on primary care , would also improve veterans' access to care because existing resources could then be redirected to serve more patients . other data we reviewed show similar efficiency and access improvements throughout va's health care system . we focused our work on va's efforts to improve the efficiency of its health care system and improve veterans' access to health services . va expected the visns to improve efficiency by reducing unnecessarily duplicative services and shifting services from costly inpatient care to less costly outpatient care . this report , which expands upon preliminary information in our may 1997 statement for the record for a hearing held by your subcommittee , discusses examples of the efficiencies achieved and improvements in veterans' access to health care . the transformation of the va health care system , however , is a work in progress . as a result , va has achieved efficiencies by reducing personnel costs . like other federal health programs , such as medicare and medicaid , that are adopting managed care practices to control program expenditures , va recognized that it could improve its health care system by adopting selected managed care practices . networks and medical centers are rapidly introducing new approaches to delivering care and planning the introduction of other initiatives . special care services , which include the most expensive services va delivers ( for example , nursing home care or care for veterans with spinal cord injuries ) , are especially important to monitor because the population receiving these services is particularly vulnerable .
the report made 27 recommendations to reduce the impact of the u.s. military presence on the okinawan people . as requested , we reviewed the contents of the final report , evaluated the impact on readiness of u.s. forces based on okinawa after implementation of the report recommendations , estimated the u.s. cost of implementing the recommendations , and determined the benefit or necessity of having u.s. marine corps forces on okinawa . the united states and japan released the final report of the special action committee on okinawa on december 2 , 1996 . in response to representative duncan hunter's concerns about the impact of implementing saco's recommendations on u.s. force readiness , we describe ( 1 ) the benefit or necessity of retaining u.s. forces in japan and on okinawa and ( 2 ) saco's report recommendations and identify the impact of implementation on u.s. operations , training , and costs . since the end of world war ii , the u.s. military has maintained a presence in japan and on okinawa , first as an occupation force and later as an ally committed to maintaining security in the asia - pacific region . the report also identifies two environmental issues that may remain after the saco recommendations have been implemented . over half of the u.s. forces in japan are on okinawa , a presence that has caused increasing discontent among the people of okinawa . dod also noted that the role of congress will be critical in maintaining the strategic relationship with japan and therefore the gao report was timely and welcome . the security relationship between the united states and japan is defined through bilateral agreements and is managed through a joint process . the committee developed 27 recommendations to reduce the impact of u.s. operations . to determine dod's views on the benefit or necessity of having u.s. forces stationed on okinawa , we interviewed officials and obtained relevant documents , including the quadrennial defense review report , the president's national security strategy for a new century , the security strategy for east asia , the commander - in - chief of the pacific command's regional strategy , and other documents . however , they also stated that if japan does not provide adequate replacement facilities or complete action needed to implement some recommendations , the united states will not be obligated to implement those particular recommendations . we are sending copies of this report to the chairmen and ranking minority members of the house committee on national security , the senate committee on armed services , and the house and senate committees on appropriations ; the secretaries of state , defense , the army , the navy , and the air force ; and the commandant of the marine corps . however , in a june 1997 report , we concluded that dod had not adequately considered alternatives to forward presence to accomplish its stated security objectives . usfj and marine corps bases , japan , indicated that this has not cost the united states any money and has had no impact on operational capability , deployment plans and schedules , or training . the committee developed recommendations on ways to limit the impact of the u.s. military presence on okinawans .
over the past few years , the department of defense ( dod ) has been interested in modernizing its forces with new weapons and equipment . for a variety of reasons , these efforts have been stymied , and funds that dod expected to have available to modernize the force have been needed instead for current operational activities . we have been assessing various air force activities to determine the feasibility of reducing operating costs . in may 1996 , we reported that the air force's fighter force was not organized economically and recommended that the air force develop an implementation plan for operating its fighter force in larger , more cost - effective squadrons . a few years ago , we evaluated whether the air force could operate its fighter forces more cost - effectively . therefore , you have expressed an interest in reducing operating costs . in making this assessment , we ( 1 ) evaluated the effect that reorganization may have on mission accomplishment , ( 2 ) determined whether costs could be reduced through redistributing aircraft among fewer wings , and ( 3 ) developed five possible options for redistributing c - 130 and kc - 135 aircraft among fewer wings at lower operating costs . for this follow - on effort , we assessed the cost - effectiveness of organizing the air force's airlift and refueling force into fewer , larger - sized squadrons and wings . dod concurred with that recommendation . this report focuses on the reserve component combat c - 130 and kc - 135 aircraft . seven states have both . we developed five options for organizing reserve component c - 130 and kc - 135 aircraft more cost - effectively into fewer , larger - sized squadrons . for each option we developed , we assessed whether ( 1 ) the guard and reserve could recruit sufficient personnel to support additional aircraft and ( 2 ) sufficient existing locations had facilities that could be expanded to accommodate additional aircraft . they rated their likely ability to increase personnel at all existing c - 130 and kc - 135 locations as ( 1 ) fully able to meet additional personnel requirements , ( 2 ) could meet personnel requirements with some difficulties , and ( 3 ) unlikely to meet additional requirements . dod believes that it would be premature to develop a plan until congress acts on the department's proposal . we also recognize that some options could have base closure and realignment implications , and that dod's authority in this area is subject to the requirements of 10 u.s.c . all of the national guard kc - 135 wings could expand to at least 12 aircraft ( 3 already have more than 12 aircraft ) with one - time construction costs of no more than $6 million . we also evaluated how three other issues could affect our options: one - time costs of redistributing the aircraft , the significance of the geographical location of the aircraft , and the effect that eliminating squadrons would have on states' abilities to respond to domestic crises . also , some locations may require increased administrative and supply space . in developing our options , we considered the two factors that reserve component officials cited as most important to successful reorganization: adequate recruiting potential and facility capacity .
specifically , we reviewed ( 1 ) the extent , nature , and cost of civil military projects ; ( 2 ) the consistency of dod's guidance on the irt program with statutory requirements ; ( 3 ) the conformity of selected projects to statutory requirements , especially those dealing with military training ; and ( 4 ) the effectiveness of the office of the secretary of defense's ( osd ) and service secretaries' oversight of such projects . 105-85 , nov. 18 , 1997 ) that we review the department of defense's ( dod ) training projects that support nondefense activities . dod conducts these civil military projects under its innovative readiness training ( irt ) program , as authorized by 10 u.s.c . this report responds to the requirement in section 595 in the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 1998 ( p.l . 2012 . in fiscal year 1997 , congress appropriated $16 million in such funding for the program . to assess the nature , extent , and cost of the support and services dod has provided under 10 u.s.c . these projects consist of three road - building projects ( operation alaskan road on annette island , alaska ; navajo nation building project between sawmill and fort defiance , arizona ; and operation good neighbor near gallup , new mexico ) ; one medical project ( mirt 97 - adams county , ohio ) ; one project to place excess combat vehicles off the shore of new jersey to build artificial reefs ( operation reefex 97 ) , and one project to reconstruct a basketball court ( operation crescent city 97 in louisiana ) . in 1996 , legislation repealed the program and replaced it with the current irt program . 2012 ) authorizes units or members of the armed forces to provide support and services to nondefense organizations . legislation enacted in 1992 authorized a civil - military cooperative action program under which dod was permitted to use the armed forces' skills and resources to assist civilian efforts to meet domestic needs by participating in projects and activities that would benefit the community.one of the objectives of the program was to enhance individual and unit training and morale in the armed forces through meaningful community involvement . the law also requires that assistance be incidental to military training , not adversely affect the quality of training , and not result in a significant increase in the cost of the training ; unit's assistance meet valid unit training requirements ; and individual members' assistance be directly related to their specific military specialties . like the prior statute , the current legislation ( 10 u.s.c . although the directive meets the legislation's requirements , dod could improve the directive by addressing how it will implement the statutory requirement that the provision of assistance not result in a significant increase in the cost of training . dod also stated that it has fully accounted for resources specifically authorized and appropriated in fiscal year 1997 to fund irt projects and that the services are responsible for irt related costs funded from service resources . dod has implemented the irt program through its directive , much of which restates in nearly identical language the statutory provisions governing the program .
this is a four - fold increase since enactment of title ix of the education amendments of 1972 . title ix prohibits sex discrimination in any education program or activity , including intercollegiate athletics , at colleges and universities ( hereafter referred to simply as “colleges” ) receiving federal financial assistance . but many have pointed to the gap that still remains in overall opportunity between men's and women's programs . specifically , you asked us to determine ( 1 ) the steps the department of education and ncaa have taken since 1992 to promote equity between men and women participating in intercollegiate athletics , ( 2 ) the steps states have taken to promote gender equity in athletic programs at colleges , and ( 3 ) what existing studies show about the progress made since 1992 in promoting gender equity in intercollegiate athletics . some have noted this increase as a move toward “gender equity” in athletics — that is , progress toward a fair distribution of athletic opportunity and resources between men's and women's athletic programs . for example , in 1992 , the national collegiate athletic association ( ncaa ) reported that although the numbers of male and female undergraduates enrolled at college campuses in 1991 were roughly the same , women constituted about 30 percent of all student athletes at the time , and women's programs received about 23 percent of the athletic operating budgets . more than 100,000 american women now participate in intercollegiate athletics each year . grants - in - aid ( scholarships ) . number and type of sanctions imposed eight states responded to the question ; the remaining 43 states did not use any indicators . the questionnaire requested data on the existence of state gender equity officials ; type of gender equity initiatives , if any ( that is , legislation , requirements , policy recommendations , or other actions ) ; methods used to promote gender equity ; indicators used to measure gender equity ; actual or estimated trends for each indicator ; compliance and guidance efforts associated with the equity in athletics disclosure act ; and conditions that help or hinder gender equity within the state . all responses reflect statewide gender equity actions . ocr both investigates discrimination complaints and conducts compliance reviews . the remaining 18 schools have yet to determine how they will comply because they are still implementing their settlement agreements . ocr also considers compliance reviews important to prevention but has conducted few of them in recent years . although its strategic plan emphasizes the value of conducting ocr - initiated compliance reviews to maximize the effect of available resources , it conducted only two such reviews in 1995 and none in fiscal year 1996 , and it plans none in fiscal year 1997 . federal regulations implementing title ix became effective in 1975 and specifically required gender equity in intercollegiate athletics . ocr's title ix activities have focused recently more on policy development , technical assistance , and complaint investigations and less on assessing schools' compliance with title ix through compliance reviews . the department's ocr is responsible for enforcing federal civil rights laws as they relate to schools , including title ix .
the military health services system ( mhss ) provides for the mental health care needs of the approximately 1.7 million active - duty members of the u.s. armed services . to meet its military readiness requirements , the mhss had 478 psychiatrists and 395 clinical psychologists on board in fiscal year 1996 . the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 1996 ( p.l . some of these problems have been resolved . given dod's readiness requirements , the pdp's substantial cost and questionable benefits , and the project's persistent implementation difficulties , we see no reason to reinstate this demonstration project . in the future , should prescribing psychologists be needed to meet dod's medical readiness requirements , the congress should require dod to ( 1 ) clearly demonstrate that the use of those mhss psychologists who have been trained to prescribe has resulted in savings , ( 2 ) clearly define a prescribing psychologist's role and scope of practice in the mhss compared with other psychologists and psychiatrists , ( 3 ) design a curriculum appropriate to this role and scope of practice , and ( 4 ) determine the need for and the level of supervision that prescribing psychologists require . on the basis of discussions with your offices , our evaluation includes ( 1 ) an assessment of the need for prescribing psychologists in the mhss , ( 2 ) information on the implementation of the pdp , and ( 3 ) information on the pdp's costs and benefits . although dod met the mandate to establish a demonstration project to train military psychologists to prescribe psychotropic medication for mental illness , the pdp implementation faced several problems . dod . each of the three services has a model and procedures to determine the number of specific types of health care providers needed to support its mhss medical readiness mission . these include delays in granting prescribing privileges and disagreements over the extent of supervision . we also examined the results of a vri survey of dod health care providers that collected information on providers' perceptions of pdp's benefits . the implementation faced several problems , however , that persisted for the pdp's duration . seven have completed it . because no medical training is required to practice clinical psychology , clinical psychologists , whether in the military or the civilian sector , historically have not been permitted to prescribe drugs . each service has more than enough psychiatrists , as well as clinical psychologists , to care for its anticipated wartime psychiatric caseload . about one out of eight casualties would involve combat stress , according to an army official.caring for combat stress requires skill in ( 1 ) diagnosing combat stress , including the ability to distinguish it from neurological or other psychological disorders with like signs and symptoms , and ( 2 ) treating a range of severity levels of combat stress . furthermore , although the pdp produced additional providers who can prescribe and some facilities have reported positive experiences with them , determining the pdp's cost - effectiveness is impossible at this time . given this surplus , spending resources to provide psychologists with additional skill does not seem justified . the pdp has trained military psychologists to prescribe psychotropic medication for mental conditions such as depressive and adjustment disorders .
in 1997 , the social security administration ( ssa ) paid about $66 billion to 9.3 million disabled beneficiaries under the social security disability insurance ( di ) and supplemental security income ( ssi ) programs . to help ensure that only eligible beneficiaries remain on the rolls , ssa is required by law to conduct continuing disability reviews ( cdr ) for all di beneficiaries and some ssi disability recipients to determine whether they continue to meet the disability requirements of the law . ssa's regulations call for cdrs to begin as soon as 6 months after benefits are awarded for some beneficiaries , or as long as 7 years after benefits are awarded for other beneficiaries . to fund this 7-year initiative , the congress authorized a total of about $4.1 billion . ssa funds state agencies called disability determination services ( dds ) to process disability applications and conduct cdr medical reviews in accordance with ssa policies and procedures . as of fiscal year 1996 , about 4.3 million cdrs were due or overdue . ssa developed a plan for a 7-year initiative to conduct about 8.2 million cdrs during fiscal years 1996 through 2002 . in fiscal year 1996 , to reduce the unnecessary costs incurred by not doing cdrs , ssa and the congress focused on providing funding to conduct overdue cdrs and new cdrs as they become due . under the new plan , ssa set a goal of 8.1 million cdrs for fiscal years 1998 through 2002 ( the last 5 years of the cdr initiative ) . you asked that we determine ( 1 ) whether ssa's plan to process 8.1 million cdrs during fiscal years 1998 through 2002 will result in cdrs being done for all beneficiaries for whom cdrs are required by law and ( 2 ) whether the ddss' cdr processing capacity and the cdr funding authorized by the congress for fiscal years 1998 through 2002 will be sufficient to process the cdrs required by law . since fiscal year 1993 , ssa has significantly increased its use of mailers and plans further significant increases . however , we have reported on several occasions that , because ssa did not consistently perform required cdrs when due , hundreds of millions of dollars in unnecessary costs were incurred each year , and program integrity was undermined . during fiscal years 1996 and 1997 , the first 2 years of ssa's cdr initiative , a total of 1.2 million cdrs were processed . in march 1998 , ssa issued a revised cdr plan that reflected the experience gained during the first 2 years of the cdr initiative and incorporated additional cdrs for certain children receiving ssi disability benefits , as required by a statutory provision enacted after the original cdr plan was developed . on the basis of the congress' commitment to fund increased cdr workloads , ssa negotiated with the ddss to increase their efforts to hire new staff . ssa's more cursory mailer questionnaires require about 6 months . to develop this information , we interviewed officials from ssa and seven state ddss about their workloads and priorities ; reviewed applicable laws and regulations and relevant ssa documents ; and analyzed the process ssa uses to determine which beneficiaries should receive a cdr , including the formulas used to estimate the likelihood that beneficiaries' impairments have improved medically since benefits were awarded .
this report focuses on ( 1 ) best management practices used in the commercial airline industry to streamline logistics operations and improve customer service , ( 2 ) air force reengineering efforts to improve the responsiveness of its logistics system and reduce costs , and ( 3 ) barriers that may stop the air force from achieving the full benefits of its reengineering efforts . we compared the air force's management of its $33 billion reparable parts inventory with the operations of leading - edge private sector firms to identify opportunities where costs could be reduced and service improved . this report focuses on ( 1 ) best management practices used in the commercial airline industry to streamline logistics operations and improve customer service , ( 2 ) air force reengineering efforts to improve the responsiveness of its logistics system and reduce costs , and ( 3 ) barriers that may stop the air force from achieving the full benefits of its reengineering efforts . this report was prepared in response to your request that we continue to compare commercial logistics practices with similar department of defense ( dod ) operations . the private sector , driven by today's globally competitive business environment , is faced with the challenge of maintaining and improving quality service at lower costs . since the department of defense's ( dod ) environment is also changing , it needs to do the same . time also has a significant impact on cost . although the airline has reaped significant gains from improvements to date , it continues to reexamine operations and is making continuous improvements to its logistics system . as a result , many firms have radically changed , or reengineered , their ways of doing business to meet customer needs . british airways has used an integrated approach to reengineer its logistics system . also , due to the pressures of budgetary limits , dod must seek ways to make logistics processes as efficient as possible . the airline did not delay initiatives to streamline specific processes until changes in corporate culture and upgrades in data systems had been made ; it began reexamining its processes concurrently . the air force , however , could build on its reengineering effort by including additional practices pursued and successfully adopted by the private sector . with the end of the cold war , dod's logistics system must now support a smaller , highly mobile , high - technology force . to build on the existing air force reengineering efforts and achieve major logistics system improvements , we recommend that the secretary of defense commit and engage top - level dod managers to support and lead air force reengineering efforts to ensure its success . complexity also plays an important role ; it adds to costly overhead and pipeline time . although not as large as the air force , commercial airlines' operations resemble the air force's in several ways . these changing roles and missions , combined with ongoing fiscal constraints , has resulted in dod's call for a smaller , highly mobile , high - technology force and a leaner , more responsive logistics system . british airways' initiatives have helped improve the responsiveness of logistics operations and reduced associated costs .
local efforts have produced a variety of single - gender in - school and after - school programs . growing concern over student performance and behavior in public elementary and secondary schools has led some educators and policymakers to consider single - gender educational settings to improve student performance . because of this recent interest , you asked us to identify the major educational and legal issues involved with public single - gender education and to cite some examples of recent public single - gender education programs . on the federal level , in recent years the senate has seen at least three bills with single - gender education components . to develop this information , we interviewed local education agency officials in certain districts that had a variety of single - gender programs and officials at the department of education and other organizations who have had a role in single - gender education issues or research . for example , virginia recently passed legislation permitting schools to establish single - gender classes consistent with constitutional principles , and in california the governor's 1996-97 budget proposes single - gender academies for students at risk of low achievement or dropping out . certain states have also shown interest in promoting single - gender settings . the latest , s. 1205 , the mentor schools act , was introduced in the fall of 1995 . in addition , the department of education's office for civil rights ( ocr ) provided us with examples of different types of single - gender educational settings from the complaints and requests for guidance it had received . we also reviewed some recent court decisions , law review articles , and other literature . some single - gender programs , however , are subject to legal impediments . the purposes of the proposed bill are to ( 1 ) award grants to local education agencies for establishing same - gender schools for low - income students ; ( 2 ) determine whether same - gender schools make a difference in the educational achievement and opportunities of low - income , educationally disadvantaged individuals ; ( 3 ) improve academic achievement and persistence in school ; and ( 4 ) involve parents in the educational options and choices of their children . we conducted our study between february and april 1996 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . educators and other experts with whom we spoke view single - gender programs as a way to address ( 1 ) high dropout rates , low academic achievement , and other problems faced by many urban males — particularly minorities — and ( 2 ) girls' low academic performance in advanced mathematics and science ; general lack of confidence , competence , and leadership skills ; and narrow views of potential careers . in a more recent study of single - gender schools in four countries ( belgium , new zealand , thailand , and japan ) , however , riordan concluded that single - gender schools do not have uniform and consistent effects and their effects are conditional . whatever the effectiveness and desirability of single - gender programs , single - gender public elementary and secondary education is limited by law . officials we talked to in schools that have experimented recently with single - gender education said that such programs have resulted in observable qualitative differences in the behavior of children in single - gender environments ; conclusive quantitative research , however , on the effectiveness of such public school programs is not available .
recent sharp increases in the annual volume of new federal student loans suggest that the cumulative amounts of student debt may be rising as well . our review was based in large part on our analysis of data collected by the department of education as part of the national postsecondary student aid study ( npsas ) . in august 1996 we reported that tuition increases at 4-year public colleges had outstripped increases in household income , and parents and others were questioning how students and their families would find the money to pay for school . in response to this concern , you asked us to answer the following questions: what changes have occurred in recent years in the percentage of undergraduate and graduate / professional students who borrow and in the cumulative amount of their borrowing ? . we chose 1992-93 for a comparison because it ( 1 ) predated the most recent round of increases in maximum limits on the amounts of loans available through the government's major student loan programs , and ( 2 ) like 1995-96 , was a year in which the department identified students who had graduated from their academic programs . what changes have occurred in the percentage of undergraduate and graduate / professional students who work and the number of hours they work ? . how do undergraduate borrowing and work patterns differ by type of school , year in school , dependency status , family income , and race / ethnicity ? . we reported , for example , that tuition increased 234 percent from school year 1980-81 through 1994-95 , in contrast to median household income , which rose 82 percent during this period . what information is available concerning the amounts of education debt parents incur ? . we focused on 1995-96 because it was the most recent year for which data were available . the use of these survey data allowed us to estimate averages for the student population as a whole , as well as narrow the comparison to groups that had completed their educational programs . we focused our analysis primarily on two academic or student years: 1992-93 and 1995-96 . the survey does not make a distinction between debt for postsecondary education and debt for elementary and secondary education , nor does it distinguish between debt owed by parents for a child's education and debt owed by parents for their own education . excluding first mortgages , u.s. home equity debt totaled about $255 billion in 1993 , $110 billion of which was in home equity lines of credit and $145 billion in traditional home equity loans . changes in students' employment have been less pronounced than changes in borrowing . in contrast with the substantial amount of information about students' own borrowing experiences , little information is available about the amounts that parents borrow to pay for their children's postsecondary education . appendix ii provides additional data , including confidence intervals , for the estimates presented . in general , studies that provide data on parents' education debt were dated or limited in scope , and they often failed to differentiate between postsecondary education debt and other types of education debt . however , this factor accounted for only about 11 percent of the difference in the amounts of borrowing that occurred , after controlling for other factors .
specifically , we discuss ( 1 ) current trends in medicare beneficiary enrollment in hmos , ( 2 ) flaws in medicare's rate - setting method preventing medicare from realizing potential savings from hmos , ( 3 ) strategies to enable medicare to realize hmo savings , and ( 4 ) the health care financing administration's ( hcfa ) efforts to test hmo payment reforms . in fact , medicare has paid health maintenance organizations ( hmo ) more for serving medicare beneficiaries than it would have spent , on average , had those same beneficiaries received care in the fee - for - service sector . medicare has not yet harnessed the cost - saving potential of its managed care option . proposals to reduce or even reverse these medicare losses have been discussed for roughly a decade . lately , these proposals have received even more interest because of recent deficit reduction proposals aimed at slowing medicare spending growth by moving more beneficiaries into managed care . as you requested , this report expands on our recent testimony before the committee on these issues . our findings derive from examinations of medicare program data , reviews of the literature , interviews with industry experts , discussions with hcfa officials , and our previous reports on this subject . a list of related gao products appears at the end of this report . our work was performed from april to september of 1995 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . in light of the increasingly urgent need to realize savings from the medicare hmo program and to develop viable new methods of paying hmos , congress may wish to consider giving the secretary of the department of health and human services authority to selectively reduce medicare hmo payment rates ( the aapcc rate ) in areas where market data indicate that the medicare rates are too high and expand hcfa's authority to mandate hmo participation in demonstration projects in order to conduct more meaningful studies of alternative payment methods . consequently , hcfa needs to complement longer term improvements with quick action to mitigate medicare losses as risk contract hmo enrollment grows . because these strategies are so far untried , the extent to which they would increase beneficiaries' price sensitivity and help control medicare costs is unknown . although beneficiary enrollment in these hmos is relatively low , the program has grown dramatically in recent years in both beneficiary enrollment and hmo participation . although the hmo share nationwide is small , recent hmo enrollment of medicare beneficiaries has grown rapidly . these include strategies to encourage medicare enrollees to be more price sensitive . hmo enrollment is further concentrated in urban areas . as of may 1995 , about 2.6 million beneficiaries — about 7 percent of the total medicare population — were enrolled in the risk contract program.figure 1 shows that the percentage of medicare beneficiaries enrolled is significantly higher than the national average in only a few states . such strategies range from requiring newly eligible medicare beneficiaries who choose a fee - for - service plan to pay slightly more than beneficiaries who choose a managed care plan to approaches that would allow beneficiaries to “price shop” from a list of approved hmos and share a portion of any cost savings with the government .
originally , the department of defense ( dod ) estimated that it would realize $4.1 billion in property sales revenue from military bases closed under the 1988 and 1991 base realignment and closure rounds . in 1994 , dod reduced this estimate to $1.2 billion . revenue from property sales is to be used to help pay for the base closure costs . as agreed with your office , we identified the revenue the government has received and is expecting to receive from these property sales , additional resources the federal government has given to communities to support their plans to reuse the bases , and several issues that delay communities' reuse plans . about $19 million of the $92 million in sales and pending sales was merely a transfer of funds from one federal agency to another — not a revenue gain for the federal government . the air force has about $16.9 million in pending sales . communities are asking the federal government to provide ( 1 ) cash grants ; ( 2 ) marketable revenue - producing properties , such as golf courses and housing units , to help pay for reuse activities ; and ( 3 ) funds for upgrading buildings and infrastructure . the army is credited for almost all of the $69.4 million in property sales revenue and for $5.3 million of the $22.2 million in pending sales . current plans call for the sale of only about 5 percent of the land . disagreements between various agencies and jurisdictions have stalled reuse decisions at some bases . the remaining 7 percent remains in an undetermined status . we compared the 6-year land revenue estimates from dod's base realignment and closure fiscal years 1991-95 budget justifications for brac - i ( the bases closed in 1988 ) and its fiscal years 1993-95 justifications for brac - ii ( the bases closed in 1991 ) . federal government real estate that is no longer needed is not automatically sold . rather , the federal property and administrative services act of 1949 ( the property act ) requires a screening process in which the appropriate government officials explore transferring the property with or without payment to another government or nonprofit agency . dod responsibility for environmental cleanup further delays disposal of base property . in a related assignment , we will report on the difficulties in cleaning up bases , the effect of environmental contamination on dod's ability to transfer property , the federal government's liabilities from environmental contamination , and dod's long - term plans for addressing environmental problems at closing bases . for example , dod first screens excess property for possible use by other dod organizations and then by other federal agencies . dod has the discretion to determine what the highest and best use for the property is and relies heavily on local reuse plans to make this determination . the federal government's retention of the contaminated land could significantly reduce cleanup costs since the land will remain undeveloped . planned sales of 9,400 acres of property will result in additional revenue once final property disposition decisions are made and cleanup or remediation is in place . if no federal agency has a need for the excess property , it is declared surplus to the federal government and generally is made available to private nonprofit and state and local agencies .
senate report 105-52 , dated july 22 , 1997 , on the 1998 military construction appropriations bill requested the continuation of our annual review of the department of defense's ( dod ) base closure accounts and its budget request for base closure activities . specifically , this report discusses opportunities for offsetting the budget request for fiscal year 1999 , including the validity of two proposed military construction ( milcon ) projects included in that request . specifically , dod stated that ( 1 ) $35.7 million in unreported proceeds generated by brac activities is unavailable to offset fiscal year 1999 requirements because the proceeds have been or will be reprogrammed to cover unfunded requirements , ( 2 ) $54.8 million in unobligated balances is unavailable as an offset since it has already been earmarked for other unfunded requirements , ( 3 ) $40.6 million for two separate milcon projects is unavailable for offset because previously approved actions that were deferred until 1999 still need to be fully funded , and ( 4 ) reductions of this magnitude will eliminate the management flexibility envisioned by the congress and , adversely impact dod's ability to close installations and speed the economic recovery of affected communities . in the late 1980s , dod decided to close excess military bases because changing national security requirements had resulted in a military base structure that was larger than needed . consequently , the congress enacted base realignment and closure ( brac ) legislation that instituted base closure rounds in 1988 , 1991 , 1993 , and 1995 . our questions center on the potential ( 1 ) use of unreported proceeds from brac actions , unused funds allocated to the brac 1991 round , and withheld brac appropriations from fiscal year 1998 to offset equivalent amounts of funding included in the 1999 budget request and ( 2 ) need for funding requested for two milcon projects , where the requirements for one project have not been determined and the other has already been funded . as a result , navy officials had to restructure the navy's brac program to meet this shortfall . as the congress develops the budget authority for dod's base closure activities in fiscal year 1999 , it may wish to consider appropriating up to $131.1 million less than dod is requesting in its fiscal year 1999 brac budget submission because prior year funds are available to meet these requirements and the request to fund two milcon projects could be eliminated . dod's fiscal year 1999 budget request did not reflect $35.7 million in proceeds that was collected but not included in the request . in march 1998 , dod requested more than $1.7 billion for the brac program in fiscal year 1999 . dod withheld $26 million appropriated in fiscal year 1998 from the brac program that could be used to offset the fiscal year 1999 brac budget request . the 1999 brac budget request contains $40.6 million for two milcon projects for which requirements have not been determined or have already been funded . as a result of this effort , the army reduced its unliquidated balance for its brac environmental projects . public law and dod guidance provide that proceeds generated from brac actions be reported in dod's annual budget estimate request .
to improve the nation's surface transportation system over a 6-year period ending in fiscal year 1997 , the intermodal surface transportation efficiency act ( [istea] , public law 102-240 , dec. 18 , 1991 ) authorized $155 billion . although istea primarily authorized highway construction and improvements , it also emphasized how intermodal connections can enhance the nation's transportation infrastructure . we reviewed ( 1 ) the department of transportation's ( dot ) efforts to track how states use istea funds for facilitating intermodal transportation and the nature and extent of istea funds used by states for intermodal freight projects , ( 2 ) how some local and regional areas that handle a large volume of freight have considered intermodal freight transportation issues as part of their planning process , and ( 3 ) what kind of impediments some areas face in improving intermodal freight transportation . in preparation for reauthorization of istea , you asked us to review several intermodal freight transportation issues . intermodal connections link the various transportation modes — highways , rail , air , and maritime facilities . according to the national commission on intermodal transportation's 1994 report , these connections are typically the weakest links in the nation's transportation system . these include operational problems at intermodal facilities ( compatibility among freight tracking systems ) ; regulatory and institutional barriers ( the lack of standardized transportation regulations ) ; and financial constraints ( inadequate funding for intermodal improvements ) . economists and transportation planners believe that productivity and efficiency gains can be achieved by improving intermodal connections . to obtain information for this report , we ( 1 ) reviewed istea and its legislative history ; ( 2 ) interviewed dot headquarters and regional officials ; ( 3 ) interviewed state , local , and private sector officials ; ( 4 ) interviewed representatives of major transportation organizations ; ( 5 ) reviewed dot data from fiscal years 1992 to 1995 showing the funding status of istea - authorized priority intermodal projects ; and ( 6 ) reviewed volumes of dot data highlighting projects funded with the two categories of istea money that dot officials believed states would most likely use to fund intermodal freight projects . in addition , we developed information on intermodal freight transportation trends . based on our review of department of transportation ( dot ) data and interviews with public and private sector officials , we attempted to identify intermodal freight projects financed with the intermodal surface transportation efficiency act ( istea ) funds not specifically targeted for priority projects ( see table i.1 ) . dot officials gave us the following reasons why they have not developed the data base: ( 1 ) dot has a limited role in managing how funds are allocated because states are given primary responsibility for allocating funds according to broad program categories ; ( 2 ) the term “intermodal” is subject to interpretation , and projects may not be identified consistently among states ; and ( 3 ) intermodal projects may be financed from multiple sources , including federal , state , and local funds , and it may be difficult to identify istea funds used for this purpose . states have provided dot with detailed information about the use of istea funds on a project - by - project basis ; this information has been entered into dot's computer information system .
this report ( 1 ) discusses the progress made and some of the problems still facing the department in real property management and ( 2 ) contains recommendations to you to strengthen the department's management . we based that decision on a number of factors , including the actions taken by the state department and its office of foreign buildings operations ( fbo ) to strengthen real property programs . the report is based on our work at fbo headquarters and the embassies in nassau , the bahamas ; london , england ; vienna , austria ; santo domingo , dominican republic ; port moresby , papua new guinea ; kuala lumpur , malaysia ; and singapore , singapore . however , because some problems still exist , state's management of overseas real property still needs to be closely monitored . in february 1995 , we removed overseas real property management from our list of federal programs most vulnerable to waste , fraud , abuse , and mismanagement . management weaknesses also directly contributed to construction delays and cost overruns , oversized and unauthorized housing , poor decisions , and questionable expenditures . fbo has made progress in strengthening its monitoring capability through its financial audit program , but coverage has been limited . to upgrade its system capability , fbo is examining the potential for integrating data maintained in the department's new information financial management system and the fbo real estate management system . these weaknesses resulted in deteriorating facilities and a significant backlog of maintenance and repair requirements . we reviewed pertinent records and documents , including the fam and fbo's guidance on use of funds ; global maintenance surveys and facilities evaluation and assistance program reports ; fbo's financial audit , real estate management system , and area management trip reports ; and posts' status of obligation reports , purchase orders , and work order reports . progress has been made in strengthening fbo's planning capabilities . progress has been made in addressing the long - standing problem of inadequate maintenance and rehabilitation of overseas facilities . in some cases , area managers ( 1 ) either did not prepare or could not locate their trip reports documenting the status of post controls or ( 2 ) had not completed fbo's standard checklists . fbo has responsibility for managing about 11,000 leased properties and 3,000 u.s. - owned properties valued about $12 billion . some progress has also been made in the area management program . fbo's responsibilities include ( 1 ) overseeing the acquisition , design , construction , sales , operations , and maintenance of properties and ( 2 ) establishing policies and procedures for overseas posts to follow in managing real property programs . overall , fbo estimates that its financial audit program has resulted in nearly $4 million in uncommitted post funds being returned to fbo for use in other projects and programs . fbo also recognizes that overall weaknesses in accountability over real property transactions continue . that obligation ( 1 ) represented a potential misuse of routine maintenance funds and ( 2 ) appeared to represent an effort to fully obligate remaining funds ( year - end buying ) instead of returning them to fbo .
given the size of the eu market and the recent regulatory changes , advocates of reforming the u.s. food and drug administration ( fda ) have suggested that the new european drug approval process may provide some alternative approaches for improving the timeliness of fda's drug approvals . to assist your committee in considering various fda reform proposals , you asked that we ( 1 ) determine how the eu now reviews and approves new drug applications ( nda ) and ( 2 ) explain why the emea was established , how it operates , and how it is financed . the movement toward uniting individual european countries into a single marketplace has made the european union ( eu ) the largest pharmaceutical market in the world . as part of its ongoing effort to establish a single european market for pharmaceuticals , the eu recently modified its drug approval procedures and created a new agency — the european medicines evaluation agency ( emea ) — to provide a faster and more efficient drug approval process that would benefit consumers and industry . with a population of about 370 million , the eu represents a consumer base that is one - third larger than that of the united states . moreover , the eu leads the world in the consumption of pharmaceutical products , using $82.7 billion worth of pharmaceutical products in 1992 , while the united states used about $54.8 billion . to gather this information , we reviewed background documents , legislation , and status reports on the eu drug approval process and interviewed senior officials at the emea and the commission of the european communities , which oversees the emea's activities . because this report uses european terms that may not be familiar to u.s. readers , we have defined these terms in a glossary at the end of this report . we also interviewed representatives from two european - based pharmaceutical companies and two pharmaceutical trade associations , as well as several academics knowledgeable in european pharmaceutical policies . regulatory and industry officials believe that this concern will be somewhat mitigated by the new procedures' use of two rapporteurs . however , according to a senior commission official , the commission is likely to retain its oversight control by funding at least 20 percent of the emea budget in the future . these procedures modify the former multistate and concertation procedures by ( 1 ) defining specific review steps and establishing time limits for review processes and ( 2 ) requiring member states to accept as binding , decisions that are issued by the commission . however , these initial efforts were not successful because the commission did not require member states to accept drug approval decisions made by the commission or other member states . as part of this effort , the commission has attempted to consolidate and harmonize many of the pharmaceutical regulations that have existed among the member states . the central regulatory body in the eu that ( 1 ) drafts legislation in the form of directives and regulations designed to foster a single market in europe and ( 2 ) enforces eu rules . pharmaceutical companies are now required to use the centralized procedure for biotechnology products and have the option to use it for other innovative products .
at your request , we will first discuss the status of the national weather service ( nws ) systems modernization and then address the most cost - effective alternatives for acquiring noaa's marine data . in brief , although nws is nearing completion of its systems modernization effort , two significant challenges face it this year — deploying the final system of the modernization and ensuring that all of its mission - critical systems are year 2000 compliant . we appreciate the opportunity to join in today's hearing to discuss our work in two areas under the responsibility of the national oceanic and atmospheric administration ( noaa ) , a component of the department of commerce . in the noaa fleet area , noaa now outsources for more of its research and data needs but plans to spend $185 million over the next 5 years to acquire four new replacement noaa fisheries research ships . last month , we continued to designate the nws systems modernization effort as a high - risk information technology area and the noaa fleet as an additional major management challenge confronting the department of commerce . nws has made progress on both fronts . thus , we believe that continued congressional oversight of noaa's budget requests for replacement or upgraded ships is needed to ensure that noaa is pursuing the most cost - effective alternatives for acquiring marine data . over the past several years , we have reported that awips has encountered delays and cost increases due to design problems and management shortcomings and have made several recommendations to improve management of this critical component of the modernization . nws' system modernization includes four major systems development programs , which are expected to collectively cost about $4.5 billion . in 1994 , we reported that noaa ( 1 ) lacked the financial and operational data it needed to adequately assess whether chartered and contracted ships could cost effectively meet the needs of its programs and ( 2 ) had no assurance that its fleet modernization plan represented the most cost effective means of meeting future program requirements . in the 1980s nws began a nationwide modernization program to upgrade observing systems such as satellites and radars , and design and develop advanced computer workstations for forecasters . the goals of the modernization are to achieve more uniform weather services across the nation , improve forecasting , provide better detection and prediction of severe weather and flooding , permit more cost - effective operations through staff and office reductions , and achieve higher productivity . in the noaa fleet area , continuing congressional oversight of noaa's budget requests for replacement or upgraded ships is needed to ensure that noaa is pursuing the most cost - effective alternatives for acquiring marine data . until awips is fully deployed and functioning properly , nws will not be able to take full advantage of the $4.5 billion total investment it has made in the modernization . these concerned the systems' operational effectiveness and efficient maintenance . while there have been specific performance problems , nws reports that the new radars and satellites overall have enabled it to generate better data and greatly improved forecasts and warnings . subsequently , the governing international fishery agreement act ( public law 105-384 , approved november 13 , 1998 ) made other changes in noaa's proposed restructuring plan .
to provide the public with information about the social security program , the congress enacted a law that requires the social security administration ( ssa ) to provide to individuals regular statements that estimate the benefits they may receive through the program . in light of this proposal , you asked us to look at ( 1 ) the general implications of using a rate of return for social security and ( 2 ) the challenges of including this information on the pebes . recently , in the course of the debate regarding how to restore long - term solvency for the social security program , legislation has been proposed that would require ssa to place on the pebes an individualized estimate of the rates of return workers receive on their contributions to the social security program . the purpose of the proposal is , in part , to provide information that would enable workers to compare the current social security program with other investments , including alternatives being discussed in the reform debate . in 1995 , ssa began sending personal earnings and benefit estimate statements ( pebes ) automatically to workers who had reached age 60 . these six - page statements provide workers with a list of their yearly earnings on record at ssa , information about their eligibility for benefits , and estimates of these benefits . starting in fiscal year 2000 , the pebes will be sent annually to almost every u.s. worker aged 25 and older — an estimated 123 million people each year . to respond to your request , we relied on our ongoing work on calculating and using rates of return , which includes an extensive review of the literature on this issue , and our prior work on the usefulness of the pebes . in our ongoing work on rates of return , we will more fully address the extent to which social security and private market rates of return can be compared .  ( the 1998 pebes is reprinted in app . ensuring long - term solvency within the current program structure will require either increasing revenues or reducing expenditures , or some combination of both . analysts disagree about whether it is appropriate to use rates of return to evaluate the social security program and the options for reform . as a result of the financial problems facing the program , a national debate on how to ensure social security's solvency has begun and will likely intensify . in addition , we obtained relevant information from ssa officials and other experts . we conducted our work in june and july 1998 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . proponents of adding rates of return to the pebes believe these rates would provide individuals with information on the current program and enable them to compare their rate of return for social security with rates for other investments . however , it has already been difficult to develop a pebes that provides readily understandable information on the existing programs and benefits alone . for example , the social security program is designed to help ensure that low - wage earners have adequate income in their retirement . adding rate of return information could significantly increase the statement's length and undermine ssa's current efforts to shorten and simplify it .
specifically , you asked us to evaluate ( 1 ) why women's benefits are lower than men's under the current social security system , ( 2 ) the possible differential effects on women of the new privatization reform proposals , and ( 3 ) what can be done to minimize the possibly negative effect on women of certain elements of the social security reform proposals . increasing longevity and falling birth rates over the past 50 years have led to a growth in the elderly's share of the u.s. population . this demographic change has led to a serious long - term financing problem for the social security system . the share that is 65 and older is expected to continue to increase from 13 percent of the total u.s. population today to 20 percent by 2050 . several different reform plans have been proposed to address the financing problem , and all would affect the financial well - being of current and future beneficiaries . on april 10 , 1997 , we testified before the house ways and means subcommittee on social security on the issue of social security reform and women's retirement income . although social security currently has more revenue than expenditures , over the next 75 years revenues are projected to be about 14 percent less than total projected expenditures . some current beneficiaries , especially older unmarried women , are already experiencing higher poverty rates than other groups in the aged population and may be increasingly vulnerable if particular options are selected . subsequently , you asked us to extend our analysis of the effect of the various reform proposals on women . to evaluate these issues , we reviewed the literature on women's labor force participation and earnings , spoke with social security and insurance industry analysts , analyzed data on individual annuity benefits for men and women , and conducted an econometric analysis to estimate the relative levels of risk aversion of men and women . among the various proposals for restoring long - term financial balance to the social security system are several that call for some degree of privatization . social security is a retirement income program whose benefits are based , in part , on an individual's earnings . in part , because of the anticipated increase in the size of the elderly population and the growing proportion of the total population that the elderly will constitute over the next 33 years , social security's trust funds are projected to be depleted by 2029 . a number of proposals have emerged to resolve this difficulty , with a great deal of variety in terms of both how the social security program would be structured and who would be eligible for benefits . women's social security benefits are currently lower , on average , than men's because their labor force participation rates and earnings are lower . some of these privatization proposals would redesign the social security system , patterning it , in part , after some private sector pension plans , such as 401 ( k ) plans . women's labor force participation rates continue to be lower than men's at every age , despite substantial increases in women's rates in the past 35 years .
under the new national military strategy , the department of defense ( dod ) must be capable of rapidly deploying armed forces to respond to contingency and humanitarian operations around the world . since dod is increasingly relying on the c - 5 aircraft as its primary airlifter , we assessed the reliability and mission capability of the aircraft and dod's current plan for modifying the c - 5 . military strategic airlift aircraft provide the capability to fly the critical , early arriving troops and cargo for overseas deployments . this review was requested by the honorable earl hutto , former chairman , subcommittee on readiness , house committee on armed services . we are addressing this report to you as the current chairman of the house subcommittee on military readiness . we recommend that the secretary of defense direct the secretary of the air force to ( 1 ) conduct a readiness evaluation to determine how c - 5 peacetime mission capability can be improved and the costs of such improvements and ( 2 ) assess the impact of proposed aircraft modifications on c - 5 mission capability and then reprioritize the proposals according to the results of the assessment . the air force's air mobility command ( amc ) has 104 c - 5 , 199 c - 141 , and 16 c - 17 strategic airlift aircraft in its fleet . dod has not been providing adequate funding to meet the original schedule for proposed c - 5 improvements . amc stated in its 1995 air mobility master plan that not completing scheduled improvements would degrade capability and increase operating costs . dod bases many of its conclusions about a more capable c - 5 aircraft on studies of buying additional quantities of a new c - 5d aircraft , which has not yet been developed . air force officials expect raising the spares support level will add about $4.6 million to annual c - 5 spares costs . amc established a c - 5 modernization plan to increase mission capability rates and reduce personnel requirements and life - cycle costs . for example , two major upgrades to improve the c - 5's reliability , the malfunction detection analysis and recording system and the main landing gear actuator , were first identified in fiscal year 1985 and scheduled to be completed by fiscal year 1994 . however , funding delays have stretched these modifications by 4 years to fiscal year 1998 . amc has established a goal that the total not mission capable supply ( tnmcs ) rate should not exceed 7 percent for its operational c - 5 fleet . afotec also found that these changes would increase annual program funding by $11 million to $12 million over and above funds already committed for various improvements , initiatives , and spare parts . according to our 1992 report , one of the major factors contributing to the c - 141's recent severe problems was inadequate funding to implement necessary modifications . the c - 5's mission capability rates could increase if the air force were to conduct a readiness evaluation similar to the operational readiness assessment conducted for b - 1b bomber aircraft . the following is our comment on the department of defense's ( dod ) letter dated october 23 , 1995 .
we reviewed the air force's and the navy's policies and procedures for determining requirements and budgets for aviation spare parts . our objective was to determine whether the air force's and the navy's requirements and budgets reflect the actual amounts needed . the following are gao's comments on the department of defense's ( dod ) letter dated february 13 , 1996 . the congress has made several attempts to change the air force's policy . although air force and navy policies and procedures related to reserving on - hand assets for depot maintenance requirements differ , both agencies' policies and procedures result in overstated requirements . this overstatement occurred because of questionable air force and navy policies concerning the determination of requirements and the accountability for assets held in reserve to satisfy depot maintenance needs . this reflects a reduction in the navy's assets from at least $154 million to at least $60 million . the air force and the navy budget and spend billions annually to procure and repair aviation spare parts . despite these efforts , the air force continues its policy of not considering depot supply level assets in requirements and budget computations . for fiscal year 1996 , the air force budgeted $3.9 billion to procure and repair aviation spare parts . we have decreased the amount of assets reserved for depot maintenance needs from $226 million to $132 million . since 1984 , air force policy has been to reserve on - hand consumable parts for depot maintenance needs and not to use these assets to offset computed requirements when deciding to buy or projecting annual budgeted buys . dod did not agree that current air force and navy procedures related to reserving on - hand assets for depot maintenance resulted in overstated requirements . for example , for fiscal year 1997 , the navy budgeted $1.4 billion for this purpose . if these assets had been applied to offset requirements , this procurement would not have been necessary . these inaccuracies included unsupported or incorrect ( 1 ) maintenance replacement rates , ( 2 ) demand rates , ( 3 ) planned program requirements , ( 4 ) repair costs , and ( 5 ) lead times . some of the demands to satisfy depot maintenance needs are included once as recurring demands based on past usage and again as nonrecurring demands to meet planned program requirements . nevertheless , dod's and the air force's position is that depot supply level assets are set aside for depot maintenance and , therefore , are not considered to offset wholesale requirements . the inaccuracies caused buys and repairs to be understated by about $8 million on some items and overstated by about $15 million on others . as a result , the congress reduced the air force's operation and maintenance budget for fiscal year 1994 . dod agreed that action should be taken to improve the accuracy of requirement determination processes and stated that the air force and the navy are taking such actions ( see app . as a result , budget requirements were overstated by $1.1 million . our review of overall budget inventory data related to these assets and our sampling tests of f - 100 and f - 404 engine parts showed that the air force and the navy overstated budgeted buys and repairs by about $132 million .
in 1997 , almost 900,000 children younger than 18 received about $5 billion in supplemental security income ( ssi ) benefits . in february 1997 , the social security administration ( ssa ) published regulations to implement the new definition of disability for the ssi children's program set forth in the welfare reform law . the personal responsibility and work opportunity reconciliation act of 1996 ( p.l . 104-193 ) , commonly referred to as welfare reform , made eligibility for childhood ssi benefits more restrictive . in september 1997 , we reported that ssa's regulations establishing a new severity standard are consistent with the law and are well supported.since then , we have been monitoring ssa's adjudication of cases under the new regulations for 288,000 children whose eligibility was subject to review against the new standard as well as for about 370,000 new applicants . under the more restrictive standard , a child's impairment generally must result in marked limitations in two areas of functioning or an extreme limitation in one area . previously , a child could be found eligible if his or her impairment resulted in one marked and one moderate limitation or three moderate limitations . you asked us to expand on our early findings regarding ssa's implementation of the new eligibility standard , which we reported to you and the chairman of the social security subcommittee in a joint hearing on march 12 , 1998 . ssa has made substantial progress in implementing the new childhood definition of disability through its rapid redetermination of most of these cases , its action to ensure that the redetermination process is fair , and its ongoing review of the implementation of the new regulations . the congress made the eligibility criteria for children to receive ssi more restrictive in order to help ensure that only needy children with severe disabilities are eligible for benefits . examples of such functional criteria include standards for assessing a child's social skills ; cognition and communication skills ; and the ability to concentrate , keep pace , and persist at tasks at hand . this growth occurred after ssa initiated outreach efforts and issued two sets of regulations that made the eligibility criteria for children less restrictive , particularly for children with mental impairments . one regulatory change , issued in december 1990 , revised and expanded ssa's medical listings for childhood mental impairments by adding such impairments as attention deficit hyperactivity disorder and incorporating functional criteria into the listings . the plan includes special initiatives to ensure the quality of cases readjudicated in response to the top - to - bottom review , as well as initiatives to improve ssa's ongoing quality assurance reviews on childhood cases . ssa found problems with the adjudication of claims for which mental retardation was the primary impairment as well as potential procedural weaknesses relating to notification of appeal rights and termination of benefits for failure to cooperate with ssa requests for information needed to redetermine eligibility . ssa also needs to continue its efforts to improve decisionmaking for childhood cases to better ensure that adjudicators apply the new eligibility criteria accurately and consistently . from the end of 1989 through 1996 , the number of children younger than 18 receiving ssi had more than tripled , from 265,000 to 955,000 .
specifically , we ascertained ( 1 ) the rationale for , and costs associated with , the construction , maintenance , and operations of the santa lucia base , an antidrug base in the upper huallaga valley ; ( 2 ) the subsequent rationale for discontinuing support of the santa lucia base ; ( 3 ) and the current status of u.s. efforts to restructure antidrug programs in peru . however , before sharing of information can resume , the president must determine that ( 1 ) illicit drug trafficking poses a national security threat to peru and ( 2 ) peru has appropriate procedures in place to protect against the innocent loss of life . nearly two - thirds of the world's coca crop is grown in peru . in response to your request , we are providing you information on u.s. antidrug efforts in peru . gradually , the united states began to ( 1 ) support peruvian efforts to eradicate coca seedbeds and ( 2 ) conduct law enforcement operations against drug - trafficking activities . the departments of state and defense and the drug enforcement administration ( dea ) coordinate antidrug activities with peruvian law enforcement and military organizations . about $6.4 million was spent for police support at santa lucia , including ( 1 ) per diem for peruvian police officers stationed at the base to provide security for the base and for workers on eradication missions and ( 2 ) commodities used by the police to support the base . most of that coca is processed into cocaine base , which is flown to colombia to make cocaine for shipment to the united states and europe . the congress reduced the state department's annual international narcotics control program request for fiscal year 1994 from $148 million to $100 million . since the 1980s , the primary coca - growing and drug - trafficking activities in peru have been in its upper huallaga valley . although the impact that the policy has had on the flow of drugs being shipped from peru to colombia is unclear , it is clear that pilots flying between peru and colombia have changed their operations , since there is little fear of interception by u.s. and peruvian forces as long as detection capabilities remain negligible and there is no sharing of information . to obtain information for this report , we interviewed officials and reviewed pertinent documents at the departments of state and defense and the drug enforcement administration in washington , d.c. ; the u.s. southern command in panama ; and the u.s. embassy in lima , peru . u.s. officials in peru said that since the policy change , drug traffickers have changed their operations and ( 1 ) have begun multiple flights with smaller drug loads and ( 2 ) have begun flying during the day , and some traffickers have doubled their time on the ground . the officials stated that the policy decision had impacted on their ability to conduct antidrug operations . as of november 30 , 1994 , the sharing of information had not yet resumed . thus , they ( 1 ) used fewer flights with larger drug loads , ( 2 ) flew mainly in the early evening hours , and ( 3 ) spent on an average only about 10 to 12 minutes in loading and unloading their cargoes .
uoes is intended to ( 1 ) allow military users to influence the thaad system design , ( 2 ) permit an early operational assessment of the system's capabilities , and ( 3 ) provide a system that could be deployed in a national emergency . the ballistic missile defense organization and the army plan to acquire a theater high altitude area defense ( thaad ) user operational evaluation system ( uoes ) — an early prototype version of the final thaad system . we are addressing this report to the committees of jurisdiction because it identifies problems and calls for corrective action that the department of defense ( dod ) has indicated an unwillingness to take . the congress may also wish to restrict obligational authority for acquiring uoes until the secretary of defense certifies that the system has adequate operational effectiveness to merit its deployment in a national emergency . uoes will consist primarily of refurbished components acquired for the system's demonstration and validation phase , although the army plans to purchase 40 uoes interceptors to provide the deployable system capability . this report does not address the overall value of the thaad system . pursuant to our basic legislative responsibilities , we reviewed the thaad uoes program to determine whether planned testing would reasonably demonstrate the capabilities of uoes as an interim system before funds are committed to interceptor production . we are suggesting that the congress may wish to take the necessary action to ensure that dod addresses the problems we have identified . because dod has clearly indicated its intention to commit over $200 million for uoes interceptors that may have inadequate operational effectiveness and because the current schedule will provide only 14 of the 40 interceptors by fiscal year 1998 , the congress may wish to consider delaying the timetable for acquiring thaad uoes set forth in the 1996 defense authorization act . in commenting on a draft of this report , dod disagreed with our recommendations , stating that thaad uoes will serve three functions in priority order: ( 1 ) providing soldiers an opportunity to influence the system's design ; ( 2 ) conducting early operational assessments of the system ; and ( 3 ) if directed by the national command authority , providing a theater commander in chief with a limited missile defense capability . accordingly , to avoid committing over $200 million for a system that may not have adequate operational effectiveness , we recommend that the secretary of defense ( 1 ) restrict obligational authority for uoes interceptors until the chairman of the joint chiefs of staff certifies that uoes has adequate effectiveness to merit deployment as an interim system and ( 2 ) seek legislative relief from the requirements of the 1996 national defense authorization act in regards to acquiring thaad uoes by fiscal year 1998 . we performed our work at the office of the chairman of the joint chiefs of staff , office of the secretary of defense , headquarters of the ballistic missile defense organization ; the department of the army in washington , d.c. ; and the thaad project office in huntsville , alabama . the 16-month delay in delivery results from ( 1 ) extended lead times — from 18 to 29 months — in delivery of some interceptor components and ( 2 ) reduced fiscal year 1997 funding that further extended final deliveries from 29 to 34 months .
the 111 th congress continues to take a strong interest in the health of the u.s. research and development ( r&d ) enterprise and in providing sustained support for federal r&d activities . its purposes include addressing specific concerns such as national defense , health , safety , the environment , and energy security ; advancing knowledge generally ; developing the scientific and engineering workforce ; and strengthening u.s. innovation and competitiveness in the global economy . the united states government supports a broad range of scientific and engineering research and development . the federal government has played an important role in supporting r&d efforts that have led to scientific breakthroughs and new technologies , from jet aircraft and the internet to communications satellites and defenses against disease . in may 2009 , president obama requested $147.620 billion for r&d in fy2010 , a 0.4% increase over the enacted fy2009 r&d funding level of $147.065 billion ( est. ) .  ( not including fy2009 r&d funding provided under the american recovery and reinvestment act ( p.l . 110-69 ) and president bush's american competitiveness initiative ( aci ) . most of the r&d funded by the federal government is performed in support of the unique missions of the funding agencies . the president's proposed fy2010 r&d funding included an emphasis on increasing funding for the physical sciences and engineering , an effort consistent with the intent of the america competes act ( p.l . as a result of these and other factors , the r&d agency figures reported by the white house office of management and budget ( omb ) and white house office of science and technology policy ( ostp ) ( and shown in table 1 ) may differ somewhat from the agency budget analyses that appear later in this report . increasing direct federal r&d funding by 12.5% in fy2010 would have required an increase of more than $18 billion above president obama's request . 111-5 ) ) . another complicating factor for fy2009 and fy2010 is the inclusion of funding for r&d , facilities , and equipment , and related activities in the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 ( arra , p.l .  , analysis of federal r&d funding is complicated by several factors , including the obama administration's omission of congressionally directed spending from the fy2010 budget request and inconsistency among agencies in the reporting of r&d . 111-5 brings total fy2009 r&d funding to $165.400 billion . based on 2007 figures , reaching president obama's 3% goal would require a 12.5% real increase in national r&d funding . more broadly , in a speech before members of the national academy of sciences , president obama put forth a goal of increasing the national investment in r&d to more than 3% of the u.s. gross domestic product ( gdp ) . in addition , advocates for increased federal r&d funding — including president obama's science advisor , john holdren — have raised concerns about the potential negative effects of a "boom - bust" approach to federal r&d funding , i.e. , rapid growth in federal r&d funding followed by much slower growth , flat funding , or even decline .
2469a and other applicable laws and regulations , ( 3 ) appropriate consideration was given to factors other than cost , and ( 4 ) award resulted in the lowest total cost to the department of defense ( dod ) for performance of the work . this report is a redacted version of a report issued on november 23 , 1998 , which contained sensitive and protected information . the report responds to one of several requirements in the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 1998 relating to depot maintenance activities . specifically , we assessed whether the ( 1 ) air force's procedures for conducting the sacramento competition provided substantially equal opportunity for the public and private offerors to compete for the work without regard to performance location , ( 2 ) procedures for conducting the competition were in compliance with 10 u.s.c . as required , we reviewed the air force's selection of a source of repair for depot maintenance work at the closing sacramento air logistics center ( alc ) , mcclellan air force base , california . questions relate to estimating costs for ( 1 ) overhead , ( 2 ) commodity rate risk , ( 3 ) warehousing , ( 4 ) base operating support , and ( 5 ) material surcharge . for these cost elements , we ( 1 ) discussed with members of the evaluation team , the methodology they used in determining the evaluated cost ; ( 2 ) reviewed the calculations and supporting documentation for the various cost elements ; ( 3 ) attempted to independently collect data to corroborate the evaluated cost estimates , where warranted ; and ( 4 ) offered to discuss competition issues with both the public and private sector competitors . the team based the reductions primarily on ( 1 ) the defense contract audit agency's ( dcaa ) assessment of ogden's overhead savings analysis , ( 2 ) its decision to limit the number of years overhead savings would be considered , and ( 3 ) its assessment of boeing aircraft's proposed cost savings on the c - 17 maintenance program . however , the selection decision would not have been affected by these questions . overall , the air force's evaluation and selection of ogden appeared to be reasonable , fair , and consistent with the solicitation and depot competition procedures . therefore , these cases had no impact on the award decision . as a result of a 1995 base realignment and closure ( brac ) act decision , the sacramento and san antonio alcs , including their maintenance depots , are to close by 2001 . these issues relate primarily to refining cost estimating methodologies and using more accurate data . however , we present them as potential opportunities for improving cost estimates for future competitions . to mitigate the impact of the closings on the local communities and employees , the administration announced its intention to maintain employment levels by privatizing the maintenance depots' workloads in place at each location . ogden's total evaluated cost of $1,794,488,861 for the competed sacramento depot maintenance workloads was about 6 percent less than lockheed's evaluated cost of $1,902,848,080 . the air force evaluation team reduced ogden's projection of overhead savings by 85 percent — from $294.5 million to $46.2 million .
our review focused on the operations of the canadian wheat board and the trade remedies applicable to the activities of state trading enterprises . as you requested , we have reviewed issues involving canadian grain exports to the united states . state trading enterprises ( ste ) have existed for some time and have been considered legitimate trading entities by the general agreement on tariffs and trade ( gatt ) since 1947 . as you requested , we plan no further distribution of this report until 30 days after its issue date , unless you publicly announce its contents earlier . we also reviewed the dispute settlement mechanisms within the cfta , the 1994 north american free trade agreement ( nafta ) , and the wto . we reviewed the following: ( 1 ) cwb operations , government assistance to the cwb and the canadian farmer , and ongoing changes to the environment in which the cwb operates ; ( 2 ) the availability of data to ascertain cwb pricing practices , and efforts to increase the amount of data available ; and ( 3 ) the nature of trade remedies available to address the operations of stes , and the frequency with which these remedies have been applied to stes . to identify efforts to increase the amount of data available we evaluated whether the wto has made progress in increasing the amount of information available on the cwb and other stes as well as wto members' compliance with ste reporting requirements . u.s. concerns that the cwb has an unfair pricing advantage have led to efforts to increase the transparency of cwb pricing practices . neither cfta nor the use of trade remedies has resolved u.s. producer concerns about u.s. access to the canadian wheat market , cwb practices , and increasing canadian wheat imports into the united states . so far , the united states has had limited success in achieving this objective . thus far , the united states' and other countries' efforts to expand ste reporting requirements on pricing have had limited success . canadian wheat and barley producers have historically received transportation subsidies that reduced shipping costs . the cwb faces structural changes due to recently completed legislative reforms , and other changes in the canadian grain marketing system are underway ; however , it is unclear how these changes will affect the way that the cwb conducts its business . some aspects of cwb pricing are better known than others . canadian wheat and barley producers have historically received transportation subsidies that reduced shipping costs . also , u.s. food use of durum has risen 125 percent over the past 2 decades ; thus , as the demand for durum wheat has increased , so too have u.s. imports of this wheat from canada . canadian access to u.s. elevators , on the other hand , is relatively less impeded . the united states wants to ( 1 ) deviate from the panel decision by applying a broader definition of “acquisition price” ; ( 2 ) expand the audit to cover not only durum but also spring wheat and barley ; and ( 3 ) include in the audit canadian grain export prices to countries other than the united states .
because of this uncertainty , you asked us to provide you with information on ( 1 ) approaches that show promise in helping teenage mothers complete their secondary education as a step toward self - sufficiency and ( 2 ) aid to families with dependent children ( afdc ) program activities that enable teenage mothers on welfare to complete their secondary education . as the congress and the administration consider how to reform the nation's welfare system and reduce the number of families that are dependent on welfare , concerns have focused on the increasing numbers of births to unmarried teenagers . this issue is of particular concern because families started by teenage mothers represent almost half the families receiving welfare and are likely to receive assistance for long periods of time , at great cost to the public . while low - income teenage mothers stand a better chance of avoiding long - term welfare dependency if they obtain a high school education , there is uncertainty about how to achieve this outcome . to develop this information , we visited 13 local programs in new jersey , new mexico , oregon , texas , vermont , and wisconsin that were recognized by experts as being exemplary in helping disadvantaged teenage mothers complete their secondary education . since most of these programs had not been formally evaluated , we also examined published impact evaluations of programs serving teenage mothers to determine which approaches had demonstrated success . we synthesized the results of the five impact evaluations whose methods we judged to be rigorous enough to produce credible results . we did not , however , verify the information given to us by the afdc and jobs program administrators .  ( app . i provides additional information about these evaluations and our synthesis of their results. ) . finally , we conducted interviews with afdc and jobs program administrators in the 15 cities across the country that had the highest numbers of births to unwed mothers under the age of 20 in 1992 . the congress is currently deliberating several reforms to the welfare system , including whether to provide benefits to teenage mothers . all five programs also provided child care and transportation assistance ; otherwise , these programs were quite different . these three afdc offices coordinate with educational providers to ensure that welfare benefits are contingent on teenagers' continuing their education . we did our work between june 1994 and july 1995 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . although our work shows that a number of approaches can work to help teenage mothers complete high school , whether states will use these approaches will likely be influenced by the final form of the legislation . numerous programs have been established in communities throughout the country to reduce the negative consequences of teenage parenting . our synthesis of rigorous impact evaluations of five such programs operating in multiple sites identified one feature that distinguished the programs that increased high school or ged completions from those that did not: active monitoring and follow - up of school attendance . many programs also recognized lack of transportation as a barrier to teenagers' ability to complete high school . the administration for children and families ( acf ) , within the u.s. department of health and human services , commented on a draft of this report and generally agreed with our conclusions about promising program approaches , but expressed several concerns .
111-151 ) with a vote of 226 to 202 on june 16 ; the senate passed it ( 91 to 5 ) on june 18 . the house - passed version of the bill provided supplemental appropriations of $96.3 billion , $11.4 billion more than the administration's amended request . the house passed its version of the bill on may 14 by a vote of 368-60 . on june 11 , 2009 , the house and senate appropriations committees announced a conference agreement on h.r . as reported and subsequently approved on the floor , the senate bill provided $91.3 billion , of which $5 billion was to support loans to the international monetary fund ( imf ) that were not part of the administration's pending request , but that fulfill commitments that have been under discussion since last fall . president obama signed the bill into law ( p.l . the agreement includes $5 billion , as in the senate bill , to support u.s. loans to the international monetary fund , and does not include a senate provision allowing the secretary of defense to exempt photos of military detainees from release under the freedom of information act . procedurally , on may 19 , the senate took up the house - passed supplemental bill and substituted the text of s. 1054 , a version reported by the senate appropriations committee on may 14 . on june 2 , 2009 , the white house submitted a request for additional fy2009 supplemental appropriations of $2.0 billion for influenza preparedness and response and $200 million for humanitarian assistance to pakistan . on april 30 , 2009 , following influenza outbreaks in mexico and in parts of the united states , the white house requested $1.5 billion for influenza preparedness and response measures . the house passed the conference report ( h.rept . on may 21 , by a vote of 86-3 , the senate approved h.r . senate approval cleared the bill for consideration by a house - senate conference committee . 111-32 ) on june 24 . 2346 , a bill providing supplemental appropriations for the remainder of fy2009 . apart from the imf funds , the senate bill provided $86.3 billion , $1.3 billion above the request . on april 9 , 2009 , the white house requested $83.4 billion in supplemental appropriations for defense , international affairs , domestic fire fighting , and some other purposes . earlier , the administration submitted three requests for fy2009 supplemental appropriations that were addressed in the pending house and senate bills . on may 12 , the white house submitted a formal request for supplemental appropriations and for legislative language to support imf loans in response to the global financial crisis . because the bill did not include that provision , there was enough support from house democrats who initially opposed the bill to overcome opposition from republicans who objected to imf funding . congress had provided down - payments on fy2009 war - related supplemental funding last year . the department of defense ( dod ) funding was mainly for operation and maintenance accounts , and was intended , together with money in the regular fy2009 defense appropriations act , to sustain ongoing military operations through the first few months of that fiscal year .
the united states was a major force behind the creation of the wto in 1993 and the establishment of new rules and trade liberalization that occurred as a result of the uruguay round of multilateral trade negotiations ( 1986-1994 ) . the 111 th congress is considering various issues related to the world trade organization ( wto ) . 103-465 ) , which is the law that approved and implemented the agreements reached during the uruguay round , provided that the u.s. trade representative ( ustr ) must submit to the congress every five years a report that analyzes the costs and benefits of continued u.s. participation in the wto . section 125 of the uruguay round agreements act ( p.l . 93-618 ) , which provides for the enactment of joint resolutions disapproving certain trade - related actions . on may 26 , 2005 , the house ways and means committee reported the resolution adversely ( h.rept . it has also been debated what legal effect the resolution would have if adopted . procedurally , a withdrawal resolution would have to pass both the house and senate and then surmount a likely presidential veto via an override with a two - thirds majority vote . the procedure provides for a ( non - mandatory ) introduction of the resolution , with mandatory , non - amendable language , and specific expedited ( fast - track ) legislative procedures . in addition to possibly considering a withdrawal resolution , the 111 th congress has monitored wto disputes involving u.s. interests and u.s. laws , china's implementation of its wto commitments , and u.s. participation in the doha development agenda , the latest round of multilateral trade negotiations . yet , this resolution provides an opportunity for members of congress periodically to debate the u.s. role in an important international institution and the direction of u.s. trade policy , generally . the reasons for the disapproval provision are explained by the house ways and means committee as follows: the purpose of this provision is to provide an opportunity for the congress to evaluate the transition of the gatt to the wto and to assess periodically whether continued membership in this organization is in the best interest of the united states . the legislative procedure for such withdrawal basically follows section 152 of the trade act of 1974 ( p.l . once congress receives this comprehensive report , any member of congress may introduce a privileged joint resolution withdrawing congressional approval of the wto agreement within 90 days . to date no withdrawal resolution has been introduced in the 111 th congress in either chamber . substantively , the withdrawal of u.s. participation could undermine a multilateral system of trade rules and practices , formulated and implemented under u.s. leadership , that on balance has contributed to increased economic prosperity and security at home and abroad . the main body of the report addresses selected issues for the united states: the economic costs and benefits to the united states ; decisionmaking in the wto and national sovereignty ; the wto dispute process ; and criticisms of the wto from environmental , health and safety , labor , development , and financial regulation perspectives . the withdrawal resolution offered the opportunity for members to examine the costs and benefits of wto participation , express the degree of satisfaction with wto dispute decisions , or debate other aspects of wto membership .
the combined efforts of the food industry and government regulatory agencies often are credited with making the u.s. food supply among the safest in the world . the majority of both total funding and total staffing , however , is with the food safety and inspection service ( fsis ) at the u.s. department of agriculture ( usda ) , which regulates most meat and poultry , and the food and drug administration ( fda ) at the u.s. department of health and human services ( hhs ) , which regulates virtually all other foods . at issue is whether the current food safety system has the resources , authority , and structural organization to safeguard the health of american consumers , who spend more than $1 trillion on food each year . in 2007 and again in 2009 , the government accountability office ( gao ) placed food safety on its biennially published list of high - risk areas , one of 30 needing concerted attention by congress and the administration . also at issue is whether federal food safety laws , first enacted in the early 1900s , have kept pace with the significant changes that have occurred in the food production , processing , and marketing sectors since then . gao has identified 15 federal agencies collectively administering at least 30 laws related to food safety . it then provides a detailed overview of the major provisions in the newly enacted law — the fda food safety modernization act ( fsma , p.l . fda's annual budget in fy2010 for its human foods program was $784 million , all of it appropriated . nonetheless , public health officials have estimated that each year in the united states , many millions of people become sick and thousands die from foodborne illnesses caused by any of a number of microbial pathogens and other contaminants . after discussing several recent food safety incidents and the systemic food safety problems that they illustrate , this report describes the existing food safety legal and regulatory landscape and presents an overview of efforts by the 111 th congress to revise federal food safety authorities and activities , principally at fda . fsis's annual budget in fy2010 was approximately $1.1 billion in appropriated funds , plus an estimated $131 million in industry - paid user fees . the report is organized around a number of selected food safety issues , describing how they are addressed in previously existing law and regulations , and describing their treatment in the newly enacted law . finally , appendixes provide a crosswalk of all provisions in fsma , followed by a side - by - side comparison of each of these provisions with previously existing law . 111-353 ) . concerns about increased record - keeping requirements and access authority often involve concerns about the intrusiveness of government , as well as about privacy and the protection of sensitive commercial information ( trade secrets ) , for example . comparison of provisions in the fda food safety modernization act ( fsma , p.l . the following sections provide a discussion of the key provisions in the fda food safety modernization act ( fsma , p.l . farms and restaurants ( as under previous law ) remain fully exempt from this provision .
two of the major goals of the elementary and secondary education act ( esea ) , as amended by the no child left behind act of 2001 ( p.l . 107-110 ; nclb ) , are to improve the quality of k - 12 teaching and raise the academic achievement of students who fail to meet grade - level proficiency standards . the arra appropriated $4.35 billion to the u.s. department of education ( ed ) for the rttt program . since that time , appropriations legislation has continued to fund the rttt program in fy2011 ( approximately $700 million ) and fy2012 ( approximately $549 million ) . in setting these goals , congress recognized that reaching the second goal depends greatly on meeting the first ; that is , quality teaching is critical to student success . 111-5 ) and , in particular , enactment of the race to the top ( rttt ) program . attempts to improve teacher performance led to federal and state efforts to incentivize improved performance through alternative compensation systems . the most recent congressional action in this area came with the passage of the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 ( arra , p.l . 109-149 , congress authorized the federal teacher incentive fund ( tif ) program , which provides grants to support teacher performance pay efforts . eligibility for funds is dependent on four broad areas of school reform outlined by ed: adopting standards and assessments that prepare students to succeed in college and the workplace and to compete in the global economy ; building data systems that measure student growth and success , and inform teachers and principals about how they can improve instruction ; recruiting , developing , rewarding , and retaining effective teachers and principals , especially where they are needed most ; and turning around the lowest - achieving schools . two of the four school reform areas specifically address teacher improvement and teacher effectiveness . in addition , there are various programs at all levels ( national , state , and local ) aimed at reforming teacher compensation systems . meanwhile , policy makers have grown increasingly interested in the output of teachers' work ; that is , their performance in the classroom and the effectiveness of their instruction . by articulating these reform areas , ed has provided an incentive to states to become more systematic about using student data to inform teacher instruction and to measure teacher effectiveness . in november 2009 , ed released a final rule of priorities , requirements , definitions , and selection criteria for the rttt , which provided details on how states are expected to address the four school reform areas . although there are other methods for assessing teacher effectiveness , in the last decade , vam has garnered increasing attention in education research and policy due to its promise as a more objective method of evaluation . considerable interest has arisen pertaining to the feasibility of using vam on a larger scale — for instance , to meet rttt program eligibility requirements concerning the evaluation of teacher performance . the latter point is elaborated on in the discussion that follows pertaining to the definition of effectiveness ( i.e. , "effective teacher" ) included in ed's rttt final rule .
a day later , on january 9 , 2013 , venezuela's supreme court upheld this interpretation of the constitution , maintaining that chávez could take the oath of office before the supreme court at a later date when his health improves . opposition leader henrique capriles appeared to accept the supreme court's interpretation of the constitution , but maintained that it did not end the uncertainties facing the country . some opposition leaders and some venezuelan legal scholars had argued that the january 10 inauguration date was fixed by article 231 , and that since chávez could not be sworn in on that date , then the president of the national assembly should have been sworn in as interim or caretaker president until either a new election was held or chávez recovered . voters delivered a resounding victory to president chávez and his united socialist party of venezuela ( psuv ) , which won 20 out of 23 states . on october 7 , 2012 , president chávez won reelection to another six - year term by a margin of 11% , capturing about 55% of the vote compared to 44% for opposition candidate henrique capriles . on december 16 , 2012 , venezuela held state elections in which 23 governorships were at stake . on january 8 , 2013 , vice president nicolás maduro announced that president chávez would not be sworn into office on january 10 as planned because he was still recovering from cancer surgery in cuba , but that he would be sworn into office at a later date , as provided for in article 231 of the constitution .  ( see " chávez's health status and political implications " below. ) . on september 18 , 2012 , venezuelan security forces captured a major colombian drug trafficker , daniel barrera , who reportedly was based in venezuela since 2008 . chávez reportedly faced complications during and after his december 11 surgery , and faced new respiratory complications at year's end .  ( maduro had been sworn into office on october 13 , 2012 , and retained his position as foreign minister , which he has held since 2006. ) .  ( see " chávez's health status and political implications " below. ) .  ( see " december 2012 state elections " ) on december 8 , 2012 , president chávez announced that his cancer had returned and that he would soon undergo a fourth cancer surgery in cuba . a white house spokesman , while acknowledging differences with president chávez , congratulated "the venezuelan people on the high level of participation , as well as on what was a relatively peaceful process. . opposition candidates won just three states , including the state of miranda , where recently defeated opposition presidential candidate henrique capriles radonski was reelected .  ( for more details , see " election results and implications " below. ) . he also announced his support for vice president nicolás maduro if anything were to happen to him , including support for maduro in a new election that would be required by the constitution . most reports indicate that election day was peaceful with only minor irregularities .  ( see " counternarcotics issues " below. ) .
china's accession to the wto , its recent efforts to negotiate bilateral trade agreements ( btas ) across asia ( including the asean - china fta ) , and its unilateral liberalization of its trade regime , has arguably placed china as a major competitor to the united states . apec is unusual among various trade associations in its reliance on consensus - based , voluntary reductions in tariff and non - tariff trade barriers — as well as a variety of trade facilitation measures — to promote trade and investment liberalization not only between apec members , but for all international trade and investment , an approach often referred to as "open regionalism" ( see " apec's approach to trade liberalization " below ) . congress and the executive branch have historically identified the asia pacific economic cooperation forum ( apec ) as potentially important in the promotion of liberalized international trade and investment in asia , and possibly the rest of the world . they advocate both increased financial assistance to apec , through the annual contribution and specific assistance programs , and alteration in u.s. laws and policies on key issues . in addition to its primary trade mission , apec provides a venue at which the united states can hold bilateral and multilateral discussions on non - economic matters of concern in the asia - pacific region , such as international security and human rights . many argue that the united states should re - energize its involvement in asian trade discussion and elevate the importance of apec to reassert u.s. leadership . over the last few years , however , the united states' position as a leader in the region has been challenged by china . critics of apec , however , point to its apparent slow progress as a demonstration of its ineffectiveness . others say that apec should reformulate its mission by focusing more narrowly on trade facilitation and economic integration , abandoning many of the working groups that are not central to the core goals , and strengthening the secretariat . second , congress may take into account u.s. commitments to apec when considering legislation on various trade and non - trade issues . third , congress may increase oversight of apec - related activities and programs of the u.s. trade representative , the department of state and other federal departments and agencies . one indicator of previous congressional interest in apec is the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2006 ( p.l . for example , the bogor goals set the year 2010 for the achievement of trade and investment liberalization for apec's "developed economies. . these principles include comprehensiveness ; wto consistency ; comparability ; non - discrimination ; transparency ; flexibility ; and cooperation . some experts maintain that it is doubtful that apec will ever fulfill the bogor goals , in part because of its reliance on voluntary compliance . the annual leaders' meeting continues to provide prestige and offer an opportunity for heads of state , particularly those of smaller countries , to interact with top u.s. officials . that legislation called for the president to develop a comprehensive strategy to address the "emergence of china economically , diplomatically , and militarily ; promote mutually beneficial trade relations with china ; and encourage china's adherence to international norms in the areas of trade , international security , and human rights. .
a persistent set of issues has stymied significant progress in detecting and deterring existing threats and implementing effective safeguard measures . issues that appear to continually challenge u.s. cybersecurity efforts include uncertainty of the geographic location of the perpetrators of cyber attacks ; the evolving integration of mobile technology devices into critical information infrastructure ; the introduction of new vulnerabilities to the nation's infrastructure from increasingly sophisticated threats ; a poorly coordinated federal - private sector approach to addressing emerging risks ; and legal ambiguities with respect to u.s. response and offensive actions . comprehensively addressing national cybersecurity - related issues is a difficult task because of a number of technical and policy considerations . while the ever - changing nature of modern technological devices is often noted as a complicating factor in securing the nation's telecommunications and cyber infrastructure , many security observers suggest that an equally daunting group of strategy and policy challenges must be addressed if the united states is to continue to rely on technology as a major component of societal activities . recent events such as the april 2007 cyber attacks on estonia and cyber attacks during the 2008 georgian incursion have served to increase awareness that cybersecurity is not just about protecting computers , but also has implications for u.s. national security and economic well - being . since 2008 , a number of strategy and policy proposals have been offered that may assist in addressing the appropriate balance of relying on emerging technology and network - centric governance while safeguarding critical infrastructure and control systems , as well as privacy and civil liberty considerations . recognizing the importance of cyberspace over the past few years , both the legislative and executive branches of government have developed cybersecurity legislation and related initiatives , respectively . the obama administration declared that u.s. critical information infrastructures are a strategic national asset in a may 29 , 2009 , speech by the president . for the department of defense , cybersecurity takes on an offensive or defensive national security role . as the president stated , "no single official oversees cybersecurity policy across the federal government , and no single agency has the responsibility or authority to match the scope and scale of the challenge . however , just as there is no single congressional committee that can claim primary jurisdiction over cyberspace , neither is there a single executive agency or department with sole cybersecurity responsibility or commensurate authorities . for example , the u.s. military views cyberspace as a warfighting domain as well as a force enabler , enhancing troops' ability to operate in real - time and with improved situational awareness . for other government stakeholders , cybersecurity means information security , or securing the information that resides on cyber infrastructure such as telecommunications networks , or the processes these networks enable . cybersecurity is a cross - cutting field that affects many government and non - governmental stakeholders . and for some , cybersecurity means protecting the information infrastructure from a physical or electronic attack . indeed , when it comes to cybersecurity , federal agencies have overlapping missions and don't coordinate and communicate nearly as well as they should — with each other or with the private sector. .
on december 16 , 2009 , president obama signed the fy2010 department of transportation , housing and urban development , and related agencies appropriation act into law ( divison a of the consolidated appropriations act , 2010 , p.l . 111-117 ) , after congress had passed the conference version of the bill on december 10 , 2006 . the enacted bill provided a total of $122.1 billion , $15.1 billion ( 14.1% ) more than the equivalent figure provided in fy2009 and $1.1 billion less than the amount requested by the administration . this was $16.2 billion ( 15.1% ) more than the amount enacted in the fy2009 thud appropriations act . other factors , such as supplemental appropriations for response to disasters ( such as the damage caused by the gulf coast hurricanes in the fall of 2005 ) and changes in the makeup of the department of transportation ( portions of which were transferred to the department of homeland security in 2004 ) , also complicate comparisons of year - to - year funding . the president's net fy2010 request for the programs covered by this appropriations bill was $123.2 billion ( after scorekeeping adjustments ) . in 2003 , a new subcommittee ( homeland security ) was added ; in order to maintain the existing number of subcommittees at 13 , the transportation appropriations subcommittees were combined with the treasury , postal service , and general government appropriations subcommittees , becoming the subcommittees on transportation , treasury , and independent agencies . the request for dot was $72.4 billion , $1.0 billion ( 1.4% ) more than the $71.5 billion of total new funding provided in the fy2009 thud appropriations act . the house committee on appropriations reduced its number of subcommittees from 13 to 10 . the difference was due to the president's request for $5 billion for a new independent federal agency , a national infrastructure bank . the house - passed bill provided $47.1 billion , while the senate committee on appropriations recommended $45.8 billion . the house and senate committees divided the responsibilities of the tthud subcommittees between two subcommittees: transportation , housing and urban development , and related agencies ( thud ) ; and financial services and general government , whose jurisdiction included the treasury department , the judiciary , the executive office of the president , the district of columbia , and many of the independent agencies formerly under the jurisdiction of the tthud subcommittees . also , congress was dealing with several major initiatives during 2009 , including energy and health care reform , in addition to dealing with the effects of the recession . dot and hud received additional funding in fy2009 through the arra emergency stimulus act ( see appendix for more information ) . the hud request was $45.5 billion , $4.0 billion ( 7.7% ) more than the comparable amount of new funding provided in the regular annual appropriation for fy2009 . this change included combining the transportation , treasury , and independent agencies subcommittee with the district of columbia subcommittee ; to the resulting subcommittee , in addition , jurisdiction over appropriations for the department of housing and urban development and the judiciary , as well as several additional independent agencies , was added .
each year , the senate and house armed services committees report their respective versions of the national defense authorization act ( ndaa ) . provisions in one version are often not included in another ; are treated differently ; or , in certain cases , are identical . these bills contain numerous provisions that affect military personnel , retirees and their family members . it was passed by the house on december 17 , 2010 and passed by the senate on december 22 , 2010 . the senate version of the ndaa , s. 3454 , was introduced in the senate on june 4 , 2010 and reported by the senate committee on armed services on june 4 , 2010 ( s.rept . the bill , the ike skelton national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2011 , was signed by the president on january 7 , 2010 and became p.l . 111-491 ) , and passed by the house on may 28 , 2010 . the house version of the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2011 , h.r . 6523 ) was introduced in the house of representatives on december 15 , 2010 . 5136 , was introduced in the house on april 26 , 2010 , reported by the house committee on armed services on may 21 , 2010 ( h.rept . instead of a conference committee to resolve differences , a new bill ( h.r . following passage of these bills by the respective legislative bodies , a conference committee is usually convened to resolve the various differences between the house and senate versions . this report highlights those personnel - related issues that seem to generate the most intense congressional and constituent interest , and tracks their status in the fy2011 house and senate versions of the ndaa . where appropriate , related crs products are identified to provide more detailed background information and analysis of the issue . some issues were addressed in the fy2010 national defense authorization act and discussed in crs report r40711 , fy2010 national defense authorization act: selected military personnel policy issues , coordinated by [author name scrubbed] . however , s. 3454 was never passed by the senate . for each issue , a crs analyst is identified and contact information is provided . the entries under the headings "house - passed" , "senate - reported" , and "house and senate - passed " in the tables on the following pages are based on language in these bills , unless otherwise indicated . in the course of a typical authorization cycle , congressional staffs receive many constituent requests for information on provisions contained in the annual ndaa . 111-201 ) . those issues that were previously considered are designated with a " * " in the relevant section titles of this report . 111-383 . background: the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2008 ( p.l . discussion: with ongoing operations in both iraq and afghanistan , service end strengths remain a high visibility issue because of the impact on dwell time , readiness and unit manning concerns . background: although the reserves have been used extensively in support of operations since september 11 , 2001 , the overall authorized end - strength of the selected reserves has declined by about 2 ½% over the past nine years ( 874,664 in fy2001 versus 854,500 in fy2010 ) .
securing the borders of the united states has long been a contentious political issue . the terrorist attacks of september 11 , 2001 ( and subsequent attempts on u.s. soil ) , the significant domestic population of unauthorized aliens , and recent concerns over drug - trafficking - related violence in mexico and the potential for spillover into the united states have all continued to fuel this debate . although the united states is often described as "a country of immigrants" and a "melting pot," highlighting the relative openness of its borders , the borders have also served as a line of protection against external security threats . in the past decade , with the reorganization of homeland security and the national security focus on terrorism , several congresses , administrations , and the national commission on terrorist attacks upon the united states ( commonly known as the 9 / 11 commission ) have put forth proposals for how to secure the u.s. border . since at least the 1980s , the border has played a central role in the debate over how to provide domestic security in the united states . with globalization producing increasing transnational threats to the united states , the pressure to use the border as a protection mechanism has grown . and ( 3 ) are there more effective alternatives to achieve border protection ? . market competitiveness and demands for efficiency create a push for more open borders to unencumber the flows of capital and labor . for congressional policymakers , the current state of border protection presents at least three questions: ( 1 ) what does the current border protection framework consist of ? . the five strategic commonalities to achieve these goals consist of the department of homeland security ( dhs ) leadership , deployment of layered security , maximizing domain awareness , promotion of a shared agency culture , and expansion of the border through international and domestic partnerships . policymakers have also had to cope with a tension between border protection issues and free market ideals . however , while the recent publication of the quadrennial homeland security review ( qhsr ) lays the foundation for a cross - agency border protection strategy , some question whether a comprehensive strategy has been sufficiently mapped out . such threats can take many shapes , but in recent years they have mainly included illegal immigration , smuggling and trafficking , and terrorism . moreover , despite the fact that over $100 billion has been appropriated to border protection functions since the formation of dhs , it remains unclear whether border protection measures are being deployed that will ultimately provide for a comprehensive , strategically effective border protection effort without significantly disrupting the border region economy . security concerns , however , frequently impede the movement of goods and labor as they are screened to determine if they pose risks to the united states .  ( 2 ) is it working ? . what has emerged from these efforts has been a generally agreed upon framework of mission and goals . moreover , such questions provide an opportunity for legislators to re - evaluate the policies that have been pursued in providing border protection , especially as these policies might impact other elements of the u.s. border , such as markets and communities .
title i , part a , of the elementary and secondary education act ( esea ) authorizes federal aid to local educational agencies ( leas ) for the education of disadvantaged children . title i - a is the largest federal elementary and secondary education assistance program , with services provided to ( 1 ) more than 90% of all leas ; ( 2 ) approximately 52,000 ( 54% of all ) public schools ; and ( 3 ) approximately 16.5 million ( 34% of all ) pupils , including approximately 188,000 pupils attending private schools . these include requirements for assessments of pupil achievement ; adequate yearly progress ( ayp ) standards and determinations for schools , leas , and states ; consequences for schools and leas that fail to make ayp for two consecutive years or more ; plus teacher and paraprofessional qualifications . another crs report ( crs report rl33731 , education for the disadvantaged: reauthorization issues for esea title i - a under the no child left behind act , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] ) discusses issues related to the accountability and other policies of esea title i - a . title i - a grants provide supplementary educational and related services to low - achieving and other pupils attending pre - kindergarten through grade 12 schools with relatively high concentrations of pupils from low - income families . this report provides: ( a ) descriptions of the esea title i - a allocation formulas ; ( b ) a review of recent funding trends for title i - a ; and ( c ) analyses of major issues related to the title i - a allocation formulas , divided into general categories of broad issues directly affecting all regions of the nation and issues that directly affect only a limited number of states or local educational agencies . in recent years , they have also become a "vehicle" to which a number of requirements affecting broad aspects of public k - 12 education for all pupils have been attached as a condition for receiving title i - a grants . currently , although the authorization for esea title i - a has expired , appropriations have continued to be provided , and the program continues to be implemented under the policies established by the most recent authorization statute . those interested in a more concise description of the esea title i - a allocation formulas and review of reauthorization issues related to them than found in this report should refer to the final section of that report ( rl33731 ) . these formulas are used to allocate funds not only under the largest federal k - 12 education program , but also several other esea and non - esea programs under which grants are made in proportion to esea title i - a allocations . the focus of this report is on the formulas used to allocate title i - a funds to states , leas , and schools . at best , it is a crude and indirect measure of variations in the costs of providing public k - 12 education . the 111 th congress is expected to consider proposals to extend and amend the esea .
it provides funding for department of the interior ( doi ) agencies ( except for the bureau of reclamation , funded in energy and water development appropriations laws ) , many of which manage land and other natural resource or regulatory programs . in former years , the appropriations laws for interior and related agencies provided funds for several activities within the department of energy ( doe ) , including research , development , and conservation programs ; the naval petroleum reserves ; and the strategic petroleum reserve . the bill also provides funds for agencies in two other departments — the forest service in the department of agriculture , and the indian health service ( ihs ) in the department of health and human services — as well as funds for the environmental protection agency ( epa ) . the first section ( title i ) provides information on interior agencies ; the second section ( title ii ) discusses epa ; and the third section ( title iii ) addresses other agencies , programs , and entities . for each agency or issue , we discuss some of the key funding changes that appear to be of interest to congress . the annual interior , environment , and related agencies appropriations bill includes funding for agencies and programs in three separate federal departments , as well as numerous related agencies and bureaus . this change resulted from the abolition of the house and senate appropriations subcommittees on veterans affairs , housing and urban development , and independent agencies , which previously had jurisdiction over epa . entries in this report are for major agencies ( e.g. , the national park service ) and cross - cutting issues ( e.g. , everglades restoration ) that receive funding in the interior , environment , and related agencies appropriations bill . we also address related policy issues that occur in the context of considering appropriations legislation . in general , the funds were made available for obligation until september 30 , 2010 ( the end of fy2010 ) . since fy2006 , appropriations laws for interior , environment , and related agencies have contained three primary titles . however , at the outset of the 109 th congress , these doe programs were transferred to the house and senate appropriations subcommittees covering energy and water , to consolidate jurisdiction over doe . at the same time , jurisdiction over the epa and several smaller entities was moved to the house and senate appropriations subcommittees covering interior and related agencies . appropriations are complex , and not all issues are summarized in this report . further , the annual bill includes funding for arts and cultural agencies , such as the smithsonian institution , the national endowment for the arts , and the national endowment for the humanities , and for numerous other entities and agencies . this report contains fy2009 appropriations levels for agencies , programs , and activities as enacted in the omnibus appropriations act , 2009 ( p.l . they generally are referred to as stimulus funds , or funds provided by the stimulus law . 111-5 , the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 , contained $10.95 billion in additional fy2009 funding for some of the agencies and programs typically funded by the interior , environment , and related agencies appropriations bill .
although it is generally agreed that congress has the authority to regulate the federal mail system and interstate wire communications , the sparse text and potential breadth of the honest services statute have prompted concerns regarding its constitutionality . perhaps in part to address the disagreement among the courts of appeals , the supreme court granted writs of certiorari in three cases , weyhrauch v. united states , black v. united states , and skilling v. united states . the supreme court in skilling v. united states held that the honest services class of mail and wire fraud offenses proscribes only bribery and kickbacks . in doing so , the court took the middle ground between those who had urged that the definition be found unconstitutionally vague and those who favored sweeping and severe condemnation of public and private corruption . congress enacted the honest services statute , 18 u.s.c . section 1346 , in 1988 to incorporate within the ambit of the federal mail and wire fraud statutes schemes infringing on a victim's right to an official's or employee's "honest services" ( i.e. , an employee's honest work on behalf of a company or an official's honest public service ) . the federal mail and wire fraud statutes , 18 u.s.c . over time , the scope of "scheme or artifice to defraud" has been a subject of contentious debate , particularly with regard to schemes to defraud victims of rights unrelated to pecuniary assets . for the purpose of mail and wire fraud prosecutions , federal jurisdiction is triggered when a person utilizes the federal postal service or an interstate carrier or sends a wire or radio communication . the cases provided the court's first opportunity to interpret the honest services fraud statute since it was enacted . however , the federal courts of appeals disagreed regarding the appropriate approach . in the private sector , a notable case involves the conviction of jeffrey skilling , a former enron executive . high - profile examples include a guilty plea by the lobbyist jack abramoff to conspiracy to commit honest services fraud and the indictment of former illinois governor rod blagojevich on honest services fraud and related charges . prompted by these and other considerations , federal courts have employed judicial interpretation techniques to avoid an overly broad reading of the statute . likewise , in an opinion dissenting from the supreme court's decision to deny review in a 2008 honest services case , justice scalia suggested that the statute's vague language invites federal prosecution of seemingly commonplace actions , such as "a mayor's attempt to use the prestige of his office to obtain a restaurant table without a reservation. . the court's granting of the three writs within a relatively short time frame , less than a year after justice scalia's strongly worded dissent from the denial of certiorari in a case from the court's 2008 term , prompted speculation that the supreme court might construe the statute narrowly . particularly with the decision to review skilling , a highly publicized case connected with the collapse of enron , the grants of certiorari garnered significant media attention . critics of the statute have argued that its mere "28 words" form a vague and unfair basis for federal criminal jurisdiction in many cases .
on march 31 , 2010 , the office of federal procurement policy ( ofpp ) in the office of management and budget ( omb ) issued a proposed policy letter on inherently governmental functions and other "work reserved for performance by federal government employees. . while not final , the policy letter represents the obama administration's proposed guidance for agencies determining ( 1 ) whether particular functions are inherently governmental and ( 2 ) when functions closely associated with the performance of inherently governmental functions and critical functions should be performed by government personnel . the proposed policy letter was , in part , issued under the authority of the duncan hunter national defense authorization act for fy2009 ( ndaa'09 ) and president obama's memorandum of march 4 , 2009 , on government contracting . section 321 of ndaa'09 tasked omb with ( 1 ) reviewing existing definitions of "inherently governmental function" to determine whether such definitions are "sufficiently focused" to ensure that only government personnel perform inherently governmental functions or "other critical functions necessary for the mission of a federal department or agency ; " ( 2 ) developing a "single consistent definition" of "inherently governmental function" that would address any deficiencies in the existing definitions , reasonably apply to all agencies , and ensure that agency personnel can identify positions that perform inherently governmental functions ; ( 3 ) developing criteria for identifying "critical functions" that should be performed by government personnel ; and ( 4 ) developing criteria for identifying positions that government personnel should perform in order to ensure that agencies develop and maintain "sufficient organic expertise and technical capacity" to perform their missions and oversee contractors' work . depending upon their views regarding the desirability and potential efficacy of the provisions of the final policy letter , members of the 112 th congress could hold hearings or introduce legislation like that enacted or introduced in the 111 th congress ( e.g. , p.l . the office of federal procurement policy has reportedly indicated that a final policy letter will be released "in early 2011. . president obama's march 4 , 2009 , memorandum similarly charged omb with clarifying when outsourcing is "appropriate. . key among these issues are ( 1 ) the relationship between the proposed policy letter and other executive branch authorities on inherently governmental and related functions ; ( 2 ) whether the proposed policy letter would necessarily result in changes in agencies' use of contractors to perform certain functions that some members of congress and commentators claim are inherently governmental ( e.g. , security services during contingency operations ) ; and ( 3 ) the potential demands of any new requirements upon the acquisition workforce . four definitions of "inherently governmental function" currently exist in law , with one additional definition in a government - wide policy document that lacks the force of law . however , agencies generally have considerable discretion in determining whether particular functions are inherently governmental , and some members of congress and commentators have alleged that certain functions that have been contracted out should have been classified as inherently governmental ( e.g. , provision of personal security ) .
a diverse array of efforts to reduce greenhouse gas ( ghg ) emissions is currently under way or being developed on the international , national , and sub - national level ( e.g. , individual state actions or regional partnerships ) . proposals in the u.s. congress have generally focused on market - based approaches , but some proposals have included a mix of market and non - market strategies . in addition , on may 19 , 2009 , president obama announced a plan to integrate federal fuel economy standards ( under the energy policy and conservation act ) with federal vehicle emissions standards ( under the clean air act ) and state standards ( driven by california's rulemaking action ) . market - based mechanisms that limit ghg emissions can generally be divided into two types: quantity control ( e.g. , cap - and - trade ) and price control ( e.g. , carbon tax or fee ) . preference for a carbon tax or a cap - and - trade program ultimately depends on which variable one wants to directly control — emissions or costs . another potential driver of market - based federal legislation is activity by the environmental protection agency ( epa ) to control ghg emissions under existing clean air act authority . in the context of these events and efforts , members in the 111 th congress have introduced several proposals that would use market - based approaches to reduce ghg emissions . to some extent , a carbon tax and a cap - and - trade program would produce similar effects: both are estimated to increase the price of fossil fuels , which would ultimately be borne by consumers , particularly households . the administration finalized ghg and fuel economy standards in the may 7 , 2010 , federal register . although members have introduced and debated ghg emission control proposals — both cap - and - trade and carbon tax programs — in previous congresses , the obama administration's stated commitment to ghg emission reduction has spurred interest in developing a workable program . one of these partnerships — the regional greenhouse gas initiative ( rggi ) — took effect january 2009 . for example , 23 states have joined one of the three regional partnerships that would require ghg ( or just carbon dioxide ) emission reductions . some have stated a preference for a cap - and - trade system ; others have indicated a preference for a carbon tax approach . in the 111 th congress , members have introduced nine bills that include provisions to impose or permit some form of market - based controls on ghg emissions . this position contrasts starkly with the previous administration , which had rejected the concept of mandatory emissions reductions , instead focusing on voluntary initiatives to reduce the growth in ghg emissions ( i.e. , emissions intensity targets ) . in addition to the policy shift in the executive branch , a number of states have taken actions in recent years that directly address ghg emissions . on december 15 , 2009 , epa finalized an "endangerment finding" under section 202 of the clean air act , which requires the agency to regulate pollutants due to their ghg impacts .
in the 2010 census , as in prior decennial censuses , the total population of the united states was counted , including u.s. citizens , lawfully present aliens , and unauthorized aliens . one question raised by this idea is whether the exclusion of aliens could be done by amending the federal census statutes ( title 13 of the u.s. code ) , or whether such action would require an amendment to the constitution . it appears one concern is that these individuals are included in the data used to apportion house seats among the states and determine voting districts within them , which some perceive as unfair to states or districts with small alien populations . some have asked whether aliens , particularly those in the country unlawfully , should be excluded from the census count . while not required by the constitution , the data are used for other purposes as well , including by the states to determine voting districts within a state . the commerce secretary has used his discretion to ask for such information on the american community survey ( acs ) , which is sent monthly to a sampling of households . at least two early censuses ( 1820 and 1830 ) included a category for foreigners not naturalized , and later censuses asked about place of birth . the 2010 census form sent to all households did not include questions regarding citizenship status or place of birth . the data must be used to apportion the number of house seats among the states . in modern times , the census questionnaire sent to all households has not included such questions , although the questionnaire sent to a sampling of households ( the "long form," which has been replaced by the acs ) has asked for such information . the constitution expressly vests congress with the authority to conduct the census "in such manner as they shall by law direct. . house proponents of this proposal failed in their attempt to have the house instruct its conferees for the cjs appropriations bill to retain the senate provision in their negotiations ; there had been no such provision in the house - passed version . historically , questions regarding citizenship status have not been consistently included in the census population surveys . however , in the event that the ongoing issue of the presence of unauthorized aliens in the united states remains unresolved by congressional legislation or executive agency action , the issue of whether to exclude unauthorized aliens from census data for apportionment may arise with regard to guidelines for future decennial censuses and apportionments . 2847 ) would have cut off funding for the census unless the census form included questions on u.s. citizenship and immigration status . the constitution requires a decennial census to determine the "actual enumeration" of the "whole number of persons" in the united states . congress has delegated this responsibility to the secretary of commerce and , within the department of commerce , to the bureau of the census . as of the date of this report , no legislation regarding the exclusion of aliens from the census data for house apportionment has been introduced in the 112 th congress . from time to time , congress has considered legislation that would exclude all aliens or only unauthorized aliens from being included in the census to apportion house seats among the states .
in this debate it has been argued that the decline in performance of u.s. firms stems , at least in part , from problems with the federal tax system . the united states reliance on direct taxes ( such as income and payroll taxes ) is commonly argued to provide a disadvantage when trading with countries that have indirect taxes ( such as a value - added tax or vat ) . the international competitiveness of the united states has been a topic of heated debate in recent years . this follows from the allowance in the general agreement on tariffs and trade ( gatt ) — the predecessor of the world trade organization ( wto ) agreements — for border tax adjustments on indirect taxes , but not for direct taxes . congressional interest in this debate continues today with the introduction of the border tax fairness act ( s. 1043 ) and the border tax equity act of 2009 ( h.r . in support of these claims , comparisons are often made between provisions of the u.s. tax code and those of the nation's trading partners — with selected differences offered as explanations for unsatisfactory outcomes . in addition , congress has also instructed u.s. trade negotiators to address this perceived distortion as part of granting fast - track trade authorization in 1974 , 1988 , and 2002 . some assert that these provisions would redress issues of u.s. competitiveness — by offsetting the impact of border tax adjustments on u.s. goods . in this application , a nation's competitiveness is defined by its balance - of - payments position . this is not to say , however , that a nation's tax structure cannot influence patterns of trade or the composition of trade , through differences in the relative prices of high - and low - tax goods and services . some nations give across - the - board tax rebates on exports which leave their ports and impose special border tax charges on our goods entering their country . border tax adjustments cannot alter a country's balance of payments because the balance of trade is a function of international capital flows , not the flow of traded goods and services . hence , in the absence of changes to the underlying macroeconomic variables affecting capital flows ( for example , interest rates ) , any changes in the product prices of traded goods and services brought about by border tax adjustments would be immediately offset by exchange - rate adjustments . border tax adjustments have been shown to mitigate the double taxation of cross - border transactions and to provide a level playing field for domestic and foreign goods and services . almost since its inception in 1967 this provision has been cited as a source of competitive disadvantage and as being an export subsidy . american commerce is at a disadvantage because of the tax systems of some of our trading partners . beginning in the johnson administration , border tax adjustments have been a matter of concern . in addition to directing u.s. trade negotiators to address this perceived distortion , the acts would impose taxes on imports from countries with border tax adjustments and compensate exporters for border taxes paid .
the primary responsibility of the lsc is to manage and oversee the congressionally appropriated federal funds that it distributes in the form of grants to local legal services providers , which in turn give legal assistance to low - income clients in all 50 states , the district of columbia , the u.s. territories of american samoa , guam , and the virgin islands , the commonwealth of puerto rico , and micronesia ( including the commonwealth of the northern mariana islands , the republic of the marshall islands , and palau ) . since its inception , the legal services program has been controversial , and congress has imposed restrictions on activities of lsc - funded legal services programs . the legal services corporation ( lsc ) is a private , nonprofit , federally funded corporation that helps provide legal assistance to low - income people in civil ( i.e. , non - criminal ) matters . debate existed from the start among policymakers as to whether the lsc's role should be similar to that of its predecessor , namely , using lawsuits and other means to resolve broad underlying difficulties of the poor , or whether the focus should be more narrowly defined to addressing small , specific situations . although the authorization of appropriations for the lsc expired at the end of fy1980 , the lsc has operated for the past 29 years by virtue of annual appropriations laws . 111-8 ) and is currently funded at $420 million for fy2010 ( p.l . the lsc was funded at $390 million for fy2009 ( p.l . legal services providers / programs may include nonprofit organizations that have as a purpose the provision of legal assistance to eligible clients , private attorneys , groups of private attorneys or law firms , state or local governments , and certain sub - state regional planning and coordination agencies . 2847 ) would increase funding for the lsc to $400 million in fy2010 ( an increase of $10 million over current year funding ) . although there is widespread agreement that individuals who cannot afford an attorney should have their "day in court," many observers contend that federal dollars should not be used to promote broad social causes . the lsc does not provide legal services directly . the authorizing statute ( p.l . rather , it funds local legal services providers / programs . 111-117 ) . 2847 ) would increase funding for the lsc to $440 million in fy2010 ( an increase of $50 million over current year funding ) and would keep the current restrictions on lsc activities , except for the one relating to attorneys' fees . during 2008 , the lsc funded 137 legal services programs in 918 offices . 111-117 also continues existing limitations on the use of lsc funds ( and non - lsc funds ) except for the restriction on the ability of lsc - funded programs to claim and collect attorneys' fees . the senate - passed version of the bill would also continue existing limitations on the use of federal funds , except that it would eliminate the restrictions on the use of non - federal funds except in litigation involving abortion and cases involving prisoners .
two political parties — the people's national party ( pnp ) and the jamaica labour party ( jlp ) have dominated the political system since before the country's 1962 independence . an english - speaking caribbean nation with a population of about 2.8 million , jamaica has had a relatively stable parliamentary political system stemming from its history of british colonial rule , even though extensive political violence often marred national elections in the 1970s and 1980s . in the 1970s and 1980s , the two parties had distinct ideological differences , with the pnp under michael manley ( 1972-1980 ) espousing democratic socialism and increasing state ownership of the economy , and the jlp under edward seaga ( 1980-1989 ) adopting a policy of economic liberalization and privatization . when michael manley returned to power in 1989 , however , his pnp government did not roll back the jlp's pro - business polices , but instead adopted a similar approach . while the jamaican government increased its enforcement activity and public awareness efforts in 2009 , the united states urges it to reform its patent protection law in accordance with international standards . since that time , there have been few ideological differences between the two parties . security assistance to jamaica has included support to assist jamaica with port and border security measures and to increase the counternarcotics and counterterrorism capabilities of the jamaican security forces and their capability to protect jamaican waters . usaid work in jamaica in recent years has focused on five program areas: 1 ) economic growth , including efforts to promote free market policies and improve worker skills ; 2 ) rural development , with efforts focused on agribusiness , eco - tourism , and cottage industries that help preserve jamaica's biodiversity ; 3 ) health , especially projects supporting hiv / aids activities ; 4 ) democracy , including efforts to help underserved communities beset with violent crime and to improve community policing initiatives ; and 5 ) education , with efforts to improve literacy and other skills and to support the regional caribbean center for excellence in teacher training ( c - cett ) that supports education in eight caribbean countries . patterson of the pnp , who took over as prime minister when manley resigned in 1992 for health reasons , won three elections and served as head of government until his retirement in march 2006 . both the u.s. agency for international development ( usaid ) and the peace corps have provided assistance to jamaica since its independence in 1962 . the jlp ran on an anti - crime and anti - corruption platform , but the golding government has continued to face challenges in both areas . most of this aid was development assistance ( da ) and economic support funds ( esf ) for usaid to implement a variety of development projects . according to the office of the united states trade representative ( ustr ) , jamaica's delay in enacting legislation to implement patent protection obligations under the world trade organization trade - related aspects of intellectual property agreement and the u.s. - jamaica bilateral intellectual property agreement remains a u.s. concern . but in the aftermath of the jamaican government's efforts to capture coke and extradite him to the united states in late june 2010 , u.s. officials commended the golding government for its efforts .
lrp is used extensively by the united nations world food program ( wfp ) and has been proposed as a cost - effective , time - saving tool that the united states could use to meet emergency food needs . local and regional procurement ( lrp ) of food aid refers to the purchase of commodities for emergency food aid by donors in countries with food needs or in another country within the region . food aid budget submissions in fy2006 through fy2009 included a proposal with suggested legislative language to authorize the administrator of the u.s. agency for international development ( usaid ) to allocate up to 25% of the funds available for u.s. food aid ( title ii of p.l . the previous administration's 2008 farm bill proposal for food aid also called for authorizing the use of p.l . congressional and other critics of the local purchase proposal maintain that allowing non - u.s. commodities to be purchased would result in undermining the coalition of commodity producers , agribusinesses , private voluntary organizations ( pvos ) , and shippers that participate in the food aid program and in reducing u.s. food aid . 480 , or the food for peace act ) to local or regional purchase . however , the president's fy2010 foreign affairs budget proposed , among other food - security - related items , that $300 million of international disaster assistance ( ida ) funds be used for lrp , cash transfers , and cash vouchers to meet emergency food needs . further , savings achieved in transportation and distribution costs could be made available for additional commodity purchases , thereby increasing the overall level of the u.s. response . the budget justification for this authority was that it would increase the timeliness and effectiveness of the u.s. response to overseas food aid needs by eliminating the need to transport the commodities by ocean carriers . could lrp contribute to agricultural development ( increased production , productivity , development of markets ) of low - income farmers in developing countries ? . house and senate agriculture appropriators did not include this proposal in the annual funding bills . instead , the 2008 farm bill ( p.l . 110-246 ) included a pilot project for lrp ( discussed below ) . this proposal also was not adopted . some of the issues that have been raised about lrp include the following: could the united states respond to emergency food needs at lower cost and in a more timely manner if commodities were purchased in locations closer to where they were needed ? . could lrp adversely affect agricultural development and make poor consumers more food insecure ? . the fiscal 2010 budget proposal for p.l . 480 title ii funds for lrp . are there risks that could be associated with lrp that would make it a less - effective response to emergency food needs than provision of u.s. commodities ? . 480 title ii does not mention using title ii funding for lrp . three recent reports — by the government accountability office ( gao ) , michigan state university ( msu ) , and the organization for economic cooperation and development ( oecd ) — examine issues with respect to lrp .
the economic growth and tax relief act of 2001 ( egtrra ; p.l . at the end of 2012 , absent legislation , the provisions will revert to the pre - egtrra rules ( $1 million exemption , 55% top rate ) . 107-16 ) , among other tax cuts , provided for a gradual reduction in the estate tax . several policy effects and issues are analyzed: the share of decedents subject to tax ; revenue effects ; distributional effects ; and effects on savings , charitable contributions , and compliance and administration . the exemption would revert to $1 million ( a value that had already been scheduled for pre - egtrra law ) and the rate to 55% ( with some graduated rates ) . president obama proposed a permanent extension of the 2009 rules ( a $3.5 million exemption and a 45% tax rate ) , and the house provided for that permanent extension on december 3 , 2009 ( h.r . to address abuses and tax avoidance , president obama has included proposals in his 2011 budget outline . one of these proposals , to reform the grantor retained annuity trust ( grat ) , is included in h.r . this provision has a $1.3 million exemption for gain ( plus $3 million for a spouse ) . for 2010 , egtrra scheduled the elimination of the estate tax , although it retained the gift tax and its $1 million exemption . after a brief description of the estate and gift tax and of options , this report compares the alternatives , focusing largely on a $1 million exemption and 55% rate , a $3.5 million exemption and a 45% rate , and a $5 million exemption and a 35% rate . the report also considers other aspects of the proposals , such as whether the exemptions are indexed for inflation , a proposed inheritance of the exemption for spouses ( which applies under the new rules to 2011 and 2012 ) , and proposals to address perceived abuses . under egtrra , the estate tax exemption rose from $675,000 in 2001 to $3.5 million in 2009 , and the top tax rate fell from 55% to 45% . proposals have also been to begin with the $3.5 million / 45% rate and phase in the $5 million / 55% rate . the estate tax applies to wealth transferred at death and had , at that time , a unified exemption for both lifetime gifts and the estate of $675,000 . senate minority leader mcconnell proposed an alternative of a 35% tax rate and a $5 million exemption . at the end of 2010 , a temporary extension for two years , with a $5 million exemption , a 35% rate , and inheritance of unused spousal exemptions was enacted in p.l . although combined estate and gift tax rates are graduated , the exemption is effectively in the form of a credit that eliminates tax due at lower rates so there is a flat rate on taxable assets under 2009 law . the gift tax exemption was , however , restricted to $1 million .
the most prevalent pta today is a free trade agreement ( fta ) , such as the north american free trade agreement ( nafta ) or the u.s. - australian fta . preferential trade agreements ( ptas ) comprise a variety of unilateral , bilateral , or regional arrangements which favor member parties over nonmembers by extending tariff and other nontariff preferences . legislation granting the president authority to negotiate ftas expired in july 2007 and has not been renewed by congress . all four ftas negotiated or under negotiation in 2007 — south korea , panama , columbia , and peru — have been approved by congress so the obama administration's major current trade initiative has been to engage in the trans - pacific partnership ( tpp ) agreement negotiations . given the need for the u.s. economy to rely on an increase in exports for faster growth , these concerns have also resonated in congress and the obama administration . the world trade organization ( wto ) permits countries to enter into ptas under certain conditions , but the criteria are very elastic , and the examination by the wto as to their consistency with wto rules has not been rigorous . if ptas , on balance , create more trade ( by allowing production to shift to the more competitive producers in the agreement ) than they divert ( by shifting trade from lower - cost non - pta members to higher - cost members because of tariff preferences extended to members ) , they are said to be a building block or complement for the world trading system . a third section assesses the implications of the eu's pta program for the multilateral trading system and u.s. trade policy . this is because the effects of the agreements on the patterns of trade and investment can depend on the content of the pta as well as the size and magnitude of the barriers being reduced . what is not disputed is that ptas have grown and become the centerpiece of world trade diplomacy as countries seek to improve access to foreign markets for their exporters and investors . in the meantime , calls from the u.s. business community sector have increased for a more activist u.s. fta policy , much out of fear of losing export sales and market share to eu competitors who may be gaining more favorable access to larger foreign markets as a result of new ptas . as a result of its widespread ptas ( including unilateral preference programs ) , the eu trades with only 10 wto members where the most - favored - nation ( mfn ) regime applies in its entirety . the main dispute is whether ptas serve as a building block or a stumbling block for further multilateral trade liberalization . ptas are excepted under certain circumstances from the nondiscrimination clause of the multilateral world trading system . as outlined in its 2006 global europe strategy , the eu targeted a number of larger countries and regions for negotiations , including south korea , india , canada , and the association of south east asian nations ( asean ) . however , it is very difficult to determine quantitatively whether trade creation or trade diversion dominates in any particular pta .
this report examines the dynamics of this issue in three parts: ( 1 ) exploration of the nature of the problem with respect to international climate change policy , potential environmental effects , and potential economic effects ; ( 2 ) identification of a range of possible options to address concerns ; ( 3 ) analysis of issues raised by the proposed mitigating approaches and options ; and ( 4 ) implications of the various approaches . there are three components of the problem of differentiated global carbon policies with respect to trade: ( 1 ) the lack of an international agreement with binding targets to reduce greenhouse gases ; ( 2 ) the issue of carbon leakage ; and ( 3 ) economic and competitive effects . as the debate on reducing greenhouse gases ( ghgs ) has progressed , increasing concern has been raised about how a u.s. reduction program would interact with programs in other countries . there are three basic approaches to assisting greenhouse - gas - intensive , trade - exposed industries: ( 1 ) assist domestic industry ; ( 2 ) penalize foreign competitors ; and ( 3 ) develop alternative sectoral approaches . the risks accompanying establishment of carbon control policies , in the absence of similar policies among competing nations , have been central to debates on whether the united states should enact greenhouse gas legislation . specifically , concerns have been raised that if the united states adopts a carbon control policy , industries that must control their emissions or that find their feedstock or energy bills rising because of costs passed - through by suppliers may be less competitive and may lose global market share ( and jobs ) to competitors in countries lacking comparable carbon policies . in response to these concerns , several proposals introduced in congress would attempt to mitigate the effect of carbon policies on affected u.s. industry . in a global context where currently some countries have legally binding policies to reduce greenhouse gas emission and other countries do not — i.e. , differentiated global carbon policies — the potential exists that countries imposing carbon control policies will find themselves at a competitive disadvantage vis - à - vis countries without comparable policies . two of the most common options are ( 1 ) subsidies for affected industries through allocation of free allowances within cap - and - trade policies ; and ( 2 ) border adjustments through an international reserve allowance program .  ) , and ( 2 ) discussions of specific options . in addition , this potential shift in production could result in some of the u.s. carbon reductions being diluted by increased production in more carbon intensive countries ( commonly known as "carbon leakage" ) . proposed mitigating actions include , for example , providing assistance to greenhouse gas - intensive , trade - exposed industries , or imposing tariffs on certain greenhouse gas - intensive goods imported into the country from countries not implementing comparable carbon policies . this section is divided into two components: ( 1 ) general issues and questions raised by the various approaches ( design , effects , etc . duration options for such an approach would include anticipated technology or best practices advancements ( or best currently available ) , consummation of an international agreement , or some criterion related to the economic health of the sector or industry .
this was a result of concerns that lower pork demand and production could reduce demand for other commodities , including u.s. feed grains and protein meals ( like soybeans ) , as well as other farm inputs . initially , as domestic pork sales fell in response to the spread of the h1n1 flu , futures prices for corn , soybeans , and wheat declined sharply . the u.s. produce sector also expressed concerns about possible restrictions on fresh produce trade with mexico and the processing of agricultural guest labor workers from mexico because of the 2009 h1n1 outbreak , but these fears so far have not materialized . in its may 2009 outlook report , usda revised its second - quarter hog prices downward to reflect lower prices in april due to the negative effects of h1n1 flu virus . there were also fears that reduced demand for pork would have adverse ripple effects throughout the hog sector , resulting in production changes as producers respond to lower prices . in part because of the surplus situation , in may 2008 and march 2009 , usda announced that it would purchase $50 million and $25 million , respectively , in pork products for federal food and nutrition assistance programs . for example , grains prices have moved higher since their initial drop following early reports of the outbreak . the h1n1 outbreak compounded this already worsening situation , and newly imposed trade restrictions in u.s. export markets , particularly in russia and china , only further strained demand for u.s. pork products . in june 2009 , ustr reported updated estimates by the university of missouri , indicating that the u.s. pork industry could face losses of about $270 million in income in the second quarter of 2009 alone , based on market conditions in the first few days since the virus was identified . in other livestock markets , wholesale beef and cattle futures prices were initially higher following reports of the outbreak . specifically , nppc asked usda to implement a purchase program for $50 million of pork products to help boost cash hog prices ; to work with u.s. trading partners to remove all restrictions on exports of u.s. pork and pork products ; to develop a comprehensive surveillance program for early detection of swine diseases ; and to work to keep open the border between the united states and canada to allow for movement of hogs . early estimates by analysts at the university of missouri estimated that the u.s. pork industry could see losses of up to $400 million in the months following initial reports of the outbreak , given expected lower market prices . however , as time has passed and the general economic downturn in the u.s. hog industry has deepened , it has become difficult to separate out the economic effects of h1n1 from generally unfavorable market conditions in the u.s. hog sector . pork producers in the united states began to see a downturn in u.s. pork markets in late 2007 . more recent estimates , however , indicate that the economic effect of the h1n1 virus has not been as negative as some analysts had predicted . initial reports of the aggregate economic effects of h1n1 on the farming sector — especially on u.s. hog producers — were grim .
111-5 ) , march 2010 ( the hiring incentives to restore employment act , p.l . the still high unemployment rate partly reflects the slow pace at which employers have been adding workers to their payrolls despite enactment of job creation legislation in february 2009 ( the american recovery and reinvestment act , p.l . 111-147 ) , and august 2010 ( the education jobs fund at title i of the faa air transportation modernization and safety improvement act , p.l . although the 11 th recession of the postwar period officially ended in june 2009 , one economic indicator that is very visible in people's daily lives — the unemployment rate — has continued to rise . with the unemployment rate at 9.8% in november 2010 , those still employed or able to find jobs are quite likely to know personally others who have been less fortunate . this report addresses the question of when one might reasonably expect to see sustained improvement in the unemployment rate and a steady resumption of job growth following a recession's end . the unemployment rate kept rising for nine months after the end of the december 1969-november 1970 recession , 15 months after the end of the july 1990-march 1991 recession , and 18 months after the end of the march - november 2001 recession . to begin with , the official definition of the unemployment rate prescribed by the u.s. bureau of labor statistics ( bls ) is the percentage of persons in the civilian labor force age 16 and older who are unemployed . while employment at firms in the private sector of the economy started to steadily rise in january 2010 , it appears that the fiscal problems of local governments in particular have dampened the pace of overall job growth . before employers are fairly certain that the increase in demand for their goods and services will continue , they are likely to boost production by restoring the hours of those currently in their employ and by having employees work overtime rather than by hiring new workers or recalling laid off workers . in sharp contrast , steady job growth did not commence until march 1992 — 12 months after the july 1990-march 1991 recession ended ; and not until september 2003 — 22 months after the march - november 2001 recession ended . firms usually are reluctant to add workers to their payrolls until convinced that the economy will continue growing ( i.e. , gross domestic product , gdp , will keep increasing ) . sustained job growth occurred within three to five months of the start of seven recoveries . mathematically , the unemployment rate is expressed as: the unemployment rate consequently may move up or down depending not just on a change in the number of workers who lack jobs ( the numerator ) but also on a change in the number of individuals participating in the labor force ( the denominator ) . with employment at public and private sector employers similarly having failed to show consistent improvement for well over a year since the recession's end , many observers think the nation has been experiencing another jobless recovery . in addition , the business cycle dating committee appears to rely chiefly on changes in both national output ( gdp ) and employment trends from the establishment survey to determine the official beginning and end of recessions .
109-58 ) ; the energy independence and security act of 2007 ( eisa ; p.l . since 2005 , congress has enacted several major energy laws: the energy policy act of 2005 ( epact 2005 ; p.l . the united states has an abundance of natural resources . 110-343 ) ; and the american recovery and reinvestment act ( arra ; p.l . 110-140 ) ; the energy improvement and extension act ( eiea ) , enacted as division b of the emergency economic stabilization act ( eesa ; p.l . recognition of the implications of dependence on foreign sources of energy , coupled with concerns over the volatility of prices driven by fluctuations in supply spurred by world events , prompted federal efforts to increase u.s. energy independence and reduce domestic consumption . for much of the nation's history , energy availability was not a concern as commerce and industry needs could be met by domestic supplies . a major result has been the establishment of a number of programs focused on energy efficiency and conservation of domestic resources and on research programs that target the development of renewable sources of energy . a few programs can also be found among the departments of the interior ( doi ) , labor ( dol ) , housing and urban development ( hud ) , and veterans affairs ( va ) , and the small business administration ( sba ) . the department of energy ( doe ) operates the greatest number of efficiency and renewable energy incentive programs . however , industrialization and population growth , and the continuing development of a consumer - oriented society , led to growing dependence on foreign sources of energy during the 20 th century to supplement the demands of a growing economy . the department of the treasury and the department of agriculture ( usda ) operate several programs . each program has been designed to meet current needs as well as future anticipated challenges . each of those laws established , expanded , or modified energy efficiency and renewable energy research , development , demonstration , and deployment ( rdd&d ) programs . many of the current programs have been reauthorized and redesigned periodically to meet changing economic conditions and national interests . assisted housing stability and energy and green retrofit investments program ( recovery act funded ) 2 . this report outlines current federal programs and provisions providing grants , loans , loan guarantees , and other direct or indirect incentives for energy efficiency , energy conservation , and renewable energy rdd&d . the programs apply broadly to sectors ranging from industry to academia , and from state and local governments to rural communities . other program descriptions and some funding information were compiled from the database of state incentives for renewables and efficiency ( dsire ) , the assistance listings ( formerly the catalog of federal domestic assistance or cfda ) housed on the beta.sam.gov website , and the energy star website . renewable energy grants ( 1603 program ) appendix d. appendix d. summary of expired federal renewable energy and energy efficiency incentives / index of program . many of these programs have roots going back almost 40 years and have been redesigned many times over that period .
the health care reform debate raises many complex issues including those of coverage , accessibility , cost , accountability , and quality of health care . underlying these policy considerations are issues regarding the status of health or health care as a moral , legal , or constitutional right . congress' power to tax and spend for the general welfare and its power to regulate interstate commerce have been the primary sources of constitutional authority for most health care legislation . it may be useful to distinguish between a right to health and a right to health care . in addition , other statutes , such as title vi of the civil rights act of 1964 which prohibits discrimination under federally funded programs , affect the manner of delivery of services under federal grants . while the united states constitution and supreme court interpretations do not identify a constitutional right to health care at the government's expense , congress has enacted numerous statutes which establish and define statutory rights of individuals to receive medical services from the government . an often cited definition of "health" from the world health organization describes health as "a state of complete physical , mental and social wellbeing and not merely the absence of disease or infirmity. . "health care" connotes the means for the achievement of health , as in the "care , services or supplies related to the health of an individual. . for purposes of this report , discussion will be limited to constitutional and legal issues pertaining to a right to health care . the constitutions of the states of alaska , hawaii , michigan , north carolina , new york , and wyoming have provisions which require the state to promote and protect the public health . the debate on these and other questions may be informed by a summary of the scope of the right to health care , particularly the right to access health care paid for by the government , under the u.s. constitution , and under interpretations of the u.s. supreme court . in 2009 , massachusetts denied state subsidies for the purchase of health insurance to a category of noncitizen immigrants lawfully residing in massachusetts , specifically those who would be ineligible for certain federal benefits ( those in the united states for less than five years , and certain others ) . by and large , however , state constitutional provisions authorize , but do not require , the provision of health care services . some state courts have liberally construed state constitutional provisions mandating care of the poor to include the provision of health care services . on the state level , governmental obligations to provide health care services either generally or for particular groups of persons may be found in a number of state constitutions . and the constitutionality of alabama's health care responsibility act , which imposed financial responsibility for the medical care of county indigents on counties , was upheld in part on the basis of alabama's constitutional provision requiring counties "to make adequate provisions for the maintenance of the poor. . congress' authority to enact health care legislation derives from the enumerated powers set forth in article i , section 8 of the constitution .
the foreign intelligence surveillance act ( fisa ) provides a statutory framework by which government agencies may , when gathering foreign intelligence for an investigation , obtain authorization to conduct electronic surveillance or physical searches , utilize pen registers and trap and trace devices , or access specified business records and other tangible things . authorization for such activities is typically obtained via a court order from the foreign intelligence surveillance court ( fisc ) , a specialized court created to act as a neutral judicial decisionmaker in the context of fisa . that act and subsequent measures amended fisa to enable the government to obtain information in a greater number of circumstances . perhaps in response to such concerns , congress established sunset provisions which apply to three of the most controversial amendments to fisa: section 6001 ( a ) of the intelligence reform and terrorism prevention act ( irtpa ) , also known as the "lone wolf" provision , which simplifies the evidentiary showing needed to obtain a fisa court order to target non - u.s. persons who engage in international terrorism or activities in preparation therefor , specifically by authorizing such orders in the absence of a proven link between a targeted individual and a foreign power ; section 206 of the usa patriot act , which permits multipoint , or "roving," wiretaps ( i.e. , wiretaps which may follow a target even when he or she changes phones ) by adding flexibility to the manner in which the subject of a fisa court order is specified ; and section 215 of the usa patriot act , which authorizes orders compelling a person to produce "any tangible thing" that is "relevant" to an authorized foreign intelligence , international terrorism , or counter - espionage investigation . the controversy surrounding section 215 complicated efforts to reauthorize all three of the expiring provisions , and they eventually expired on june 1 , 2015 . one day later , congress enacted the usa freedom act , which placed new limitations on the scope of the government's foreign intelligence activities , while simultaneously extending the expired provisions through december 15 , 2019 . these provisions were originally set to expire on december 31 , 2005 , but were extended multiple times , with slight modifications , through june 1 , 2015 . at the time of enactment , these expanded authorities prompted concerns regarding the appropriate balance between national security interests and civil liberties . in summer 2013 , media began reporting on several foreign intelligence activities conducted by the national security agency ( nsa ) , including the bulk collection of telephone metadata under section 215 . for example , in the context of roving wiretaps , section 105 ( c ) ( 2 ) of fisa would read as it did on october 25 , 2001 , eliminating the authority for fisa court orders to direct other unspecified persons to assist with electronic surveillance . shortly after the 9 / 11 terrorist attacks , congress enacted the usa patriot act , in part , to "provid[e] enhanced investigative tools" to "assist in the prevention of future terrorist activities and the preliminary acts and crimes which further such activities. .
the federal death penalty act and related provisions establish the procedure that must be followed before a defendant convicted of a federal capital offense may be executed . murder , committed under any of more than 50 jurisdictional circumstances , is a federal capital offense . so are treason , espionage , and certain drug kingpin offenses . by the time of the revised statutes of 1878 , the list of federal capital offenses included treason ; and murder , arson , or rape in u.s. special maritime and territorial jurisdiction ; piracy ; insurance fraud involving the destruction of a vessel at sea ; and the rescue of an individual under sentence of death . the death penalty has long been a sentencing option in this country . the federal death penalty act reflects the constitutional boundaries identified in furman and subsequent related supreme court decisions . after furman , where the supreme court found unconstitutional imposition of capital punishment pursuant to procedures then required under state and federal law , congress made procedural adjustments to revive the death penalty as a sentencing option first in air piracy cases , then in drug kingpin homicide cases , and finally as a general matter in the federal death penalty act . when the first congress convened , it made federal capital offenses of murder within federal enclaves , treason , and piracy , as well as forgery and counterfeiting of federal certificates and public securities . when the supreme court announced its decision in furman v. georgia , the number of federal capital murder offenses had increased , but the inventory of capital offenses that did not include death as an element had been reduced to rape , treason , and espionage . capital punishment was a feature of english law that the early colonists brought with them . now federal capital offenses are confined to espionage , treason , certain drug kingpin offenses ( that do not involve murder ) , and murder under various jurisdictional circumstances . although law among the colonies was hardly uniform beyond its english foundations , murder , rape , grand larceny , and various other property crimes appear to have been among the crimes punishable by death in each of the colonies . two others felt that the then existing sentencing procedures failed to equitably separate the wheat from the chaff: the system did not ensure imposition of the death penalty , the most severe punishment , uniformly in the most deserving cases and only in the most deserving cases . and , they argued that the unfair , arbitrary , capricious standard advanced by three members of the majority was a due process standard which the court the year before had found posed no impediment to implementation of state capital sentencing statutes . in fact , "[a]t the time the eighth amendment was ratified , capital punishment was a common sanction in every state. . the remaining four justices dissented on three grounds . some states sought to remedy arbitrary imposition of the death penalty by making capital punishment mandatory . once here , they often supplemented english law with provisions of their own . it simply states: "the court holds that the imposition and carrying out of the death penalty in these cases constitute cruel and unusual punishment in violation of the eighth and fourteenth amendments. .
the regional character of transportation policy is evident in the debate over what constitutes equitable distribution of federal highway aid among the states . for many years , "donor states" ( mostly in the south , but also including some states in the midwest and the west ) have complained that they receive significantly less federal highway aid than their highway users pay into the highway account of the highway trust fund ( htf ; unless otherwise indicated all references to the htf are to the highway account ) . the most recent multi - year authorization , the safe , accountable , flexible , efficient transportation equity act: a legacy for users ( safetea ; p.l . on the other side of the debate , "donee states," those that receive more federal highway aid than they pay in federal highway taxes , have opposed any reduction in their existing shares of total federal highway aid . the donor - donee issue has often been the most difficult issue to resolve during surface transportation reauthorization . since 1982 , congress has included provisions in every surface transportation reauthorization act to address these distributional concerns by assuring that each state receives at least a specified proportion of its trust - fund contributions in highway grants . a series of extension acts has extended safetea , most recently through december 31 , 2011 . 109-59 ) , expired september 30 , 2009 . for an overview of reauthorization issues see crs report r41512 , surface transportation program reauthorization issues for the 112 th congress , coordinated by [author name scrubbed] . historically , transportation policy battle lines have often formed along regional rather than partisan alignments . the concern by states that federal spending might benefit other states' road infrastructure more than their own has a long history . "scope" issues an issue related to the federal role issue is whether a high rate of return percentage , such as 95% , coupled with a similarly broad program scope could constrain a federal programmatic response to federal needs as they arise . the current federal - aid highway program has been criticized for failing to link each state's funding with its performance in areas such as the cost - effectiveness of its highway construction efforts or the benefit / cost ratio of its projects . in 1808 , secretary of the treasury albert gallatin recommended that the federal government provide $20 million over a ten - year period for a national network of canals and roads . among the factors that mitigated against the plan was the view of southern states , which generally opposed federal grants for roads and canals , that spending would benefit other regions more than the south . 355 ) , which established the first federal aid for roads on a programmatic basis . the debate over equity among donor and donee states has had a role in the shifting balance of control of and responsibility for highway spending between the federal government and the states . the new england states , which had relatively good roads , opposed federal funding for roads because they expected the money would be spent for roads outside new england .
the substance abuse and mental health services administration ( samhsa ) , within the department of health and human services ( hhs ) , is the lead federal agency for increasing access to behavioral health services . samhsa funds community - based mental health and substance abuse treatment and prevention services and collects information on the incidence and prevalence of mental illness and substance abuse at the national and state level . possible reauthorization issues include increased performance measurement and accountability for samhsa grants , granting specific authority for the access to recovery program , improving the ability of communities to provide behavioral health services during disaster response , requiring collaboration between samhsa and other federal agencies , increasing samhsa's level of emphasis on primary prevention , increasing samhsa's role in expanding the number and diversity of the behavioral health provider workforce , and ensuring fairness of the formula used to distribute samhsa's block grants . samhsa's two largest programs are the $1.8 billion substance abuse prevention and treatment ( sapt ) block grant and the $421 million community mental health services ( cmhs ) block grant , which account for more than 60% of the agency's budget in fy2010 . authorizations of appropriations for most of samhsa's grant programs expired at the end of fy2003 , though many of them continue to receive funding . it also highlights some of the issues that may be addressed by congress when it next considers legislation to reauthorize samhsa and its programs . in addition , performance and outcome data are used to measure the impact of programs and interventions . comprehensive reauthorization of samhsa was discussed during the 110 th congress , and reauthorizing legislation was introduced in the 111 th congress . these activities support samhsa's mission to improve the lives of people with substance abuse disorders and mental illnesses . these data provide information on the incidence and prevalence of mental illness and substance abuse , the availability and utilization of treatment services , and the outcomes of mental health and substance abuse prevention and treatment services . samhsa uses this information to monitor mental health and substance abuse trends and to help determine how resources should be directed . this report provides an overview of samhsa's organization and programs and includes some analysis of the agency's funding over the past decade . samhsa funds mental health and substance abuse services through formula and competitive grants . samhsa provides formula funding to states , u.s. territories , and the red lake indian tribe , while competitive funding is awarded through numerous grant programs to states , territories , tribal organizations , local communities , and private entities . samhsa was last reauthorized in 2000 . the difference reflects the historical role federal and state governments have played in funding services in these two areas , with states providing a much larger portion of mental health funding than substance abuse funding . the sapt block grant provides approximately 40% of the expenses of state agencies responsible for substance abuse prevention and treatment services . by comparison , the cmhs block grant funds on average 2% of the expenses of state mental health agencies . samhsa also collects data on mental health and substance abuse at the national and state level .
the resulting information may be used to better understand policy problems and to help inform the design , implementation , and oversight of policies . an evaluation may provide information at any stage of the policy process about how a federal government policy , program , activity , or agency is working . a variety of stakeholders may seek evaluation information and data to help them exercise their responsibilities , obligations , and rights in a representative democracy , including the establishment , implementation , oversight , and other requirements of a federal program or project . a program's context , including its longevity and the manner in which it is implemented , typically influences choices about evaluation design . these stakeholders and interested parties include , among others , congress , the president , federal agency officers and employees , state and local governments , interest groups , private sector contractors , the news media , and the general public . these differences , in turn , could affect their capabilities , effectiveness , and assistance to others , including their contributions to the oversight of a program or project by the executive or legislature . after an overview of such entities — which include newly and specially created units as well as existing ones , such as the government accountability office ( gao ) and offices of inspector general ( oigs ) — this report suggests possible broad characteristics and criteria of independent evaluators or similar units . for a number of reasons , there is not necessarily a best way to design and carry out an evaluation of a particular program , activity , or operation . this report focuses on the characteristics of independent evaluators ( ies ) — examples of which are described in the appendix — when an evaluation is to be conducted by an entity outside the immediate organization that is responsible for policy implementation , and the ie is also intended to have one or more dimensions of independence . in addition , stakeholders often have different needs and research questions about which they would like more information . independence also may refer to an entity that conducts evaluations that also is located outside the immediate organization responsible for policy implementation ( "independent evaluator" ) . in some situations , there may be little need for independence in evaluations ( e.g. , when equipping a program with capacity to improve its own operations iteratively , or when "adaptively" managing a project to help restore an ecosystem ) . ies and similar constructs that conduct independent evaluations , however , vary across a number of attributes: structure , jurisdiction , authority , resources , length of tenure , and specific duties and responsibilities . there is some diversity of opinion regarding how to define independence and what makes an evaluator ( or evaluation ) independent . in situations when some extent of independence in an existing or proposed evaluator were deemed desirable , congress might consider the different kinds and degrees of independence that could be pursued . nonetheless , instances of independent evaluators appear to be growing in number and variety . on one hand , for example , the term may relate to independence of an evaluation from the policy preferences of an individual or group ( "independent evaluation" ) , perhaps by prohibiting political appointees from revising an evaluation .
the effect of the recession that officially began in december 2007 and ended in june 2009 on government budgets increased the interest of policy makers in the compensation of public sector employees . an issue for congress and state and local governments is whether the pay and benefits of public workers are comparable to those of workers in the private sector . according to the congressional budget office ( cbo ) , the federal deficit has fallen since fy2009 . among the ways to reduce budget deficits , policy makers are considering the pay and benefits of public sector employees . but , cbo projects that the deficit for fy2014 will be $514 billion . the public sector is separated into employees of the federal government , state governments , and local governments . several state and local governments also face budget shortfalls . this report begins with an analysis of the trends in employment in the private and public sectors . the report does not compare the actual pay or benefits of private and public sector workers or compare the characteristics of workers to try to explain any differences in the pay or benefits of private and public sector workers . next , the report analyzes selected characteristics of private and public sector workers . these characteristics are often used in comparisons of the compensation of different workers . the first part of this report examines the trends in employment in the private and public sectors in the united states . in the ces , federal employment includes civilian employees only ; the military is not included . employment in the federal government ( including the postal service ) grew by approximately 471,000 jobs ( from 2.3 million to 2.8 million ) . from 1955 to 2013 , employment in the private sector increased by 70.8 million jobs ( from 43.7 million to 114.5 million ) , while employment in the public sector grew by 14.8 million jobs ( from 7.0 million to 21.9 million after rounding ) . the number of people employed in both the private and public sectors has increased steadily as the u.s. economy has grown . since the end of the 2007-2009 recession , public sector employment has fallen . the share of total employment accounted for by local governments peaked at 11.4% in 1975 . from 1999 to 2010 , public sector employment increased from 15.7% to 17.3% of total employment . employment includes all full - time and part - time workers of any age . in 1955 , public sector employment accounted for 13.8% of total employment . the share of total employment accounted for by state governments also peaked in 1975 , at 4.1% . including the postal service , in 2013 the federal government employed an estimated 471,000 more workers than in 1955 ( an increase from 2.3 million to 2.8 million ) . in 2013 , there were approximately 211,000 fewer federal jobs than in 2010 . from 2007 to 2010 — during and after the 2007-2009 recession — private sector employment fell by an estimated 7.9 million jobs , while public sector employment increased by almost 272,000 jobs . state governments had 129,000 fewer jobs than in 2008 . reflecting the effects of the 2007-2009 recession on the budgets of state and local governments , from 2010 to 2013 public sector employment fell from 17.3% to 16.0% of total employment .
the title i - a program of the elementary and secondary education act ( esea ) , as amended by the no child left behind act ( nclb ; p.l . 107-110 ) , is the largest source of federal funding for elementary and secondary education . specifically , states are required to develop academic standards and assessments and use the results of these assessments within an accountability system that determines whether schools and local educational agencies ( leas ) are making adequate gains in student achievement . provisions regarding state standards and assessment systems were in place prior to the nclb ; they were enacted through the improving america's schools act of 1994 ( iasa ; p.l . the primary purpose of this report is to explore issues related to the cost of assessments and to provide an understanding of the factors that influence the overall cost of assessment systems . states that receive title i - a funding must comply with certain requirements related to measuring and evaluating student achievement . decisions made in the design of a state assessment system have direct implications for the validity of the nclb accountability system and direct consequences for schools . this information is supplied to congress as it prepares for the reauthorization of the esea and for deliberations on the esea standards and assessment provisions . the extent to which these newly authorized grant programs have assisted states in meeting the assessment requirements of the nclb is unclear . this report aims to shed light on the current status of state assessment systems under the nclb and it provides analysis that allows policymakers to explore some of the potential implications of changing the requirements of state assessment systems . as congress considers the reauthorization of the esea , it is likely that the standards and assessment provisions within title i - a will be reviewed and debated . as such , the effectiveness of federal policy is dependent upon a valid state assessment system . the first section explicitly details the current assessment requirements of the nclb and provides an overview of the current status of state assessment systems . 103-382 ) , which amended the esea . the third section provides a discussion of factors that influence the overall cost of student assessment within state assessment systems , which include assessment development , scoring and administration , policy choices , and implementation practices . the grants for state assessments program is a formula grant program that is intended to pay the costs of the development of the required assessments and , if assessments are fully developed , to help pay the costs of administering the assessments . the final sections report data on the cost of current assessment systems under the nclb and explore some of the policies that may promote efficiency . that is , it is unclear how much the federal grant programs are contributing to the overall cost of assessment activities under title i - a of the nclb . the grants for enhanced assessment instruments program is a competitive grant program that is intended to enable states to improve the quality , validity , and reliability of their assessments beyond the requirements of title i - a . state assessments are currently the primary policy tool used to measure whether schools , leas , and states are meeting certain academic targets .
with explicit congressional authorization , the department of defense ( dod ) developed the national security personnel system ( nsps ) as a unique personnel and pay system attempting to more closely link employee pay to job performance . most federal employees ( 59.1% ) are paid on the general schedule ( gs ) , a pay scale that consists of 15 pay grades in which an employee's pay increases are to be based on job performance and length of service . some members of congress , citizens , and public administration scholars have argued that federal employee pay advancement should be more closely linked to job performance . on october 28 , 2009 , the president signed the bill into law ( p.l . on october 7 , 2009 , house and senate conferees reported a version of the national defense authorization bill for fiscal year 2010 that included language to terminate nsps . the system faced legal and political challenges from unions and employees who claimed it was inconsistently applied and caused undeserved pay inequities , among other concerns . the senate agreed to the conference report on october 22 , 2009 . the return to the gs or other pay system must be completed by january 1 , 2012 , pursuant to the law . nsps was initially intended to cover all dod employees , but had a final total enrollment of roughly 227,000 dod employees or 31.7% of the department's 717,000-person workforce . in october 2010 , dod sent a report to congress that said 76% ( 171,985 ) of employees formerly in the nsps pay system had been converted to the gs . another 20% of employees will be placed in pay scales other than the gs , and 4% of nsps employees may have their jobs eliminated as a result of closing military bases pursuant to the 2005 defense base realignment and closure commission ( brac ) findings . on october 8 , 2009 , the house agreed to the conference report . dod must now return employees currently enrolled in nsps to the gs or to the pay system in which they were previously enrolled . nsps was beset by criticisms since it went into effect in 2006 . the report discusses how the transition is scheduled to occur and analyzes congressional options for oversight or legislative action . the 112 th congress may choose to continue its congressional oversight of nsps employees' transition to other pay systems . 111-84 ) . of those employees who moved into the gs , 72% ( 124,200 ) received a pay raise when they were placed in the proper gs grade and step . it does not address the operation of nsps or other pay schedules . every u.s. state has employees who were or are on nsps . dod does not require additional appropriations to fund nsps pay bonuses and salary increases in 2011 . 111-84 included language preventing any employee from suffering a loss or decrease in pay as a result of the elimination of nsps . this report focuses on the transition of employees from nsps to non - nsps pay scales . as of january 2011 , roughly 54,000 dod employees remain in nsps . office of personnel management ( opm ) guidance said nsps bonuses do not violate the freeze in federal pay for fy2011 , enacted in p.l .
there has been increased concern over the size and sustainability of the united states' recent deficits and the country's long - run budget outlook . this concern has brought the issues of the federal government's revenue needs and fundamental reform of the tax system to the forefront of congressional debates . one place congress may turn to address these issues is the set of tax benefits for homeowners . the goals of this report are five - fold: ( 1 ) briefly summarize the trends in homeownership ; ( 2 ) provide an overview of what tax benefits are available ; ( 3 ) analyze the rationales commonly provided for offering such benefits ; ( 4 ) analyze the effect of the mortgage interest deduction and property tax deduction on the homeownership rate , housing consumption , and the economy ; and ( 5 ) present policy options . the joint committee on taxation ( jct ) has estimated that the cost to the federal government in terms of foregone revenue from these benefits will be approximately $136.3 billion annually between 2014 and 2017 . economists have identified the set of tax benefits for homeowners as one area in which reform may improve economic efficiency . this report focuses on the two largest federal tax benefits available to homeowners — the mortgage interest deduction and the deduction for state and local property taxes . the three most expensive tax incentives in the jct's estimate are the mortgage interest deduction ( $77.3 billion annually ) , the itemized state and local property tax deduction ( $31.5 billion annually ) , and the exclusion of capital gains on the sale of a principal residence ( $26.5 billion annually ) . the joint committee on taxation ( jct ) estimates these benefits will cost the federal government an average of $136.3 billion in foregone revenue annually between 2013 and 2017 . the exclusion of capital gains is not reviewed in detail because its effects on the housing decisions of taxpayers is fundamentally different than the effects of the deductions for mortgage interest and property taxes . and how does subsidizing owner - occupied housing affect the performance of the overall economy ? . these long - term trends in homeownership behavior may be overshadowed by more recent trends in foreclosures . this trend can have important ramifications in terms of land use , energy use , transportation , and affordability . and lastly , homeownership may have a positive effect on living conditions , which can lead to a healthier population . at the beginning of 2001 , near the start of the housing boom , the national foreclosure rate on all mortgage loans was 1.24% . until recently , the homeownership rate in this country had generally increased over time . after peaking in late 2009 and early 2010 , the foreclosure rate has gradually decreased . by 1950 , the homeownership rate had increased to 55% , and to 67.4% by 2000 . second , homeownership may promote a more even distribution of income and wealth , as well as establish greater individual financial security . by the fourth quarter of 2013 the foreclosure rate on all loans stood at 2.86% , while foreclosures occurring among subprime borrowers stood at 10.43% .
it was established in 1965 under title xviii of the social security act as a federal entitlement program to provide health insurance to individuals 65 and older , and has been expanded over the years to include permanently disabled individuals under 65 . medicare is a federal insurance program that pays for covered health care services of qualified beneficiaries . the legislation did not , however , make changes to the physician sustainable growth rate ( sgr ) payment system ; unless congress takes action before april 1 , 2015 , reductions in physician payment rates of about 21% will be required . the aca also established a new independent payment advisory board ( ipab ) , which is required to make recommendations to reduce medicare spending in years in which medicare costs are projected to exceed a target growth rate . the failure of the joint committee to propose deficit reduction legislation by its mandated deadline triggered automatic spending reductions ( "sequestration" of mandatory spending and reductions in discretionary spending ) in fiscal years 2013 through 2021 . on february 15 , 2014 , the president signed into law an amended version of s. 25 ( p.l . 112-25 ) provided for increases in the debt limit and established procedures designed to reduce the federal budget deficit , including the creation of a joint select committee on deficit reduction . under sequestration , medicare's benefit structure generally remains unchanged ; however , benefit related payments are subject to 2% reductions . 112-240 ) delayed the automatic reductions by two months , while the bipartisan budget act of 2013 ( bba , p.l . generally , individuals are eligible for premium - free part a of medicare if they or their spouse paid medicare payroll taxes for at least 40 quarters , are at least 65 years old , and are a citizen or permanent resident of the united states . 111-148 as amended ) , made numerous changes to the medicare program that modify provider reimbursements , provide incentives to increase the quality and efficiency of care , and enhance certain medicare benefits . section 256 ( d ) of the balanced budget and emergency deficit control act of 1985 ( bbedca , p.l . for example , under the legislation , annual updates of the prices paid by medicare for almost all non - physician categories of health services are being reduced by the growth in economy - wide productivity ( productivity adjustments ) . in 2013 , the program covered 52.3 million persons ( 43.5 million aged and 8.8 million disabled ) at a total cost of $583 billion , accounting for about 20% of national health spending and 3.5% of gross domestic product ( gdp ) . individuals under 65 may also qualify for coverage if they have a permanent disability , have end - stage renal disease ( permanent kidney failure requiring dialysis or transplant ) , or have amyotrophic lateral sclerosis ( lou gehrig's disease ) . the american taxpayer relief act of 2012 ( atra , p.l . in other words , most medicare payments to health care providers , as well as to ma and part d plans , are being reduced by 2% .
implementation of the affordable care act ( aca ) is having a substantial impact on federal mandatory spending . the two agencies primarily responsible for the aca's implementation are the centers for medicare & medicaid services ( cms ) , within the department of health and human services ( hhs ) , and the internal revenue service ( irs ) , within the department of the treasury . first , it discusses all the aca authorizations ( and reauthorizations ) of appropriations for grant and other programs . most of the mandatory spending under the law is for expanding health insurance coverage . this includes premium tax credits and cost - sharing subsidies for individuals and families who purchase private insurance coverage through the aca health insurance exchanges , as well as federal matching funds for states that choose to expand their medicaid programs . in addition , the aca authorized new medicare spending and appropriated billions of dollars in mandatory funds to support numerous other activities and programs . second , there are the costs incurred by federal agencies to administer and enforce the health insurance reforms and other core requirements of the law . the aca is having a more modest impact on federal discretionary spending , which is subject to the annual appropriations process . for example , it provided a permanent appropriation — available for 10-year periods — for a center for medicare & medicaid innovation to test and implement innovative health care payment and service delivery models . furthermore , the aca established four special funds — and appropriated amounts to each one — to support primary care , public health , and comparative effectiveness research , and help pay for the administrative costs of the law's implementation . both agencies have requested additional administrative funding in recent years to help cover the costs of implementing the law . the next update will occur after congress completes its work on the fy2017 appropriations acts and the president releases the fy2018 budget . appendix a provides background information on the enforceable discretionary spending limits ( caps ) and the annual spending reductions under the budget control act of 2011 . this report examines the aca's effects on discretionary spending . discretionary spending under the aca falls into two broad categories . first , there are the amounts provided in appropriations acts for specific grant and other programs pursuant to explicit authorizations of appropriations in the aca . this information , along with the appropriation amounts ( if any ) for each program since fy2010 , is summarized in a series of tables . discretionary spending and the budget control act of 2011 congress has taken a number of steps in recent years to limit federal discretionary spending . a companion crs report summarizes all the aca's mandatory appropriations and the obligation of these funds . this report is periodically revised and updated to reflect important legislative and administrative developments . in april 2011 , lawmakers agreed to cuts in discretionary spending for a broad range of agencies and programs as part of negotiations to complete the fy2011 appropriations process and avert a government shutdown . four months later , as part of negotiations to raise the debt ceiling , congress and the president enacted the budget control act of 2011 ( bca ) .
delegations from more than 190 countries and regions meet from november 28 to december 9 , 2011 , in durban , south africa , to continue discussions of how to address climate change under the united nations framework convention on climate change ( unfccc ) . the year 2012 will mark both the 20 th anniversary of the opening for signature of the unfccc ( in rio de janeiro , 1992 ) and the end of the first "commitment period" ( 2008-2012 ) of the unfccc's subsidiary kyoto protocol . the preceding 20 years have witnessed expanding evidence of many aspects of human - related , greenhouse gas ( ghg ) - induced climate change . however , many questions regarding the magnitude , timing , and local characteristics of natural and human - induced climate change will likely persist for decades . congress remains divided over the stance the united states should take in the international climate change negotiations . the u.s. congress has taken up , but never enacted , legislation specifically addressing mitigation of u.s. ghg emissions , and has not fully funded requests by presidents clinton , ( george w. ) bush , or obama to support their pledges of financial support for deployment of low - emitting technology and other assistance to low - income countries . the 1992 unfccc treaty was formulated as a framework to facilitate mutual movement of all countries in this process , to increase effectiveness , and to ameliorate possible adverse effects on competitiveness . although some observers hope that the durban negotiations will overcome this hurdle by producing a mandate for quantitative , legally binding ghg obligations for all countries , others wonder whether the unfccc process will be able to maintain momentum even on narrower objectives , such as rules for new processes and mechanisms for finance , technology deployment , and adaptation . the unfccc was also created to help avoid a problem of "free riders" ( in which some benefit by the efforts of others while not taking comparable actions themselves ) . a large majority of countries now consider climate change to be a primary impetus to restructuring their energy sectors — and economies more broadly — toward more efficient and less climate - vulnerable models . in this context of strongly held differences within the united states , and between the united states and most other countries , the durban conference will tackle questions of the future of the kyoto protocol and the possibility of a mandate for future quantitative , binding ghg obligations for all parties . parties to the kyoto protocol were due to conclude negotiations for a second commitment period by 2007 ; unable to do so , parties agreed to a two - track negotiating mandate: one to extend the kyoto protocol , and the other to include all parties ( including the united states ) , called the bali action plan . many international stakeholders doubt the policy stasis of the united states can be overcome in the next few years ; instead of looking to u.s. leadership , some observers now counsel the u.s. delegation to "get out of the way. . the breadth of views may be characterized by contrasting two recent remarks by members: on the one hand , there is the call from representative bobby l. rush: "ambitious and urgent action to help poor countries and communities confront climate change and to reduce greenhouse gas emissions here in the [united states] is both a moral imperative and in our national interest. .
111-148 , as amended ) created the independent payment advisory board ( ipab , or the board ) to "reduce the per capita rate of growth in medicare spending. . the board's proposals will be implemented by the secretary of health and human services ( the secretary ) unless congress acts either by formulating its own proposal to achieve the same savings or by discontinuing the automatic implementation process defined in the statute . the patient protection and affordable care act ( ppaca , p.l . the report then describes the structure of the board , the calculations and determinations required to be made by the office of the chief actuary ( the chief actuary ) in the centers for medicare & medicaid services ( cms ) that trigger a board proposal , and the content of and constraints on board proposals — including the medicare productivity exemptions under section 3401 of ppaca . among some proponents of health care reform , a major impetus for reform , in addition to improving quality and increasing access , has been the rising cost of the medicare program . in addition , the report reviews the expedited and other parliamentary procedures that relate to congressional consideration of board proposals and other board - related activities , and concludes with a description of how the board's proposals are to be implemented and their possible impact . this report , which provides an overview of the board , begins with a discussion of the rationale behind the creation of an independent medicare board and briefly reviews prior proposals for similar boards and commissions . appendix a details key dates for ipab implementation and various reports required by the law , and appendix b compares the ipab with the medicare payment advisory commission ( medpac ) . the explicit charge given by ppaca to the board in section 3403 ( b ) is to "reduce the per capita rate of growth in medicare expenditures. . recommendations relating to payments to plans under medicare parts c and d and recommendations relating to payment rate changes that take effect on a calendar year basis take effect on january 1 of the iy . in addition , the government accountability office ( gao ) is directed , as described below , to undertake a review of the board's initial recommendations and report to congress by july 1 , 2015 . this joint resolution requires a super - majority vote of both chambers and either the signature of the president or overriding his veto by a two - thirds vote in each house to enter into force . since some providers and suppliers of services will receive a reduction in payments beyond their productivity adjustment in some years , section 3403 ( c ) ( 2 ) ( iii ) prohibits , as described below , the board from recommending in some years further reduction in payment rates to those providers and suppliers . 452 was combined with the help efficient , accessible , low - cost , timely healthcare ( health ) act of 2011 ( h.r . the national commission on fiscal responsibility and reform , popularly referred to as the simpson - bowles deficit commission , proposed two sets of recommendations ( recommendations 3.5 and 3.6 ) regarding ipab .
broad efforts are underway to expand the use of renewable energy technologies to increase domestic energy production , improve u.s. energy security , create new industries and new jobs , and reduce greenhouse gas emissions . according to the u.s. energy information administration , renewable energy technologies provided 3.6% of u.s. electricity generation in 2009 . congress extended the program for one year , through 2011 , in the tax relief , unemployment reauthorization , and job creation act of 2010 ( p.l . in february of 2009 , congress passed new legislation that provides renewable energy projects with an alternative option for realizing the value of federal tax benefits: a grant in lieu of tax credits ( section 1603 of the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 ( p.l . since weak tax - equity markets were a motivating factor in adopting the section 1603 grant program in 2009 , understanding trends in tax - equity markets may help congress evaluate whether the policy motivations that led to the adoption of the section 1603 grant program under arra remain relevant . the section 1603 grant program was established in response to weak tax - equity markets . although u.s. renewable electricity markets have grown in size and scope in recent years , the cost of renewable electricity generation continues to be typically higher than conventional generation sources ( e.g. , coal , natural gas , existing nuclear ) . of the 144 million megawatt hours of electricity generated from renewable sources , wind provided 51.4% , wood and wood - derived fuels provided 24.8% , other forms of biomass provided 12.8% , geothermal accounted for 10.4% , and solar thermal / photovoltaic provided 0.6% . the section 1603 grant program was initially enacted on a temporary basis , and was scheduled to expire at the end of 2010 . this report provides a detailed overview of tax - equity markets during the recent financial crisis , as well as information on the current status of tax - equity markets . federal tax policy has served to reduce this cost gap by providing various tax incentives for renewable energy . the first part of this report focuses on how different renewable energy market sectors have responded since the grant option was made available . investors may carry unused tax credits forward to offset future tax liability , or , alternatively , partner with a third - party tax - equity investor capable of providing cash in exchange for tax benefits . understanding how different renewable energy markets have responded to the grant option may provide some insight regarding the potential implications for the renewable energy market of letting the section 1603 grant program expire as scheduled at the end of 2011 . compared to direct tax incentives , however , the section 1603 grant program may be an improvement in terms of economic efficiency . one key motivation for creating the section 1603 grant program was the perceived lack of tax equity capacity available for renewable electricity generation projects following the financial crisis in 2007 . in recent years , the size of tax benefits available for renewable energy investors has sometimes exceeded the investor's tax liability . as another option , existing tax incentives could be modified to provide some of the added benefits associated with the section 1603 grant program .
for activities funded through the annual appropriations process ( referred to as discretionary spending ) , congress differentiates between authorizations and the appropriations . both the house and senate have internal rules encouraging the separation of money and policy decisions . under the rules of the house and senate , legislative provisions and appropriations for purposes not authorized by law typically may not be included in appropriations measures . as currently provided in house rule xxi , the house bars legislative provisions from being reported in general appropriations bills ; amendments to general appropriations bills containing language that would add to or alter existing law are also prohibited . these rules are enforced on the house and senate floor through points of order , but if legislative provisions are enacted as a part of an appropriations measure , they have the full force of the law . limitations within appropriations measures are provisions that negatively restrict the amount , purpose , or availability of funds without changing existing law . although house and senate rules restrict legislating on appropriations , policy matters may be included through limitation provisions . authorizations comprise substantive law establishing government entities , activities , or programs , while appropriations provide budget authority to fund government agencies or programs by allowing them to obligate funds . these rules stem from the principle that the process through which the activities of government are chosen should be distinct from the process through which those activities are funded . the effect of these provisions is to limit the actions for which funds may be used through the capping or outright denial of funds for specific purposes . these rules were formally established in both chambers during the mid - 1800s to address concerns with delays in enacting appropriations due to the inclusion of extraneous legislative matters that tended to provoke controversy . the goal of this report is to clarify aspects of the legislative process concerning the inclusion of limitations in appropriations measures under the rules of the house and senate . clause 5 of house rule xxii also prohibits the inclusion of legislative language in conference reports that accompany appropriations acts . proper limitations are distinct from legislative provisions because they do not have the effect of either making new law or changing existing law . senate rule xvi additionally restricts legislative language not contained within existing law from being added via amendment to a general appropriations bill , unless it is determined to be germane to a legislative provision previously added by the house . in more recent years , as the precedents regarding limitations have become more nuanced , parliamentary determinations of legislative language have stemmed from a number of principles related to the imposition of new duties upon the recipient of funds , changes in agency discretion , or whether the provision mandates action contrary to law . the allowability of limitations under the rules of the house and senate is based upon the principle that although congress may authorize an activity , it is under no obligation to fund that activity . the distinction between legislative provisions and funding limitations has been developed and refined over time based on various rulings that establish what types of provisions are allowable . as a result , limitation provisions , which define the purposes for which budget authority may not be used without also affecting a recipient's discretion under other laws , have frequently been included within the text of appropriations bills reported by the committee or added by amendments on the floor .
111-203 ) substantially overhauled the u.s. financial regulatory system . title x of the dodd - frank act , the consumer financial protection act ( cfp act ) , established the bureau of consumer financial protection ( cfpb or bureau ) within the federal reserve system . the dodd - frank wall street reform and consumer protection act ( dodd - frank act ; p.l . it also will have the authority to prescribe regulations to implement 18 federal "enumerated consumer laws" that were in place prior to dodd - frank's enactment , such as the truth in lending act ( tila ) and the real estate settlement procedures act ( respa ) . the bureau will have jurisdiction over an array of consumer financial products and services , including deposit taking , mortgage lending , credit card lending , loan servicing , check guaranteeing , the collection of consumer report data , debt collection , real estate settlement services , money transmitting , and financial data processing . the cfp act alters the consumer financial protection landscape by consolidating regulatory authority and , to a lesser extent , supervisory and enforcement authority in one regulator — the cfpb . however , most of the bureau's authorities will go into effect on the "designated transfer date" — a date six to 18 months after enactment , as determined by the secretary of the treasury ( secretary ) . the bureau will serve as the primary federal consumer financial supervisor of many of the institutions that offer these products and services . some of the bureau's authorities took effect when the dodd - frank act was signed into law on july 21 , 2010 . these enumerated consumer laws provide for consumer protections over a broad and diverse assortment of consumer financial products and activities . currently , the designated transfer date is july 21 , 2011 . the transferor agencies are: the office of the comptroller of the currency ( occ ) , the office of thrift supervision ( ots ) , the board of governors of the federal reserve system ( frb ) , the federal deposit insurance corporation ( fdic ) , the national credit union administration ( ncua ) , the federal trade commission ( ftc ) , and the department of housing and urban development ( hud ) . not all of the cfpb's powers become effective at the same time . subsection 1066 ( b ) states that the department of the treasury ( treasury department ) "may provide administrative services necessary to support the bureau before the designated transfer date ( emphasis added ) . . in addition to the effective dates set out in the cfp act , the authority to exercise the bureau's powers also may be affected by the appointment of a director , and the date of the appointment . this report explores the limitations imposed on the secretary's authority to perform the functions of the bureau until a director is appointed . the treasury department's administrative support powers under section 1066 ( b ) went into effect on the date of enactment and terminate on the designated transfer date . the cfp act provides the secretary the authority to exercise some , but not all of the bureau's authorities until a cfpb director is appointed .
once binding on federal courts , the guidelines are now the starting point for federal sentencing in most cases . congress created the commission and authorized the guidelines in the sentencing reform act of 1984 . the federal sentencing guidelines greatly influence the sentences imposed for federal crimes . the first guidelines were promulgated with an effective date of november 1 , 1987 . in the last quarter of fy2014 , over 75% of the sentences imposed by federal courts fell within the sentence ranges recommended by the guidelines or within those ranges but reduced by prosecution endorsed departures recommended in the guidelines . the commission may promulgate amendments which become effective 180 days after they are presented to congress , absent congressional action . they provide the principal standard against which the reasonableness of any sentence imposed is judged . the guidelines are the work of the u.s . sentencing under the guidelines is essentially a score - keeping exercise , not unlike the procedure for filling out a federal income tax return . the sentencing ranges for any term of imprisonment depend both on the final offense level and upon the offender's criminal history score calculated on the basis of his past criminal record and divided into categories . sentencing commission . organizational sentences must: ( 1 ) compel the defendant organization to remedy any harm caused by the offense of conviction to the extent practicable ; ( 2 ) strip the assets of any entity operated primarily for criminal purposes or by criminal means ; ( 3 ) reflect the seriousness of the offense and the organization's culpability ; and ( 4 ) include probation when needed . the process involves assigning "offense levels" for a particular offense based on the nature of the offense and the circumstances under which it was committed . under the guidelines , most sentencing determinations follow from the final offense level identified at the end of the process . each of the possible forty - three offense levels has six sentencing ranges corresponding to the six criminal history categorie . chapter 8's procedure involves: ( a ) an identification of the appropriate remedial measures ; ( b ) calculation of the applicable fine ; ( c ) determination of whether and under what conditions probation should be imposed ; and ( d ) compliance with statutory requirements for special assessments , forfeitures , and costs . the guidelines make adjustments in five victim - related situations: ( 1 ) when the victim is vulnerable or the offense is hate crime motivated ; ( 2 ) when the victim is or was a government official or member of the officer's immediate family ; ( 3 ) when the victim is restrained ; ( 4 ) when the offense is a federal crime of terrorism ; and ( 5 ) when the offense is a serious human rights offense . obstruction may result in a sentencing enhancement under any of four sections: ( 1 ) obstruction or impeding the administration of justice , ( 2 ) reckless endangerment during flight , ( 3 ) commission of an offense while on release and ( 4 ) false registration of a domain name . 3553 ( a ) and with any other applicable statutory demands , such as the requirement to impose a minimum sentence of imprisonment in some instances .
the 111 th congress enacted a number of renewable energy tax incentives as part of the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 ( arra ; p.l . ongoing concern surrounding energy security and the environment have led to sustained congressional interest in energy tax policy . a number of expiring renewable energy tax provisions were extended through the end of 2011 in the tax relief , unemployment insurance reauthorization , and job creation act of 2010 ( p.l . this report explores the policy option of extending the master limited partnership ( mlp ) business structure option to renewable energy facilities and related activities . one option for attracting additional capital to the renewable energy sector that congress may consider is allowing renewable energy activities access to the master limited partnership ( mlp ) business structure . the obama administration has also repeatedly emphasized the importance of investments in clean energy technologies and infrastructure . policymakers have been exploring various options for increasing the availability and decreasing the cost of financing for the renewable energy sector . as various incentives for renewable energy , renewable fuels , and energy efficiency are scheduled to expire at the end of 2011 , the 112 th congress may want to explore various policy options for encouraging investment in renewable energy . 111-5 ) . president obama has noted that clean energy investments can enhance domestic energy security , promote environmental objectives , and create jobs . capital intensive renewable energy projects continue to face a number of challenges with respect to financing . this report also provides background on the legislative origins of the mlp structure , and legislative changes affecting mlps that have been made in recent years . the final sections of this report highlight how the mlp structure might be able to attract additional capital to the renewable energy sector , while also discussing some potential policy concerns . one barrier to investments in renewable energy projects is that such projects are highly capital intensive . 111-312 ) . before evaluating the policy , this report provides a brief overview of the mlp structure , highlighting notable tax issues . enhanced investment in and deployment of renewable energy technologies may also have the potential for domestic job creation . other changes enacted as part of the tra86 , however , limited the attractiveness of mlps for investors . legislative changes enacted as part of the american jobs creation act of 2004 ( p.l . prior to 2008 , renewable energy investors often relied on tax - equity markets to monetize renewable energy tax benefits ( such as the renewable energy production tax credit ( ptc ) ) . in 1987 , congress enacted irc § 7704 , which modified the rules publicly traded partnerships ( ptps ) and mlps had been using to avoid being subject to corporate taxation . enhanced use of clean energy resources may be consistent with broader energy policy goals , environmental sustainability , and perhaps domestic energy security . the 1987 rules related to ptps and mlps were enacted to address concerns surrounding erosion of the corporate tax base . the tax reform act of 1986 ( tra86 ) reduced the top marginal individual income tax rate to a level lower than the top marginal corporate tax rate .
the global economy has undergone dramatic changes over the past 60 years . this report addresses these concerns in two parts by ( 1 ) describing and analyzing trends that are transforming the global economy , and ( 2 ) highlighting varied policy challenges raised by the new global economy for congressional consideration . with important responsibilities for the formulation of u.s. international trade and financial policies , congress has an interest in understanding how these shifts of wealth and power are affecting u.s. economic interests . international institutions , such as the organization for economic cooperation and development ( oecd ) , the world bank , the world trade organization ( wto ) , and the international monetary fund ( imf ) ; private research institutions , such as the brookings institution and the carnegie endowment for international peace ; and private sector research entities , such as goldman sachs and pricewaterhouse coopers , have all issued analyses of the changing global economy . in the early 1950s , the world economy was essentially divided between developed or industrialized countries in the "north" and developing or non - industrialized countries in the "south. . developed countries , excluding japan , at that time accounted for 90% of world manufacturing output and 90% of world exports of manufactured goods . their share of global trade has increased significantly , with trade and investment between developing countries ( south - south trade and investment ) becoming an important new force in the global economy . spurred by the information technology ( it ) revolution , trade liberalization and other economic reforms , the entry of an estimated 2 billion people into the labor force as a result of the breakdown of the soviet bloc and the opening of china , and the freer movement of capital and technology from developed countries to developing countries , the size of the global economy doubled over the decade preceding the 2008-2009 global financial crisis , increasing from $31 trillion in 1999 to $62 trillion in 2008 . if current trends persist , the shifts in wealth and power could become more pronounced over the next several decades . in addition to altering global gdp rankings , the changes in the global economy have affected the centers of economic growth , the location of manufacturing , and international trade patterns . the global economy has been reshaped over the past two decades . while the evolution of the g - 20 as a key forum for international economic policy coordination mechanisms is considered by many as a major step toward increasing the responsibility of the rising powers for the smooth functioning of the world economy , the g20 also raises questions about representation and legitimacy . these include concerns about the adequacy of the regulatory system for integrating developing countries into international financial arrangements , rules for direct investment , the role and operation of sovereign wealth funds , and the future of the dollar as world's primary reserve currency . in addition to a large imbalance in the structure of production and exports , there was a dramatic imbalance in living standards and political power as well . discussion and analysis of these trends has intensified over the past few years .
among the many concerns , particular attention has been paid to the value of coverage in terms of out - of - pocket ( oop ) costs relative to premiums . considerable congressional attention has been placed on the treatment of consumers within the private health insurance marketplace . according to the department of health and human services ( hhs ) approximately 18 million americans are subject to annual limits in their health coverage . private health insurers use annual limits to require the consumer to assume 100% of the cost of coverage after a certain amount of spending for the year has been reached . 111-148 , ppaca ) was enacted on march 23 , 2010 , and amended by the health care and education reconciliation act ( p.l . one method that lowers the value of coverage is the use of annual limits on the dollar amount of coverage . ppaca , among other provisions , reorganizes and amends title xxvii of the public health service act ( phsa ) to reform the private health insurance marketplace . among the immediate reforms are consumer protections from high oop costs by placing restrictions on and eventually prohibiting the use of annual limits . however , market demand for low - premium coverage has led to the proliferation of limited benefit plans ( "mini - med plans" ) that rely on annual limits to keep premiums down . 111-152 , hcera ) , enacted on march 30 , 2010 ( hereafter collectively referred to as ppaca ) . the patient protection and affordable care act ( p.l . the plan year refers to the 12-month period during which a policy or plan benefit is effective . the spending can be for the total health benefits covered or targeted to specific services , such as hospitalizations . the "immediate" reforms in sections 2711 through 2719 of the phsa become effective for plan years beginning on or after september 23 , 2010 . this report provides an overview of the waiver available for the restriction on annual limits and will be periodically updated to reflect any legislative or regulatory changes . policyholders and plan members that exceed these coverage caps end up with very high oop costs . for plan years beginning on or after six months after enactment , group health plans , grandfathered group health plans , and health insurance issuers offering group or individual plans are restricted , as determined by the secretary of hhs ( hereafter the secretary ) , from establishing annual limits on the dollar value of essential health benefits for any participant or beneficiary . hhs estimates that about 17.9 million persons have plans or policies that are subject to annual limits , primarily in the individual ( 65% of total ) and small group ( 31% of total ) markets . these concerns prompted a december 1 , 2010 , hearing by the senate commerce committee . in the interim final regulations on restricted annual limits , the secretaries of hhs , labor , and the treasury announced that hhs would establish a waiver process for limited benefit plans in order to preserve coverage at similar premiums . limited benefit plans do not have a categorical exemption from the reforms of ppaca .
 ; tsca ) , giving the u.s. environmental protection agency ( epa ) authority to regulate production and use of industrial chemicals not otherwise regulated in u.s. commerce . those previous bills proposed generally similar changes to tsca that were summarized in crs report r41335 , proposed amendments to the toxic substances control act ( tsca ) : senate and house bills compared with current law . 5820 ) , but congress did not vote on either bill . in 1976 , president gerald r. ford signed the toxic substances control act ( 15 u.s.c . thirty - five years of experience with tsca implementation and enforcement have demonstrated the strengths and weaknesses of the law and led many to propose legislative changes to tsca's core provisions in title i . on april 14 , 2011 , senator frank lautenberg introduced similar , but not identical , legislation ( s. 847 ) in the 112 th congress . democrats introduced legislation to amend tsca title i in the 111 th congress ( s. 3209 and h.r . based on hearing testimony , stakeholders generally agree that tsca needs to be updated , although there is disagreement about the extent and nature of any proposed revisions . therefore , this report compares key provisions of s. 847 , as introduced , with provisions of tsca title i ( 15 u.s.c . 2601 et seq . to date , no other legislation has been introduced that would amend core provisions of tsca title i . that would be affected if s. 847 becomes law . 2601 et seq. ) . new provisions that would be added to the end of tsca title i by s. 847 — for example , those related to reduced use of animals for toxicity testing — are summarized in table 6 . for example , provisions related to testing would still be in section 4 , requirements for notifying epa when a new chemical or new use is proposed would still be in section 5 , and regulatory authorities would remain in section 6 . however , s. 847 would amend or delete most of the original title i provisions and would make substantial additions to current law . these provisions are summarized in tables 1 through 5 . also unaffected would be changes to tsca title i that were enacted during the 110 th congress , such as a provision that bans exports of elemental mercury . s. 847 would expedite regulatory action , relative to the process under current law , by authorizing epa in some cases to issue administrative orders instead of rules ( which must be promulgated under current law ) , exempting certain epa decisions from judicial review , and removing certain tsca requirements that are in addition to requirements specified in the administrative procedure act ( 5 u.s.c . s. 847 , as introduced , directs the epa administrator to establish varied or tiered minimum data set requirements for different chemical substances or categories of substances . the bill would prohibit production and use of chemicals when it was inconsistent with u.s. obligations under any of the three international agreements after they had entered into force for the united states . s. 847 would not affect titles ii through vi of tsca , nor would it change the basic organization of tsca title i .
once binding on federal courts , the guidelines are now the starting point for federal sentencing in most cases . the federal sentencing guidelines greatly influence the sentences imposed for federal crimes . the goal of the guidelines is nation - wide federal sentencing consistency ; to ensure that defendants with similar criminal records , convicted of similar crimes , receive similar sentences and that the dissimilar do not . the supreme court has upheld the constitutionality of the guidelines as a valid delegation of congressional authority , but held unconstitutional the provision in the sentencing reform act which made them binding on federal courts , rather than advisory . congress created the commission and authorized the guidelines in the sentencing reform act of 1984 . in the last quarter of fy2014 , over 75% of the sentences imposed by federal courts fell within the sentence ranges recommended by the guidelines or within those ranges but reduced by prosecution endorsed departures recommended in the guidelines . they provide the principal standard against which the reasonableness of any sentence imposed is judged . the first guidelines were promulgated with an effective date of november 1 , 1987 . between the statutory maximum and any statutory minimum established for noncapital federal felonies , the guidelines calibrate a series of sentencing ranges , according to the nature of the offense and the defendant's criminal record . the commission may promulgate amendments which become effective 180 days after they are presented to congress , absent congressional action . the sentencing ranges for any term of imprisonment depend both on the final offense level and upon the offender's criminal history score calculated on the basis of his past criminal record and divided into categories . each of the possible forty - three offense levels has six sentencing ranges corresponding to the six criminal history categories ( see the sentencing guidelines' sentencing table , supra ) . the guidelines are the work of the u.s . sentencing under the guidelines is essentially a score - keeping exercise , not unlike the procedure for filling out a federal income tax return . identification of the most appropriate guidelines section for the crime ( s ) of conviction , based on the nature of the offense ( the most commonly applicable are noted in the guidelines index ) ii . under the guidelines , most sentencing determinations follow from the final offense level identified at the end of the process . the process involves assigning "offense levels" for a particular offense based on the nature of the offense and the circumstances under which it was committed . sentencing commission . the lower federal appellate courts are divided over whether a sentencing court may nevertheless take the §3553 ( a ) ( 2 ) ( a ) factors in consideration in a revocation case .  ( 6 ) the need to avoid unwarranted sentence disparities among defendants with similar records who have been found guilty of similar conduct ; and ( 7 ) the need to provide restitution to any victims of the offense . sections 3553 ( a ) ( 4 ) and ( a ) ( 5 ) require sentencing courts to consider the recommendations of the guidelines . finally , §3553 ( a ) ( 7 ) compels the sentencing court to consider the need to provide victim restitution .
the united states has seen continued growth of electronic card payments ( and a simultaneous decrease in check payments ) . this report begins with a description of the debit payments process and network pricing for the four - party system and the three - party system . 111-203 , the dodd - frank wall street reform and consumer protection act ) , known as the durbin amendment , authorizes the federal reserve board to mandate regulations to ensure that any interchange transaction fee received by a debit card issuer is reasonable and proportional to the cost incurred by the issuer . from 2009 through 2012 , debit card transactions have outpaced other payment forms . section 1075 of the consumer financial protection act of 2010 ( title x of p.l . specifically , section 735 of the financial choice act would repeal section 1075 of the consumer financial protection act of 2010 . the durbin amendment allows the federal reserve to consider the authorization , clearance , and settlement costs of each transaction when setting the interchange fee . on june 29 , 2011 , the federal reserve issued a final rule implementing the durbin amendment by regulation ii , which includes a cap on the interchange fee for large issuers . 10 , the financial choice act of 2017 , would repeal the durbin amendment . the interchange fee is paid to the consumer's bank that issued the debit card , covering the bank's costs to facilitate the transaction . and debit card issuers from imposing restrictions that would override a merchant's choice of the network provider through which to route transactions . prior to 2010 , the policy debate about interchange fees was motivated by concerns that the interchange fees received by banks were not being set by competitive market forces . the report concludes with a discussion of some implications of regulation ii for merchants , consumers , and banks as well as with some recent observations . by statute , debit card issuers with less than $10 billion in assets are exempt from the regulation , which means that smaller financial institutions may receive a larger interchange fee than larger issuers . the durbin amendment also prohibits network providers ( visa , mastercard , etc. ) . the final rule went into effect on october 1 , 2011 . 10 was ordered to be reported by the house financial services committee . the durbin amendment allows the interchange fee to be adjusted for costs incurred by debit card issuers to prevent fraud . on may 4 , 2017 , h.r . when a consumer uses a debit card in a transaction , the merchant pays a "swipe" fee , also known as the interchange fee . alternatively , debit card issuers and networks had argued that a percentage of the interchange fees were being rebated to consumers in the form of consumer reward programs that were also beneficial to merchants . it summarizes the requirements of regulation ii , which implements the durbin amendment . a competitive market arguably would drive down swipe fees , which would benefit merchants and ultimately consumers . on june 29 , 2011 , the federal reserve issued regulation ii , a final rule , which capped the interchange fee received by large issuers ( with $10 billion or more in assets ) to 21 cents plus 0.05% of the transaction .
these set out the liability of an oil spill's "responsible parties" for the costs inflicted on others by the oil spill — in particular , cleanup costs and economic damages ( such as injury to natural resources , destruction of private property , and loss of profits or impairment of earning capacity ) . congress has also addressed the compensatory liability provisions of the jones act and the death on the high seas act in connection with the deaths of 11 workers when the deepwater horizon platform exploded on april 20 . since the deepwater horizon oil spill began on april 20 , 2010 , congress has given much attention to the compensatory liability provisions in the oil pollution act . to reiterate , the function of these liability provisions is to compensate those injured ; that function determines the dollar amount of the liability . also discussed in relation to the deepwater horizon oil spill are federal statutory provisions of a very different nature . their function is not to compensate , but rather , like all civil and criminal penalties , to punish and / or deter . on june 1 , 2010 , attorney general eric holder announced that the u.s. department of justice had launched a civil and criminal investigation into the gulf spill , including the deaths of the 11 workers on the deepwater horizon mobile offshore drilling unit . as for civil penalty ceilings , congress has enacted the federal civil penalties inflation adjustment act of 1990 to ensure that inflation over a long period does not erode the deterrent force of a penalty ceiling . these provisions , the topic of this report , impose civil and criminal penalties . this act requires federal agencies to adjust at least once every four years the maximum ( and minimum , if any ) dollar amount on civil penalties within their jurisdiction to reflect movement in the consumer price index . except for the migratory bird treaty act and occupational safety and health act , all the included laws expressly apply beyond the u.s. territorial sea , either out to the limit of the united states' exclusive economic zone at 200 nautical miles offshore , or , as applied to persons subject to u.s. jurisdiction , anywhere on the high seas . that the federal laws listed herein extend to the gulf spill seems clear , notwithstanding that the spill site is 50 miles off the coast of louisiana , well beyond the territorial limits of the united states on the outer continental shelf . it remains to be seen whether this one court's view will win acceptance by other courts , as to the endangered species act specifically or as to smaller - than - cfia penalty caps enacted post - cfia generally . this report summarizes selected federal civil and criminal penalty provisions that may be found violated in connection with the gulf spill and related worker fatalities . as for the migratory bird treaty act and occupational safety and health act , the outer continental shelf lands act broadly declares that the laws of the united states are extended to the subsoil and seabed of the outer continental shelf , "and to all artificial islands , and all installations and other devices permanently or temporarily attached to the seabed" to explore for or produce resources .
111-148 ) , which was substantially amended by the health provisions in the health care and education reconciliation act of 2010 ( hcera ; p.l . the 111 th congress passed major health reform legislation , the patient protection and affordable care act ( aca ; p.l . several other laws that were subsequently enacted made more targeted changes to specific aca provisions . 111-152 ) . all references to aca in this report refer to the law as amended . for more detailed information on aca's provisions , crs has produced a series of more comprehensive reports , which are available at http: / / www.crs.gov . the report provides a brief summary of major aca provisions , implementation and oversight activities , and current legal challenges . the hhs secretary is tasked with implementation and oversight of many of aca's key provisions . the costs of expanding public and private health insurance coverage and other spending are offset by revenues from new taxes and fees , and by savings from payment and health care delivery system reforms designed to reduce spending on medicare and other federal health care programs . the new law also expands eligibility for medicaid ; amends the medicare program in ways that are intended to reduce the growth in medicare spending ; imposes an excise tax on insurance plans found to have high premiums ; and makes numerous other changes to the tax code , medicare , medicaid , the state children's health insurance program ( chip ) , and many other federal programs . the information provided in these reports ranges from broad overviews of aca provisions , such as the law's medicare provisions , to more narrowly focused topics , such as dependent coverage for children under age 26 . other federal agencies , notably the internal revenue service ( irs ) , also have substantial regulatory and administrative responsibilities under the new law . implementation of aca , which began upon the law's enactment in 2010 and will continue to unfold over the next few years , involves all the major health care stakeholders , including the federal and state governments , as well as employers , insurers , and health care providers . it also established the health insurance reform implementation fund ( hirif ) and appropriated $1 billion to the fund to cover federal regulatory and other administrative costs associated with aca's implementation . aca is projected to have a significant impact on federal spending and revenues . the primary goal of aca is to increase access to affordable health insurance for the millions of americans without coverage and make health insurance more affordable for those already covered . the law includes spending to subsidize the purchase of health insurance coverage through the exchanges , as well as increased outlays for the expansion of the medicaid program . while most of the major provisions of the law do not take effect until 2014 , some provisions are already in place , with others to be phased in over the next few years . finally , the law established many new grant programs and provided for each an authorization of appropriations , and reauthorized funding for numerous existing programs whose authorization of appropriations had expired .
over the past decade , however , the united states has worked closely with the united nations high commissioner for refugees ( unhcr ) to make third country resettlement a viable , durable solution for increasing numbers from a broader representation of the world's refugee population , which currently stands at over 10 million . to help inform possible future efforts to reform the refugee resettlement assistance system , this report discusses existing resettlement assistance programs , key issues and challenges in providing effective assistance , and policy options to reform the current system . the obama administration has initiated an interagency review of refugee resettlement , which is being lead by the national security council ( nsc ) . many of the resettled refugees had family members already in the united states . in the early years of the [refugee] program , large numbers of relatively few nationalities located in a limited number of countries dominated the program . a set of refugee resettlement assistance programs , administered by the office of refugee resettlement ( orr ) in the department of health and human services' administration for children and families ( hhs / acf ) , provides transitional assistance to refugees and other designated groups . it remains unclear whether the administration will take additional steps to reform the system and / or whether congress will pursue reform through legislation . achievement of self - sufficiency has been more difficult in recent years in the face of the economic recession . this excerpt , from the interagency report proposed refugee admissions for fy201 1 , suggests the extent of the challenge facing the u.s. government as it resettles a diverse group of individuals with a wide range of needs . these programs are intended to help the beneficiaries ( who are referred to collectively as "refugees" in this report ) achieve economic self - sufficiency as soon as possible after their arrival in the united states . they have been widely anticipated , however , and may further energize reform efforts . the admission of refugees to the united states and their resettlement here are authorized by the immigration and nationality act ( ina ) , as amended by the refugee act of 1980 . the administration has worked closely with the congress to invest the resources necessary to reach smaller numbers of the most desperate populations who find themselves in seemingly forgotten locations . while the refugee admissions process is briefly described and referenced in parts of this report , as relevant , the focus of this report is on resettlement assistance to refugees in the united states . it is not known when the results of the review will be made available . separate from the orr program , the department of state ( dos ) administers a program of initial resettlement for newly arriving refugees known as the reception and placement program . while we have again resettled large numbers of iraqis , burmese , and bhutanese this year , the usrap has admitted refugees from over 60 nationalities who were processed in some 90 countries . it may be that the results of the nsc - led interagency review mentioned in the introduction will help galvanize support for a particular set of reforms .
on the other hand , advertising ( be it private or governmental ) often attempts to persuade individuals to alter their behaviors . americans have long been of mixed mind about advertising . primary oversight of government agency advertising has been exercised by congress . for example , the department of defense has been prohibited from using appropriated funds to pay the costs of advertising by any defense contractor ( 10 u.s.c . 114 amendments ) ; and 7 c.f.r . many americans believe that government was established to protect liberty , and that the essence of liberty is the freedom to think and live as one pleases ( provided one does not harm others ) . this statute directed the office of national drug control policy ( ondcp ) to produce media campaigns to discourage illicit drug use . however , not all government advertising is controversial . in recent years , it has examined some large advertising campaigns , often when some members of congress have perceived the advertisements as being overly promotional of a policy or program . few complain when the government advertises federal agency job openings , competitions for federal contracts , or the sale of surplus government property . under the "necessary expense doctrine," an agency may use a general appropriation to pay any expense that is ( 1 ) necessary or incidental to the achievement of the underlying objectives of the appropriation , ( 2 ) not prohibited by law , and ( 3 ) not otherwise provided for by statute or appropriation . additionally , some government advertising has been mandated by law . for example , congress established the national youth anti - drug media campaign in a 1997 appropriations act ( p.l . however , gao reviews of agency advertising result only after congressional request , and its opinions are advisory — they do not have the force of law . 1913 ) that prohibits agencies from using government funds to pay for advertisements that are designed to sway members of congress . unease with advertising can be magnified if the advertiser is the government , especially if an advertisement conflicts with widely held beliefs about government . principles begins with the 1919 federal anti - lobbying law ( 18 u.s.c . on the one hand , advertising is beneficial insofar as it provides information . in light of these beliefs , it is not surprising that controversies have arisen around government advertisements that have attempted to dissuade individuals from using marijuana , have promoted the use of social service programs , are viewed as overly expensive or wasteful , or are perceived as possibly misleading . otherwise , oversight , investigation , and enforcement of appropriate practices regarding government advertising falls to agencies' inspectors general , gao , and congress . some restrictions on agencies' advertising expenditures may be found in annual appropriations acts , the u.s. code , and the code of federal regulations . many individuals also believe that government should not needlessly or wantonly spend taxpayer money , and that citizens should be thrifty and self - reliant . as one of the hoover commission task forces wrote a half - century ago , apart from his responsibility as spokesman , the department head has another obligation in a democracy: to keep the public informed about the activities of his agency .
on april 20 , 2010 , the deepwater horizon oil drilling rig was reportedly nearing completion of a deepwater oil well ( owned by bp ) when an uncontained release of hydrocarbons ( oil and natural gas ) caused explosions and fire , resulting in 11 crew member fatalities . the incident produced the largest oil spill that has occurred in u.s. waters , eclipsing the magnitude of the 1989 exxon valdez spill after four to five days . based on the most recent estimate from the federal government's flow rate technical group , the deepwater well ultimately released more than 200 million gallons ( or 4.9 million barrels ) of crude oil ( see "well flow rate estimates" below ) . the uncertainty range of this estimate ( + / - 10% ) is equivalent to two exxon valdez - size spills in either direction . the fate of the oil may be of interest to policymakers for other reasons , including oversight of oil spill response performance and assessment of the government's capability to monitor oil spills in the environment . the spill spanned approximately 84 days , and following several attempts , responders gained control of the oil discharge on july 15 , 2010 . some of these efforts may provide clues to the oil's fate . because evaluating the actual fate of the oil may take time and may prove difficult , perceptions of the oil's fate may influence congressional interest and action , with consequences for the affected stakeholders . multiple challenges hinder this objective: the complexity of the gulf system ; resources required to collect data ; and varied interpretations over the results and observations . the impact of the 2010 gulf spill is still being assessed and will likely continue to be assessed for years to come . for the purposes of this report , the term fate refers to the oil itself , not its actual or potential impacts on the gulf ecosystems or organisms . where is the remaining oil and what is its physical and chemical state ? . these perceptions may be influenced by multiple factors , including oil spill assessments and their methods , the group that prepared the assessment ( and perceived biases of the group ) , and the manner in which the assessment is presented . on august 4 , 2010 , the national incident command ( the spill response leadership team of the federal government ) made public an estimate of the oil spill budget for the deepwater horizon incident . it is debatable whether the fate of the remaining oil will ever be established conclusively . one of the more comprehensive of these studies was released december 17 , 2010 , by the unified command's operational scientific advisory team ( osat ) . if policymakers have the perception that the oil has degraded with minimal impacts to the environment , attention to oil spill's consequences and associated impacts may wane . researchers are continuing to study various components of the gulf , specifically damages to natural resources . according to the federal government's geoplatform database , august 20 , 2010 , was the first day since the spill's start in which no oil was observed on the ocean's surface .
their interest has been sparked by the debate over the south korea - u.s. free trade agreement ( korus fta ) , which would lower or eliminate u.s. tariffs and non - tariff barriers on most imports from south korea . as a result of north korea's relative economic isolation , the undeveloped state of its export sector , and u.s. trade restrictions , the united states imports virtually no finished goods from north korea . a number of groups and individuals have recently focused attention on u.s. rules governing imports from north korea . some , particularly the agreement's opponents , argue that the agreement could lead to increased u.s. imports of goods or components made in north korea . the korus fta will not enter into force unless congress approves implementation legislation , which obama administration officials have said they expect to send to the 112 th congress . the korus fta might constrain the u.s. government's ability to impose restrictions on imports from north korea . the ability of the united states to enforce its restrictions would then depend to a large extent upon the level of u.s. - south korea customs cooperation — which arguably would be enhanced by the korus fta — and the severity of the penalties charged for non - compliance with u.s. import restrictions . the korus fta appears likely to have only a minimal impact on whether u.s. sanctions on north korean imports are put to the test . over the course of the 2000s , north korea's significant export markets shrunk to two countries , south korea and china , which in 2010 appear to have accounted for over three - quarters of north korea's export shipments . the agreement also contains provisions that aim to help preserve the united states' ability to maintain its restrictions on imports of north korean goods and components . between 2000 and 2010 , cumulative u.s. bilateral imports of finished north korean goods totaled $335,700 , which is equivalent to a rounding error in annual u.s. trade flows with most countries . the dprk's stated policy of self - reliance ( juche ) , its suspicion of foreign countries , and the collapse of its industrial base since the late 1980s have resulted in an extremely low level of commercial and financial relations with other nations in the world . the first section of this report examines existing u.s. rules and practices governing imports from north korea . the korus fta has insufficient "rules of origin" to determine the country of origin of imported products . the third section addresses the issue of how , if at all , the korus fta would affect potential u.s. imports of north korean content , including whether the agreement could result in legal action against the u.s. government if it kept out imports of north korean content . since 2005 , according to u.s. trade data , the only finished imports that have entered the united states from north korea have been $8,363 worth of stamps , which were imported in june 2010 . the second section analyzes the two main portals through which north korea conducts its minimal economic interaction with the outside world: the kic and china .
the first of these bills , the continuing appropriations act , 2011 ( p.l . 111-242 ) , was enacted on september 30 , 2010 , and provided funding through december 3 , 2010 . normally , a continuing appropriation permits government agencies to operate at the same rate as experienced in the most recent full - year appropriation — in this case fy2010 — for the duration of the appropriation . the most substantial adjustment to military construction accounts was the reduction of the brac 2005 account from the $8.0 billion needed near the height of brac construction in fy2010 to $2.4 billion . a second full - year continuing appropriation , including funding for military construction , was introduced to the house on april 11 as division b of h.r . since then , six other bills have extended federal funding through march 4 , 2011 .  ( a ) no appropriation or funds made available or authority granted pursuant to section 101 for the department of defense shall be used for ( 1 ) the new production of items not funded for production in fiscal year 2010 or prior years ; ( 2 ) the increase in production rates above those sustained with fiscal year 2010 funds ; or ( 3 ) the initiation , resumption , or continuation of any project , activity , operation , or organization ( defined as any project , subproject , activity , budget activity , program element , and subprogram within a program element , and for any investment items defined as a p - 1 line item in a budget activity within an appropriation account and an r - 1 line item that includes a program element and subprogram element within an appropriation account ) for which appropriations , funds , or other authority were not available during fiscal year 2010 . crs has published a report , recently updated , on continuing appropriations that discusses at length and tracks the seven bills that have thus far funded federal government operations through fy2011 . although the ike skelton national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2011 ( p.l . 1473 , the department of defense and full - year continuing appropriations act , 2011 . 111-383 ) , enacted on january 7 , 2011 , authorized the expenditure of appropriations for a number of military construction projects , dod has taken this section to be a barrier to the initiation of any new fy2011 construction . 1 , a full - year continuing appropriation , on february 19 , 2011 . nevertheless , the bill failed passage in the senate . when a final appropriation for fy2011 is enacted , the various defense agencies and military departments will have to adjust their spending rates to end the fiscal year without exceeding their newly enacted budget authority . none of the subsequent enacted appropriations altered this language , and dod has reported that no new fy2011 construction has yet been undertaken . with the exception of new construction projects , dod may be assumed to be obligating funds in each account at a rate commensurate with its fy2010 appropriation . the bill would have set new fy2011 full - year appropriations amounts for each of the military construction and family housing accounts , as indicated in table a - 1 and table a - 2 in the appendix .
federal judges have also expressed concern from time to time , observing that the "mail and wire fraud statutes have 'been invoked to impose criminal penalties upon a staggeringly broad swath of behavior,' creating uncertainty in business negotiations and challenges to due process and federalism. . enacted as part of the communications act amendments of 1952 , it was always intended to mirror the provisions of the mail fraud statute . congress did amend it thereafter to confirm that the mail fraud statute and the wire fraud statute reached schemes to defraud another of the right to honest services and to encompass the use of commercial postal carriers . the federal mail and wire fraud statutes outlaw schemes to defraud that involve the use of mail or wire communications . both condemn fraudulent conduct that may also come within the reach of other federal criminal statutes . both may result in the forfeiture of property . the wire fraud statute is of more recent vintage . since its inception , changes in the mail fraud statute have come with corresponding changes in the wire fraud statute in most instances . both are punishable by imprisonment for not more than 20 years ; for not more than 30 years , if the victim is a financial institution or the offense is committed in the context of major disaster or emergency . this overlap occurs perhaps most often with respect to ( 1 ) crimes for which mail or wire fraud are elements ( "predicate offenses" ) of another offense ; ( 2 ) fraud proscribed under jurisdictional circumstances other than mail or wire use ; and ( 3 ) honest services fraud in the form of bribery or kickbacks . but for penalty increases and amendments calculated to confirm its breadth , the prohibition has come down to us essentially unchanged . commentators have argued that the statutes "have long provided prosecutors with a means by which to salvage a modest , but dubious , victory from investigations that essentially proved unfruitful. . nevertheless , mail and wire fraud prosecutions have brought to an end schemes that bilked victims of millions , and sometimes billions , of dollars . as treatment of the individual elements makes clear , however , there seems little dispute that conviction requires the government to prove the use of either mail or wire communications in the foreseeable furtherance of a scheme and intent to defraud another of either property or honest services involving a material deception . due to their breadth , misconduct that constitutes mail or wire fraud may constitute a violation of one or more other federal criminal statutes as well . 5122 ) ) , or affects a financial institution , such person shall be fined not more than $1,000,000 or imprisoned not more than 30 years , or both . the first of the two , the mail fraud statute , emerged in the late 19 th century as a means of preventing "city slickers" from using the mail to cheat guileless "country folks. . both entitle victims to restitution . some time ago , a federal prosecutor referred to the mail and wire fraud statutes as "our stradivarius , our colt 45 , our louisville slugger … and our true love. .
comprehensive refugee reform legislation , the refugee protection act of 2011 ( s. 1202 / h.r . 2185 ) , would make significant revisions to asylum policy . over the past decade , the united states has admitted or adjusted about 1 million foreign nationals to legal permanent resident ( lpr ) status each year , and annual asylee adjustments have ranged from 1% to 9% of the total . senate committee on the judiciary chairman patrick leahy and house committee on the judiciary subcommittee on immigration policy and enforcement ranking member zoe lofgren introduced the companion bills on june 15 , 2011 . the u.s. congress plays the key role in considering when and whether revision or re - calibration of asylum law and policies is warranted . 2185 , the bill would eliminate the time limits on seeking asylum in cases of changed circumstances ; proscribe conditions under which an asylum seeker who was a victim of terrorist coercion would not be excluded as a terrorist ; provide alternatives to detention of asylum seekers ; modify certain elements necessary for the asylum seeker to meet the conditions for the granting of asylum ; and , allow aliens interdicted at sea the opportunity to have an asylum interview . unlike other facets of u.s. immigration policy , asylum issues are less about the number of foreign nationals involved and more about the qualities of the policies and the efficacy of the procedures . at the crux of the issue is the extent to which an asylum policy forged during the cold war is adapting to the competing priorities and turbulence of the 21 st century . for many years , most foreign nationals who sought asylum in the united states were from the western hemisphere , notably central america and the caribbean . overall , asylee adjustments comprised only 4% ( 411,972 ) of the 10.3 million lprs admitted or adjusted from fy2000 through fy2009 . in fy1999 , the people's republic of china ( prc ) moved to the top of the source countries for affirmative asylum claims , with 4,209 new cases . among the asylum revisions in s. 1202 / h.r . others maintain that current law does not offer adequate protections for people fleeing human rights violations or gender - based abuses that occur around the world . from october 1981 through march 1991 , for example , salvadoran and nicaraguan asylum applicants totaled over 252,000 and made up half of all foreign nationals who applied for asylum with the ins . some express concern that u.s. sympathies for the asylum seekers caught up in the current political uprisings in the middle east , northern africa , and south asia could inadvertently facilitate the entry of terrorists . some cite the seemingly inexplicable disparities in asylum approvals rates and urge broad - based administrative reforms . the policy tensions of asylum often pit the promotion of our humanitarian values against the prevention of fraudulent abuses ; the protection of the persecuted against the security of our borders ; and the obligations of our moral responsibilities internationally against the commitments of our social priorities domestically . some assert that asylum has become an alternative pathway for immigration rather than humanitarian protection provided in extraordinary cases .
barring major changes by congress in the form of increased appropriations from the fund or a redirection of its receipts , the fund's balance is expected to continue to increase . the reclamation fund was established in 1902 as a special fund within the united states treasury to aid the development of irrigation on the arid lands of western states . it originated as a revolving fund supported by the proceeds of the sale of land and water in the western united states . for instance , congress could increase appropriations from the reclamation fund in annual discretionary appropriations , but such an increase would have to compete with other appropriations ( including general fund appropriations ) subject to congressional 302 ( b ) allocations . in title x of the omnibus lands act of 2009 ( p.l . this report provides general background information on the reclamation fund , including a short history of the fund and trends in its deposits and appropriations . as of the end of fy2011 , the fund had a balance in excess of $9.6 billion . more recently , a bill in the senate in the 113 th congress , the authorized rural water projects completion act ( s. 715 ) , proposes to establish a new fund for rural water projects ( similar to the water settlements fund referenced above ) that would receive , without further appropriation , approximately $80 million per year in funding that would otherwise revert to the reclamation fund . over time it , has been amended to receive proceeds from a number of disparate sources , including power generation and mineral leasing . the increasing balance of the reclamation fund has caused some to call for directing these funds for new purposes or to supplement ongoing authorized expenditures . separately , congress could dedicate a stream of revenue from the reclamation fund for a subset of projects and make it available , with or without further appropriations ( i.e. , discretionary funding or mandatory funding ) required . however , others may view other potential uses of the fund's surplus as being more pressing in the current fiscal climate . since the mid - 1990s , balances in the reclamation fund have increased significantly as appropriations made from the fund have not kept pace with receipts coming in to the fund . 111-11 ) , congress redirected a portion of reclamation fund receipts for indian water rights settlement projects . some , including water users and others benefitting from reclamation projects , note that the reclamation fund was intended to benefit water resource projects in western states , and spending its balance on the fund's intended purposes is a logical use of the fund . the bill established a separate fund ( known as the reclamation water settlements fund ) in the treasury and directed the secretary of the treasury to transfer into the new fund up to $120 million annually between fy2020 and fy2034 that would otherwise go to the reclamation fund . such a change could take one or more forms , each of which may have an associated budget scoring impact . in contrast to the aforementioned water settlements fund , some of this funding would be redirected to projects over the next 10 years .
in a sharp reversal of its policy of denying the existence of a chemical weapons program , the syrian government agreed to destroy its chemical weapons stocks and joined the treaty banning the possession and use of these weapons , the chemical weapons convention ( cwc ) , on september 12 . president obama had been seeking congressional authorization to use military force in response to a large - scale chemical weapons attack by syria , but on september 10 asked congressional leaders to postpone a vote in order to give the administration time to pursue a u.s. - russian diplomatic initiative to achieve chemical weapons disarmament in syria . the target dates for implementation are completion of initial on - site inspections of syria's declared chemical weapons - related sites by november 2013 ; destruction of syrian chemical weapons production , mixing , and filling equipment by november 2013 ; and complete elimination of all chemical weapons material and equipment in the first half of 2014 . on september 14 , 2013 , secretary of state john kerry and russian foreign minister sergey lavrov announced a proposed framework for elimination of syrian chemical weapons . as a first step , the syrian government is required to declare all its stocks , munitions , precursor chemicals , and production and storage facilities to the organization for the prohibition of chemical weapons ( opcw ) . the u.n. mission to investigate allegations of the use of chemical weapons in the syrian arab republic released its report on september 16 . u.n. security council resolution 2118 authorizes measures under chapter vii of the u.n. charter if syria does not comply with its chemical weapons disarmament commitments . syria has requested technical assistance for the cw dismantlement process , which would likely include u.s. technical or financial assistance to the opcw . in past cases of chemical weapons elimination , the country holding the stocks was responsible for securing the stockpile and related facilities while awaiting dismantlement . the united nations and the opcw have had experience successfully monitoring the destruction of chemical weapons in several countries . under chapter vii , a response could include sanctions or use of military force . based on this declaration , the opcw recommended a plan for cw destruction , which was approved by its executive council on september 27 , 2013. international inspectors would first verify that the declaration was accurate and complete , and are to begin inspections by october 1 . key implementation issues will include verification , access , security of stocks and of international personnel , and timelines for action . this contingency has raised two major policy concerns: the use of chemical weapons by the regime of president bashar al asad ; and whether the regime could lose control over these weapons . the potency and effectiveness of syrian chemical agents are unknown since precursor chemicals may degrade over time , but , as noted , syria has used chemical weapons with some apparent effectiveness . there will continue to be limits , however , to the united states' ability to monitor the security of these stockpiles and limits to intelligence about where , how well , and by whom they are being secured . president barack obama and other world leaders had said that the use of chemical weapons against the civilian population would be met with consequences , which could include the use of military force .
tainted water and unsanitary practices are at the root of many health problems in the developing world and are hindering u.s. and international global health efforts . 109-121 , the senator paul simon water for the poor act of 2005 ( water for the poor act ) . key provisions of the law direct the secretary of state , in consultation with the u.s. agency for international development ( usaid ) and other implementing agencies , to develop and implement a strategy that boosts access to safe drinking water and sanitation ; require the department of state to report annually on u.s. efforts to expand global access to clean drinking water and sanitation ; and urge usaid to raise resources for and attention on water and sanitation , and better integrate water , sanitation , and hygiene ( wash ) activities within global health efforts . congressional interest in combating this problem is strong , evidenced by the passage of p.l . on world water day in march 2010 , secretary of state hillary clinton pledged to elevate water issues and later called on under secretary for democracy and global affairs maria otero and usaid administrator rajiv shah to spearhead u.s. efforts to address water issues ; develop a comprehensive approach to addressing water - related challenges ; identify areas of investment that can deliver sustainable , measurable results ; and maintain a long - term perspective on solving water - related issues . the law amended the foreign assistance act of 1961 to make the provision of "affordable and equitable access to safe water and sanitation in developing countries" a u.s. foreign policy priority . support for the act was also tied to previously established commitments by the united states to support attainment of the millennium development goals . the obama administration continues to demonstrate support for advancing access to clean water and sanitation . the act also called for u.s. agencies to work toward halving the 2009 level of people without access to clean drinking water and sanitation by 2015 . in march 2012 , usaid announced that it had joined the sanitation and water for all ( swa ) partnership — a coalition of governments , donors , civil society , and development groups committed to advancing sustainable access to clean drinking water and sanitation . congressional support for the legislation was motivated , in part , by concerns that the united states had not given wash programs sufficient priority and that these efforts needed to be better aligned with u.s. foreign aid programs , particularly global health efforts . these programs are monitored and reported by the department of state and implemented primarily by usaid and the millennium challenge corporation ( mcc ) . water productivity projects seek to make water use more efficient for the preservation of water reserves , and reduce pollution and other threats to water quality for the protection of water supplies . generally speaking , water - related efforts can be grouped into three areas: water supply , sanitation , and hygiene ( wash ) , water resource management , and water productivity . in fy2009 , usaid and mcc accounted for roughly 90% of all u.s. spending on the issue . water resource management programs promote policy and legal reforms , build local capacity , and strengthen water resources planning , management , and governance .
wia includes titles that authorize programs for job training and related services for adults , youth , and dislocated workers ( title i ) ; adult education and literacy ( title ii ) ; employment services ( title iii ) ; and vocational rehabilitation ( title iv ) . the workforce investment act of 1998 ( p.l . 105-220 ) is the most recent federal law to provide job training and related services to unemployed and underemployed individuals , including youth . since the 1930s , federal job training and employment programs and policies have sought to connect vulnerable youth to work and school . it also discusses relevant provisions of two bills: ( 1 ) h.r . generally , these young people have been defined as being vulnerable because they are low - income and have a barrier to employment , such as having dropped out of school or spent time in foster care . 803 , which was reported by the house education and workforce committee on march 6 , 2013 , and passed the house on march 15 , 2013 , and ( 2 ) workforce investment act of 2013 ( s. 1356 ) , which was ordered reported by the senate health , education , labor , and pensions ( help ) committee on july 31 , 2013 . all youth job training programs and related services are authorized under title i of wia and are carried out by the department of labor ( dol ) . in the 112 th congress , policy makers had signaled that the law may be reauthorized in the near future . wia authorized funding through september 30 , 2003 ; however , wia programs continue to be funded through annual appropriation acts . these programs include the wia youth activities ( youth ) formula program , job corps , and youthbuild . under the pilot and demonstration authority in title i , dol has carried out the reintegration of ex - offenders program . although the programs have distinct activities and purposes , each program seeks to connect youth to educational and employment opportunities , as well as leadership development and community service activities . this report provides an overview of issues pertinent to the wia youth programs , particularly youth activities and job corps . issues that have been raised as part of the wia reauthorization process in congress and elsewhere generally include the following: some policy makers have proposed consolidating workforce programs for adults , dislocated workers , and youth . the senate help committee held a markup of s. 1356 on july 31 , 2013 , and ordered the bill reported by a vote of 18 to 3 . together , these programs make up the federal job training system for youth . during the 111 th congress , the senate health , education , labor , and pensions ( help ) committee held a series of listening sessions in april 2009 to address the positive aspects of wia and to increase understanding of the issues that can be addressed as part of any reauthorization legislation . under such a proposal , states would generally have greater ability to target funds to certain activities and populations . another issue is the perceived lack of coordination between the workforce system and other systems that serve youth , such as the education system .
since its inception , the higher education act ( hea ) of 1965 has had a focus on increasing the postsecondary access and achievement of disadvantaged students , including low - income and first - generation college students . the two major approaches are financial support and supportive services . the pell grant program is the single largest source of federal grant aid supporting primarily low - income postsecondary education students . in 2010 , the u.s. department of education ( ed ) released the final regulations to implement the heoa trio program provisions . the pell grant program is estimated to provide approximately $30.1 billion to approximately 7.6 million undergraduate students in fy2019 . 110-315 ) of 2008 made several changes most recently to the trio programs to increase accountability , rigor , and uniformity and to ensure that all disadvantaged students had access to the programs . there are six main trio programs ( in descending order of funding levels ) : trio upward bound ( ub ) program , trio student support services ( sss ) program , trio talent search ( ts ) program , trio educational opportunity centers ( eoc ) program , ronald e. mcnair postbaccalaureate achievement ( mcnair ) program , and trio staff development ( training ) program . the higher education opportunity act ( heoa ; p.l . the trio programs are the primary federal programs providing support services to disadvantaged students to promote achievement in postsecondary education . the higher education amendments of 1968 ( p.l . this is followed by a description of unique provisions and regulations that are common to the trio programs , highlighting key heoa and regulatory changes . the number of trio programs has since expanded to six , and they were funded at a total of $950 million in fy2017 . trio services support the federal policy goals of secondary school completion , college preparation , college enrollment , undergraduate completion , and graduate school preparation . collectively , the trio programs are designed to identify qualified individuals from disadvantaged backgrounds , prepare them for a program of postsecondary education , provide support services for postsecondary students , motivate and prepare students for doctoral programs , and train individuals serving or preparing for service in the trio programs . the initial section describes the provisions of each of the programs , as reauthorized by heoa . the subsequent section provides a brief overview of recent funding and participation trends for each of the programs . 90-575 ) consolidated a "trio" of programs under one overall program . this report serves as an introduction to the trio programs . a concluding section presents the key findings and results of recent program evaluations and assessments . through the college cost reduction and access act ( ccraa ; p.l . the authorization was extended through fy2015 under the general education provisions act ( gepa ) , although the programs have continued to receive appropriations . between 2002 and 2008 , the office of management and budget ( omb ) assessed the effectiveness of federal programs through the part . the federal trio programs provide support services and some financial assistance primarily to low - income , first - generation college students to help them succeed academically and encourage them to advance through much of the educational pipeline .
the first responder network authority ( firstnet ) is a federal agency that includes private sector and other non - federal representation on its board of directors . firstnet was created by congress with provisions in title vi ( spectrum act ) of the middle class tax relief and job creation act of 2012 ( p.l . 112-96 ) to ensure the deployment and operation of a nationwide , broadband network for public safety communications . in addition to establishing the structure and goals for firstnet , congress provided $7 billion for costs related to planning and deploying the broadband network , and a $135 million grant program to assist states with plans to connect to firstnet's broadband network . it is established as an "independent authority" within the national telecommunications and information administration ( ntia ) , part of the department of commerce . the act requires that firstnet deploy its network using the fourth - generation wireless technologies of long term evolution ( lte ) . lte is also a platform for commercial carrier - expansion into fifth - generation ( 5g ) wireless communications and the internet of things . the act therefore provides for public - private partnerships with firstnet or with states , and for fees ( charged to states and other users ) to ensure that firstnet becomes self - sustaining . firstnet holds a license for 20 mhz of broadband spectrum , assigned by the federal communications commission ( fcc ) , as required by the act . lte is a powerful cellular technology with industry standards that are consistently being upgraded to expand its capabilities . there are many challenges for public safety leaders and policymakers in establishing the framework for a nationwide network that meets state , local , tribal , and territorial needs for robust , interoperable emergency communications . furthermore , each state has its own laws and procedures for building , managing , and funding communications infrastructure . notably , gao found that firstnet has not fully assessed the risks associated with its planning efforts ( such as conflict of interest ) ; has not established standards of conduct ; and is not fully evaluating the information from five "early builder" projects . also on april 24 , the proposed acquisition approach and the draft request for proposal ( s ) ( rfp ) were considered in a closed meeting . among the challenges facing firstnet is establishing a governance model that accommodates current investments and future needs of its clients without compromising the coherence of a national network . the act allows states that meet specified requirements to lease spectrum from firstnet and thereby negotiate their own partnerships that share spectrum in radio area networks for their state or region . to attract private sector partners , firstnet can offer access to its assets , including radio frequency spectrum capacity , in return for financial payment or other support . the anticipated cost of building and operating a nationwide core broadband network — and the interoperable radio networks that connect to it — is significantly in excess of the amount appropriated . currently , for example , state emergency communications needs are typically met by separate networks using different technologies . these funds are provided from revenue realized through auctioning licenses for radio frequency spectrum , as designated in the act .
the federal crop insurance program provides producers with risk management tools to address crop yield and / or revenue losses on their farms . several legislative proposals have been introduced in the 112 th congress , including provisions in the senate - passed farm bill ( s. 3240 ) and the house agriculture committee - reported farm bill ( h.r . the crop insurance program has expanded in recent decades , and policies are available now for a wide range of commodities , including crops covered by federal farm programs ( e.g. , wheat and corn ) as well as specialty crops such as fruits and vegetables . while additional policies have been introduced in the last 10 years , producers and some members of congress would like to enhance crop insurance for specialty crop producers . farmers can purchase subsidized policies that pay an indemnity when their production or revenue falls below a guaranteed level . the u.s. department of agriculture's ( usda's ) risk management agency ( rma ) operates the federal crop insurance corporation ( fcic ) , which is the funding mechanism for the program . in 2009 , specialty crop policies covered more than 7 million acres , which was roughly one - half to three - quarters of specialty crop area , depending on how total area is calculated . this report describes the federal crop insurance program for specialty and organic crops . in total , crop insurance is available for over 80 specialty crops . 6083 ) . the federal crop insurance program is permanently authorized by the federal crop insurance act , as amended ( 7 u.s.c . the availability of federal crop insurance remained limited until passage of the federal crop insurance act of 1980 ( p.l . variation across crops and by variety within crop types also complicates the loss adjustment process ( i.e. , assessing the effect of weather on crop production ) . the rural economic farm and ranch sustainability and hunger ( refresh ) act of 2011 ( s. 1658 and h.r . selected provisions in both bills with potential benefit for specialty crop producers would require usda to ( 1 ) conduct more research on whole farm revenue insurance with higher coverage levels than currently available , and ( 2 ) conduct a study on insuring specialty crop producers for food safety and contamination - related loss ; enhance the noninsured crop assistance program ( nap ) , which offers catastrophic coverage for crops not insurable under the crop insurance program , by making available additional coverage at 50% to 65% of established yield and 100% of average price ; allow producers to purchase a second crop insurance policy called "supplemental coverage option" or sco , which is designed to cover part of the deductible under the producer's underlying policy ; sco is intended for crops , including specialty crops , that have sufficient data needed for policy development and implementation ; revise the value of crop insurance for all organic crops to reflect prices of organic ( not conventional ) crops ( specific provision in s. 3240 ) ; and subsidize the purchase of existing private - sector index - based weather insurance , which insures against specific weather events and not actual loss ( s. 3240 only ) .
section 9401 of the elementary and secondary education act ( esea ) provides the secretary of education ( hereinafter referred to as the secretary ) with broad waiver authority with respect to programs authorized under the act . the decision to grant the waiver is left to the secretary's discretion . while this waiver authority is limited in some respects , such as its applicability to fiscal accountability and civil rights requirements , at the request of specified entities , the secretary may choose to grant a waiver of various esea requirements , including those related to academic accountability . this broad waiver authority was initially included in the esea through the improving america's schools act ( p.l . the authority was retained through enactment of the no child left behind act of 2001 ( nclb ; p.l . for example , since the enactment of nclb , the secretary has granted waivers of various esea requirements in response to the gulf coast hurricanes of 2005 and to address issues raised by the american recovery and reinvestment act ( arra ; p.l . the secretary has used the authority provided under section 9401 to grant numerous waivers over time , including waivers of accountability and general administrative requirements . the administration has argued that the esea flexibility package is needed because congress has failed to reauthorize the esea . also included is an update on state applications for the esea flexibility package . the next section of the report provides an examination of how the secretary has used waiver authority in the past and a legal analysis of the scope of the secretary's waiver authority and the secretary's authority to grant a waiver in exchange for another action . this report begins with a general discussion of the esea flexibility package and current congressional efforts to reauthorize the esea . there is broad concern that states and leas may become increasingly taxed with regard to their ability to undertake required activities to help schools that fail to make ayp . as this deadline approaches , and performance expectations under the law increase , an increasing share of the nation's schools are failing to meet adequate yearly progress ( ayp ) — the measure that determines whether a school is or is not meeting the academic accountability requirements . the administration has suggested that this lack of congressional action is particularly an issue as there are requirements contained in the esea , including academic accountability requirements , that have become problematic for state educational agencies , local educational agencies ( leas ) , and schools to implement , and various states have sought waivers of these provisions . on june 13 , 2011 , the secretary announced that he might begin to use the authority provided under section 9401 to issue broad sweeping waivers if congress fails to reauthorize the esea . 107-110 ) , the most recent amendments to the esea . with the exception of one optional waiver , state educational agencies ( seas ) applying for the esea flexibility must apply for all 10 waivers and must agree to implement all four principles related to receiving the waivers . on september 23 , 2011 , president obama and the secretary of education formally announced the availability of an esea flexibility package for states that included 11 waivers of esea requirements , as well as four principles for "improving student academic achievement and increasing the quality of instruction" that must be met to receive the waivers .
the authority for congressional review and approval of the district of columbia's budget is derived from the constitution and the district of columbia self - government and government reorganization act of 1973 ( home rule act ) . the district of columbia's budget is included in the financial services and general government ( fsgg ) appropriations bill . however , congress retained the authority to review and approve all district laws , including the district's annual budget . in 1973 , congress granted the city limited home rule authority and empowered citizens of the district to elect a mayor and city council . the constitution gives congress the power to "exercise exclusive legislation in all cases whatsoever" pertaining to the district of columbia . the approved budget must then be transmitted to the president , who forwards it to congress for its review , modification , and approval through the annual appropriations process . it is currently included in the financial services and general government appropriations act ( fsgg ) . as required by the home rule act , the city council must approve a budget within 56 days after receiving a budget proposal from the mayor . whether to continue a needle exchange program or whether to use federal or district funds to address the spread of hiv and aids among intravenous drug abusers is one of several key policy issues that congress faced in reviewing the district's appropriations for fy2013 . since fy2006 , the district's appropriations act has been included in a multi - agency appropriations bill ; before fy2006 the district budget was considered by the house and the senate as a stand - alone bill . general provisions are typically the third component of the district's budget reviewed and approved by congress . special federal payments appropriated by congress to be used to fund particular initiatives or activities of interest to congress or the administration . other provisions include administrative directives and controls , limitations on lobbying for statehood or congressional voting representation , congressional oversight , and congressionally imposed restrictions and prohibitions related to social policy . congress not only appropriates federal payments to the district to fund certain activities , but also reviews , and may modify , the district's entire budget , including the expenditure of local funds as outlined in the district's home rule act . the district's operating budget , which includes funds to cover the day - to - day functions , activities , and responsibilities of the government , enterprise funds that provide for the operation and maintenance of government facilities or services that are entirely or primarily supported by user - based fees , and long - term capital outlays such as road improvements . district operating budget expenditures are paid for by revenues generated through local taxes ( sales and income ) , federal funds for which the district qualifies , and fees and other sources of funds . district of columbia appropriations acts typically include the following three components: 1 . the controversy surrounding funding a needle exchange program touches on issues of home rule , public health policy , and government sanctioning and facilitating the use of illegal drugs . however , the obama administration , in a statement of administration policy issued on june 28 , 2012 , included language that urged the house to remove language prohibiting the use of federal funds in support of a needle exchange program arguing that current federal law allows the use of federal funds for such programs to prevent or limit the spread of hiv / aids among intravenous drug users .
the public , private , and tribal forests of the united states are crisscrossed by thousands of miles of logging roads . how , under the federal clean water act ( cwa ) , should logging road runoff be addressed ? . when it rains or snow melts , the runoff from those roads can be environmentally harmful , depositing large amounts of sediment and other pollutants into streams and rivers . the ninth circuit decision had prompted immediate reaction in congress , which enacted legislation barring epa from requiring discharge permits for logging road runoff until september 30 , 2013 , and now has enacted permanent legislation to that effect ( the 2013 farm bill , h.r . in decker v. northwest environmental defense center , the court held that epa had permissibly construed a prior version of its industrial stormwater rule to exempt stormwater runoff from logging roads that is channeled — that is , collected in ditches , culverts , or other channels — from the discharge permit scheme in the clean water act ( cwa ) . on march 20 , 2013 , the supreme court answered a key aspect of that question . congress enacted the modern version of the cwa in 1972 , adding regulatory teeth to a statute first enacted in 1948 . the provision leaves epa authority to take measures regarding silviculture activities if future circumstances demonstrate the need to do so , for example , pursuant to cwa section 402 ( p ) ( 6 ) ( see " epa's response " above ) . 113-79 ) , includes a provision similar but not identical to the house - passed language . first , congress enacted a temporary measure in the consolidated appropriations act , 2012 ( p.l . this report gives the statutory and regulatory background of decker , describes the supreme court decision , lays out some legal and programmatic implications of the decision , and describes congressional response . clean water act stormwater amendments and epa regulations . the final farm bill , enacted in february 2014 ( p.l . that court had held that when water running off logging roads is channeled , cwa regulations require that a discharge permit be obtained . second , the court found the claim not to have been mooted by epa's november 2012 amendment to the rule . most of epa's statutes bar petitions for review of the agency's regulations when filed more than a certain number of days ( 60 , 90 , or 120 ) after the regulation is promulgated , unless based on grounds arising after the deadline . as described previously , section 402 ( p ) ( 6 ) allows for a broad range of regulatory and non - regulatory approaches as to which stormwater discharges , if any , should be designated and do not require the use of npdes permits . it also states that discharges from silvicultural activities are not exempted from permitting requirements under cwa section 404 ( the act's dredge and fill permit program ) , existing permitting requirements under section 402 , or from any other federal law . the statute allows epa to authorize qualified states to administer the npdes program ; 46 states have been so authorized .
on may 14 , 2013 , the senate agriculture committee reported its version of the bill ( s. 954 , the agriculture reform , food and jobs act of 2013 ) , which was approved by the full senate on june 10 , 2013 ( vote of 66-27 ) . the farm commodity provisions of the food , conservation , and energy act of 2008 , as amended ( p.l . the broader farming community uses the term farm safety net to refer to the combination of ( 1 ) farm commodity price and income support programs in the 2008 farm bill , ( 2 ) federal crop insurance ( permanently authorized ) under the federal crop insurance act of 1980 as amended , and ( 3 ) five disaster assistance programs in the 2008 farm bill , which are currently unfunded . 110-246 , the 2008 farm bill ) expire with the 2013 crop year . on may 15 , 2013 , the house agriculture committee completed markup of its version of the bill ( h.r . 2642 ) for purposes of resolving differences with the senate . however , on june 20 , the full house voted to reject the bill ( vote of 195-234 ) . 361 ) on september 28 that combined the texts of h.r . the house adopted a resolution ( h.res . 2642 , which excluded a nutrition title , and on september 19 approved a nutrition title ( h.r . 1947 , the federal agriculture reform and risk management act of 2013 ) , and floor action began in mid - june . consequently , the 113 th congress has been considering an omnibus farm bill that would establish the direction of agricultural policy . on july 11 , the full house approved a revised bill , h.r . title i of both versions of the 2013 farm bill contains commodity and disaster program provisions , and modifications to the current crop insurance program are in title xi of the senate bill and title x of the house bill . conference on the two measures is pending . both bills would reshape the structure of farm commodity support , reauthorize several disaster programs , and expand crop insurance coverage . 3102 into one bill ( h.r . 3102 ) . this report compares the so - called "farm safety net" provisions in the two bills . 2642 and h.r . the two titles account for a combined $12.4 billion savings over 10 years in the senate bill ( of $17.9 billion in total savings across all titles ) and $9.8 billion in the house bill ( of $39.0 billion ) . current farm support for traditional program crops includes direct payments , the counter - cyclical price ( ccp ) program , and the average crop revenue election ( acre ) program . in both bills , approximately three - fourths of the 10-year , $46 billion - $47 billion in savings ( as estimated by the congressional budget office ) associated with the proposed elimination of current farm programs would be used to offset the cost of updating farm programs ( title i ) , enhancing crop insurance ( title xi ) , and retroactively reauthorizing four disaster programs ( beginning fy2012 ) .
the people's republic of china ( prc ) has the world's largest number of internet users , estimated at 500 million people , including an estimated 300 million people with accounts on twitter - like microblogging sites . the development of the internet and its use in china have raised u.s. congressional concerns , including those related to human rights , trade and investment , and cybersecurity . along with its extensive internal security apparatus , china also has an aggressive and multi - faceted internet censorship system . despite government efforts to limit the flow of information , chinese internet users are able to access unprecedented amounts of information , and the web has served as a lifeline for political dissidents , social activists , and civil society actors . these include the use of the internet as a u.s. policy tool for promoting freedom of expression and other rights in china ; the use of the internet by political dissidents in the prc and the political repression that such use often provokes ; and the role of u.s. internet companies in both spreading freedom in china and cooperating with prc censorship and social control efforts . congressional interest in the internet in china is linked to human rights in a number of ways . "netizens" have helped to curb some abuses of government authority and compelled some officials to conduct affairs more openly . the web also has enabled the public to engage in civil discourse on a national level . since the early 2000s , policy makers have focused on supporting censorship circumvention techniques and their use in china , protecting the privacy of chinese internet users , and discouraging or preventing u.s. information and communications technology companies from aiding beijing's censorship efforts and public surveillance system . however , the internet has proven to be less of a catalyst for democratic change in china than many foreign observers had initially expected or hoped . they have advocated a broader approach or the development of a more comprehensive and robust mix of tools and education for "cyber dissidents" and online activists in china and elsewhere , including the following: software and training to help dissidents and civil society actors communicate securely through evading surveillance , detecting spyware , and guarding against cyberattacks ; archiving and disseminating information that censors have removed from the internet ; developing means of maintaining internet access when the government has shut it down entirely ; and providing training in online communication , organization , and advocacy . u.s. efforts to promote internet freedom have broadened . some government departments have begun to solicit online public input on policy issues . according to some analysts , counter - censorship technology has proven to have a vital , but limited , impact on the promotion of freedom and democracy in the prc . in 2011 , freedom house ranked china as one of the five countries with the lowest levels of internet and "new media" freedom . in addition to the effectiveness of censorship , some studies show that the vast majority of internet users in china do not engage the medium for political purposes . furthermore , some experts argue that the internet in china has created an illusion of democracy by allowing people to vent their opinions online and by providing venues for debate on some political and policy issues .
on march 16 , 2010 , the federal communications commission ( fcc ) released connecting america: the national broadband plan . mandated by the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 ( arra , p.l . 111-5 ) , the fcc's national broadband plan ( nbp ) is a 360-page document composed of 17 chapters containing over 200 specific recommendations directed to the fcc , the executive branch ( both to individual agencies and to the administration as a whole ) , congress , and nonfederal and nongovernmental entities . accordingly , the nbp identified significant gaps in broadband availability and adoption in the united states , and in order to address those gaps and other challenges , the nbp set six specific goals to be achieved by the year 2020 . the arra mandated that the nbp should "seek to ensure that all people of the united states have access to broadband capability. . 6: to ensure that america leads in the clean energy economy , every american should be able to use broadband to track and manage their real - time energy consumption . this report does not address the appropriateness of those goals or the ongoing debate over the best ways to reach those goals . currently , the 113 th congress and the fcc are initiating , developing , and / or overseeing a number of telecommunications policies and programs including universal service reform and a number of spectrum and wireless policy initiatives . 2: the united states should lead the world in mobile innovation , with the fastest and most extensive wireless networks of any nation . 5: to ensure the safety of the american people , every first responder should have access to a nationwide , wireless , interoperable broadband public safety network . 3: every american should have affordable access to robust broadband service , and the means and skills to subscribe if they so choose . these goals are as follows: goal no . 4: every american community should have affordable access to at least 1 gigabit per second broadband service to anchor institutions such as schools , hospitals , and government buildings . rather , this report — with three years having passed since release of the nbp — looks at each of these goals and examines available data and activities which might indicate the nation's progress towards meeting them . given that those policies and programs are intended to help the nation reach many of the goals set by the nbp , the extent to which the nbp goals are met will likely be a part of the ongoing debate over many of these issues . issues include congressional oversight of the fcc's efforts to establish the connect america fund and its mobility and remote areas component funds as part of universal service fund reform ; congressional oversight of the fcc's efforts to expand the lifeline program by allowing subsidies to low - income americans to be used for broadband , and to modify the rural health care and schools and libraries ( e - rate ) programs , also part of universal service fund reform ; congressional and fcc consideration of spectrum policies intended to make more spectrum available for wireless broadband ; congressional oversight of the development , construction , and implementation of firstnet , a nationwide broadband network designed to meet public safety communications needs ; congressional oversight of arra broadband grant and loan programs and reauthorization of broadband loan programs in the 2013 farm bill ; and congressional consideration of possibly revising the current regulatory framework established by the 1996 telecommunications act ( and its underlying statute , the communications act of 1934 ) in response to the convergence of telecommunications providers and markets and the transition to an internet protocol ( ip ) based network .
in the wake of the 2008 financial crisis and the perception that the unregulated over - the - counter ( otc ) derivatives market contributed to systemic risk , the dodd - frank act ( p.l . 111-203 ) sought to remake the otc market in the image of the regulated futures exchanges . nevertheless , such firms have continued to be concerned that the act could impose indirect costs on them , or that the rulemaking process by the commodity futures trading commission ( cftc ) and securities and exchange commission ( sec ) could do so . derivative contracts are an array of financial instruments with one feature in common: their value is linked to , or derives from , changes in some underlying variable , such as the price of a physical commodity , a stock index , or an interest rate . derivatives contracts — futures contracts , options , and swaps — gain or lose value as the underlying rates or prices change , even though the holder may not actually own the underlying asset . swaps that are cleared are also subject to trading on an exchange , or an exchange - like "swap execution facility" ( sef ) regulated by either the cftc or the sec , in the case of security - based swaps . when derivatives are cleared , the size of a cleared position is limited by the firm's ability to post capital to cover its potential losses . many nonfinancial firms complained during the debate over the dodd - frank act that their use of derivatives posed no systemic threat and thus they should not be subjected to the cost of clearing these otc derivatives . in the dodd - frank act , some of the crucial reforms included a requirement that swap contracts be cleared through a central counterparty regulated by one or more federal agencies . while the clearing of derivatives helps to address systemic concerns , it also imposes the cost of posting margin on those who trade derivatives . clearinghouses require traders to put down cash ( called initial margin ) at the time they open a contract to cover potential losses , and they require subsequent deposits ( called maintenance margin ) to cover actual losses to the position . in addition , concern about derivatives has been fueled by sharp rises in commodity prices — particularly oil — in 2008 and early 2011 . one well - known example of such an uncapitalized exposure includes the case of aig , which sold about $1.8 trillion worth of credit default swaps guaranteeing payment if certain mortgage - backed securities defaulted or experienced other "credit events. . for example , in 2009 the staff of the permanent subcommittee on investigations of the senate committee on homeland security and government affairs found that excessive speculation has had "undue" influence on wheat price movements and in the natural gas market . as a result of these concerns , the dodd - frank act in section 723 includes a broad exemption from the clearing requirement for firms that are primarily nonfinancial in nature . a 2011 report by the minority staff of the house committee on oversight and government reform argued that "addressing excessive speculation offers the single most significant opportunity to reduce the price of gas for american consumers. .
the u.s. will generally defer levying a tax on this income until it is brought back ( repatriated ) to the united states , although the countries where american companies operate may tax this income at the time it is earned . american based companies reported earning $938 billion in profits overseas in 2008 ( most recent data ) . the united states' method for taxing american based companies gives rise to two principal issues in the international tax debate . first , american companies can use tax deferral and other techniques to avoid or delay taxes by moving profits out of high - tax countries ( or out of the u.s. ) and into low - tax countries with little corresponding change in business operations , a practice known as "profit shifting. . for example , economist kimberly clausing has estimated that profit shifting by american companies cost the government between $57 billion and $90 billion in lost revenue in 2008 . for example , the senate permanent subcommittee on investigations held a hearing in september 2012 on the methods companies use to shift profits and possible options for curbing such behavior . second , the ability to defer taxes on income earned abroad allows american companies to reinvest earnings in foreign markets and expand business operations alongside foreign counterparts . 2669 , s. 1346 , s. 2075 ) , as well as part of broader reform proposals in the 112 th congress , including s. 727 ( senators wyden , begich , and coats ) , s. 2091 ( senator enzi ) , and a house ways and means "discussion draft" ( representative camp ) . the findings of this report are in agreement with a large body of economic research that has found evidence that american companies are shifting profits in an attempt to reduce their tax liabilities and that u.s. tax revenues suffer as a result . profit shifting has also been the specific target of several bills that were introduced in the 112 th congress ( h.r . data on the activities of american based companies with overseas operations is analyzed to understand the degree to which , if any , profit shifting may be occurring . witnesses included irs officials , academics , private tax consultants , and executives from the tax departments at two american companies ( hewlett - packard and microsoft ) . employing a different approach than clausing and sullivan , professors charles christian and thomas schultz have estimated that on net $87 billion was shifted out of the u.s. in 2001 , which , at a 35% tax rate would imply a revenue loss of about $30 billion . the issue of profit shifting has also attracted the attention of foreign policymakers . the analysis appears to show that american companies report earning profits in tax haven or tax preferred countries that , when compared to more traditional economies , appear to be disproportionate to hiring and capital investment in those countries . a number of media outlets have also recently published stories which report that companies such as apple , cisco , facebook , google , and microsoft may be using sophisticated tax planning techniques to shift profits to low tax countries and lower their u.s. tax liabilities .
this report describes the rules related to eligibility for snap benefits and the rules related to the issuance and use of benefits . snap is authorized by the food and nutrition act of 2008 . the supplemental nutrition assistance program ( snap ) , formerly called the food stamp program , is designed primarily to increase the food purchasing power of eligible low - income households to a point where they can buy a nutritionally adequate low - cost diet . this law , formerly the food stamp act of 1977 , has since 1973 been reauthorized by the "farm bill," omnibus legislation that also typically includes the reauthorization of other federal agricultural policies and programs . snap was most recently authorized by the 2014 farm bill ( agricultural act of 2014 ; p.l . the u.s. department of agriculture's food and nutrition service ( usda - fns ) administers snap . 113-79 ) for further discussion of the nutrition program policy changes . 110-246 ) changed the name of the program from the food stamp program to snap and revised the name of the governing law from the food stamp act to the food and nutrition act . the food , conservation , and energy act of 2008 ( "2008 farm bill," p.l . see crs report r43332 , snap and related nutrition provisions of the 2014 farm bill ( p.l . state names for the program may vary ; some states continue to name their programs "food stamps," while others have switched to snap or maintain another name . categorical eligibility provides states with the ability to modify federal financial eligibility rules . snap benefits are available for households that meet federal financial eligibility tests for limited monthly income and liquid assets . although a detailed framework of federal law and regulation exists , a robust framework of state options and waivers exists as well . in this way , while universal concepts of benefit eligibility and administration exist among the states , there also are many policies that vary among the states . 113-79 ) . this report will focus on the federal framework but will at times discuss state options that may cause state and local programs to vary . whether a retailer is authorized requires two general steps: ( 1 ) an application for authorization and ( 2 ) passing a usda - fns administered inspection . as of february 2018 , 42 states utilize broad - based categorical eligibility , although several do so with an added limit on liquid assets . in general , the maximum snap benefit is based upon the level of the u.s. department of agriculture's lowest cost food plan ( the thrifty food plan or tfp ) and varies by household size . however , these rules can be bypassed through the use of "categorical eligibility" for snap . to be eligible for snap , a household must fulfill requirements related to work effort and must meet citizenship and legal permanent residence tests . in the past , usda - fns required that the bonus funds be non - federal dollars ; however , the 2014 farm bill created a competitive grant program , the food insecurity nutrition incentive ( fini ) grant program , which provides limited funding for bonus incentives .
it was not until the 1980s that congress took an alternative approach to agricultural conservation through enactment of the food security act of 1985 ( p.l . the bill's more publicized provisions — the conservation reserve program ( crp ) , highly erodible land conservation ( sodbuster ) , and wetland conservation ( swampbuster ) — remain significant today . compliance violations related to the loss of federal crop insurance premium subsidies now have separate considerations from violations related to the loss of other farm program benefits . the latter two "conservation compliance" provisions require that in exchange for certain u.s. department of agriculture ( usda ) program benefits , a producer agrees to maintain a minimum level of conservation on highly erodible land and not to convert wetlands to crop production . f ederal policies and programs traditionally have offered voluntary incentives to producers to plan and apply resource - conserving practices on private lands . the agricultural act of 2014 ( 2014 farm bill , p.l . 99-198 , 1985 farm bill ) . 113-79 ) added federal crop insurance subsidies to the list of program benefits that could be lost if a producer were found to be out of compliance with conservation requirements on highly erodible land and wetlands . as the 114 th congress continues to review the implementation of farm programs , issues related to conservation compliance could be debated . since its introduction in the 1985 farm bill , conservation compliance has remained a controversial issue . the 2014 farm bill also extended limited protection for native sod in select states . these environmental gains appear to be leveling off , however , and raise questions about conservation compliance's ability to further conservation goals . how compliance is calculated , where compliance provisions apply , and traditional exemptions and variances were not amended . the 1985 farm bill created the highly erodible land conservation and wetland conservation compliance provisions , which tied various farm program benefits to conservation standards . similar to previous farm bills , the changes to conservation compliance in the 2014 farm bill debate were controversial . the highly erodible land conservation provision ( sodbuster ) introduced in the 1985 farm bill was not intended to "allow the federal government to impose demands on any farmer or rancher concerning what may be done with their land ; ... only that the federal government will no longer subsidize producers who choose to convert highly erodible land to cropland unless they also agree to install conservation system ( s ) . . most producers prefer voluntary financial incentive programs such as eqip , to policies such as conservation compliance , which discourages the degradation of private lands by restricting access to other federal benefits . as congress evaluates the implementation of the 2014 farm bill , conservation compliance might continue to generate interest . these provisions have been amended with each subsequent farm bill , including the most recent 2014 farm bill . similarly , the wetland conservation provision introduced in the 1985 farm bill does not authorize usda "to regulate the use of private , or non - federal land" ; rather , "the objective of this provision is to deny various federal benefits to those producers who choose to drain wetlands for the purpose of producing agricultural commodities. .
oversight issues include whether the department of defense ( dod ) is properly taking adversary precision strike weapons into account in its own plans and programs . use of guided rockets , artillery , mortars and other missiles ( g - ramm ) against a u.s. expeditionary force's forward operating bases ( fobs ) . congress's decisions regarding combating the proliferation of precision strike in its oversight role could be wide - ranging , substantially affecting a variety of key factors , including capabilities and funding requirements ; service force levels and missions ; technology proliferation strategy ; forward - deployed basing considerations ; level of support given to allies ; strength of u.s. influence around the globe ; and the defense industrial base . authorization and appropriations issues include whether congress should approve , reject , or modify proposed dod programs for responding to those weapons . u.s. naval forces being restricted from protecting the world's waterways by anti - access / area denial measures , such as those under development in china , which could directly affect the u.s. ability to support key allies and greatly affect international trade and commerce . some analysts state that "the united states took an early lead in exploiting the promise of precision - strike systems and the use of precision weaponry has given the united states a battlefield edge for twenty years . precision strike systems utilize projectiles , bombs , missiles , torpedoes , and other weapons that can actively correct for initial - aiming or subsequent errors by homing on their targets or aim - points after being fired , released , or launched . this report provides background information and considers issues for congress related to the worldwide proliferation of "precision strike" capabilities . the fact that this ability of the united states to project power could also diminish , possibly leaving u.s. forces — and eventually the united states itself — increasingly vulnerable to precision weapons in the hands of its adversaries , will raise a number of serious considerations for members of congress . such proliferation could lead to events such as the following: u.s. ground forces having to fight without the inherent safety of air superiority / supremacy , leaving them vulnerable to attack by enemy air forces for the first time in nearly 70 years . the proliferation of precision strike creates potential issues for congress . as precision - strike capabilities spread , will the united states see its edge erode ? . finally , should congress legislate requirements for dod to develop precision strike countermeasures and then provide funding for that research and development ? . however , these weapons are now spreading: other countries , and non - state actors , are acquiring them and developing countermeasures against them. . the following is a short list of possible further questions for congress to consider: 1 . how does the united states maintain the freedom of movement , trade routes , and global commerce that are key to the united states and world economies , as well as to u.s. national security ? . guided weapons , including the v - 1 cruise missile and v - 2 ballistic missile , but also the fritz x air - to - surface weapon , were first used in combat by germany during world war ii .
these include ( 1 ) prohibitions on certain persons based on age and on criminal history ; ( 2 ) state concealed carry laws ; and ( 3 ) state and local assault weapons bans . in 2008 , the u.s. supreme court decided district of columbia v. heller , in which the court held that the second amendment to the u.s. constitution protects an individual right to possess a firearm , unconnected with service in a militia , and the use of that firearm for traditionally lawful purposes , such as self - defense within the home . shortly afterward in mcdonald v. city of chicago , the supreme court held that the second amendment also applies to the states , but it did not further explore the scope of the second amendment . this report first discusses the standard of judicial review that the lower courts generally have fashioned to determine if a firearm law is in violation of the second amendment . although heller did not constitute "an exhaustive historical analysis ... of the full scope of the second amendment," the court noted that its decision "does not imperil every law regulating firearms," and "[does] not cast doubt [] on longstanding regulatory measures [such] as 'prohibitions on the possession of firearms by felons and the mentally ill,' 'laws forbidding the carrying of firearms in sensitive places such as schools and government buildings , or laws imposing conditions and qualifications on the commercial sale of arms.' . since heller and mcdonald , both federal and state firearms laws have been regularly challenged under the second amendment . next , the report examines select categories of firearms laws that have been challenged under the second amendment . an examination of these categories could provide some insight as to how courts might assess future firearms legislation on second amendment grounds . these include , among others , measures that would ban certain assault weapons and prohibit possession of large capacity magazines ( e.g. , s. 150 / h.r . in the 113 th congress , several gun control proposals have been introduced . 437 / s. 33 ) ; and measures that would require background checks on private transfers of firearms or ammunition ( e.g. , s. 22 / s. 174 / s. 374 / h.r . 141 ) . therefore , with respect to concealed carry laws , courts have been confronted with determining whether the second amendment's protections extend beyond the home and , if so , whether concealed carry laws substantially burden the right of self - defense . the individuals targeted by this provision include ( 1 ) persons convicted of a crime punishable by a term of imprisonment exceeding one year ; ( 2 ) fugitives from justice ; ( 3 ) individuals who are unlawful users or addicts of any controlled substance ; ( 4 ) persons legally determined to be mentally defective , or who have been committed to a mental institution ; ( 5 ) aliens illegally or unlawfully in the united states , as well as those who have been admitted pursuant to a nonimmigrant visa ; ( 6 ) individuals who have been discharged dishonorably from the armed forces ; ( 7 ) persons who have renounced united states citizenship ; ( 8 ) individuals subject to a pertinent court order ; and , finally , ( 9 ) persons who have been convicted of a misdemeanor domestic violence offense .
the u.s. department of veterans affairs ( va ) , previously named the veterans administration , has been providing veterans educational assistance ( gi bill ® ) benefits since 1944 . the newest gi bill was enacted on june 30 , 2008 , as the post - 9 / 11 veterans' educational assistance act of 2008 ( post - 9 / 11 gi bill ) , title v of the supplemental appropriations act , 2008 ( p.l . it was recognized that veterans and servicemembers would be eligible for u.s. department of education ( ed ) student financial aid benefits such as pell grants and stafford loans ; u.s. department of defense ( dod ) educational assistance ; and various state , local , and other federal benefits in addition to the basic post - 9 / 11 gi bill benefits . the benefits have been intended , at various times , to compensate for compulsory service , encourage voluntary service , prevent unemployment , provide equitable benefits to all who served , and promote military retention . in general , the benefits provide grant aid to eligible individuals enrolled in approved educational and training programs . 114-315 ) , enacted on december 16 , 2016 , extends benefit availability for some individuals and streamlined claim processing . the post - 9 / 11 veterans' educational assistance improvements act of 2010 ( improvements act ; p.l . although the va still provides benefits under several older gi bills , participation and spending for the post - 9 / 11 gi bill has represented approximately 80% or more of total gi bill participation and spending in each year since fy2013 . the veterans' access to care through choice , accountability , and transparency act of 2014 ( veterans' access to care act ; p.l . the benefits were designed to meet four main objectives: 1. provide reservists benefits equivalent to members of the regular armed forces for equivalent , though often not continuous , active duty service ; 2. ensure comprehensive educational benefits ; 3. meet military recruiting goals ; and 4. improve military retention through transferability of benefits . 114-92 ) , enacted on november 25 , 2015 , prohibits concurrent receipt of unemployment insurance and post - 9 / 11 gi bill benefits . several laws have been enacted to amend programmatic aspects of the post - 9 / 11 gi bill the supplemental appropriations act , 2009 ( p.l . the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2016 ( p.l . in fy2018 , the program is estimated to benefit almost 800,000 individuals and expend over $12 billion . 115-48 ) , also known as the forever gi bill , enacted on august 16 , 2017 , eliminates the time limitation on use of benefits , expanded eligibility , and modified benefit amounts . 112-26 ) , enacted on august 3 , 2011 , temporarily reverses one amendment of the improvements act for some individuals attending private institutions of higher learning ( ihls ) in seven states . the restoring gi bill fairness act of 2011 ( p.l . 111-377 ) , enacted on january 4 , 2011 , made several amendments to the post - 9 / 11 gi bill and other veterans' educational assistance programs .
recently , the commodity futures trading commission ( cftc ) and the u.s. department of justice ( doj ) reached settlements with barclays , in which the british bank admitted submitting false responses to the survey used to calculate libor and the euro interbank offer rate ( euribor ) to manipulate the indexes . american policymakers have a number of concerns , including the possibility that american banks that participate in the libor survey may also have attempted to manipulate the index , the effect that changes in libor can have on borrowers and lenders whose contracts reference libor to determine the interest rate of a loan , and the reliance of policymakers on libor as one of the indicators of the stability of the financial system . this report answers several common questions regarding the london interbank offer rate ( libor ) , an index representing prevailing interest rates in london money markets . libor is an index that measures the cost of funds to large global banks operating in london financial markets or with london - based counterparties . the u.s. banks on the dollar panel include bank of america , citibank , and jpmorgan chase , although all of the listed banks have significant u.s. activities . for brevity and ease of exposition , this report focuses on libor , although the manipulation and policy issues regarding euribor are similar . the federal reserve bank of new york ( frbny ) reportedly raised concerns with barclays about its libor responses . the settlement documents signed by barclays with the cftc and doj include employee emails that can be divided into three categories documenting manipulation: ( 1 ) changing the survey response for the benefit of barclays' derivatives trade positions , ( 2 ) changing the survey response to protect barclays' reputation , and ( 3 ) attempting to induce other banks to change their survey responses . or , banks could use the federal funds rate as a benchmark , but that rate is subject to changes for policy reasons , not just market conditions . it is possible for a single bank on the panel to affect the dollar libor if the bank's response would have been within the middle of the responses , or if it can change which responses are the middle responses . one estimate by staff of the federal reserve bank of cleveland found that 45% of prime adjustable rate mortgages ( arms ) and 80% of subprime arms used libor as the benchmark . differences in the type of borrower or the maturity of the loan may make other benchmarks less suitable for some purposes . for the dollar libor , the highest 4 and lowest 4 responses of the 18 banks on the panel are thrown out , and the middle 10 are averaged . because libor is meant to represent the cost of borrowing dollars by the largest banks in global financial markets , other lenders may choose libor if they believe that their own cost of funds is likely to follow a similar pattern over time . alternatives to libor for private contracts exist , but may have shortcomings . included among the documents are explanatory note ; april 11 , 2008: marketsource weekly market review ; may 6 , 2008: slide deck of presentation to u.s. treasury , "recent developments in short - term funding markets" ; may 20 , 2008: marketsource report "recent concerns regarding libor's credibility" ; june 1 , 2008: timothy f. geithner e - mail to mervyn king , copying paul tucker , with attached "recommendations for enhancing the credibility of libor" ; june 3 , 2008: mervyn king e - mail to timothy f. geithner ; and june 5 , 2008: slide deck of presentation to the interagency financial markets group meeting , "market concerns regarding libor. .
the increased interest has been driven at least in part by the federal fiscal situation and in part by the state of the economy since the recession began in 2007 . in recent years , there has been significant congressional interest in compensation of the federal workforce . issues related to the compensation of federal employees often center on the pay differential between federal workers and their private sector counterparts . for years , the annual president's pay agent ( ppa ) study , which is covered in greater detail later in this report , has shown a large wage penalty for federal workers compared to private sector workers in similar occupations . there have been several attempts in recent years to address the issue of compensation between the federal workforce and the private - sector workforce . these studies and accompanying reporting on the comparison of compensation of federal workers to private sector workers provide an indication of the disparate findings , which makes it difficult to determine how compensation of federal employees actually compares to that of workers in the private sector . a spate of recent studies , which use a different analytical approach and data sources , has partially contradicted the findings of the ppa study by concluding that at least some federal workers enjoy a wage premium over comparable private sector workers . in evaluating claims about federal pay , there appear to be two basic approaches to comparing compensation in the federal and private - sector workforces — the human capital approach and the jobs analysis approach . " ) , while others are empirical ( e.g. , what is the most appropriate model specification for the underlying data structure ? ) . any modeling of the relationship between the compensation of federal and private sector workers involves making assumptions , which in turn influence the results . this report attempts to clarify why the recent studies have arrived at different conclusions and examines limitations of the approaches employed in the different studies . based on the review of studies considered in this report , it appears there is no single study that addresses the question of compensation comparability using a widely agreed - upon methodology . the studies reviewed were chosen because they are official government studies ( president's pay agent , congressional budget office ) or have received significant attention in policy debates . these two approaches are not mutually exclusive but may be difficult to combine given data limitations . finally , there are data limitations that prevent , or at least seriously curtail , researchers from specifying models as fully as possible . that is not to say individual studies are not methodologically sound ( some are ) , but rather that the questions asked and the assumptions made are not necessarily the same across studies , which at times arrive at vastly different conclusions . in addition , the two approaches could even produce opposite results . for example , there is not a dataset available at this time that allows an analyst to combine detailed characteristics of individual workers and detailed characteristics of jobs performed in the federal and private sectors . as noted previously , to isolate the effect of sector — federal or private — on compensation , many other factors that influence compensation need to be considered ( i.e. , controlled for ) .
president george w. bush signed the postal accountability and enhancement act ( paea ; p.l . the 112 th congress is considering additional major postal reforms , including reductions in service , expansion of the usps's authority to provide products and services , and alterations to the postal employees pension and healthcare plans . 3198 ) on december 20 , 2006 . assuming congress wants to maintain the present usps model — addressing these financial challenges will require ( 1 ) improving the usps's liquidity immediately ; ( 2 ) fortifying usps's long - term revenues ; and ( 3 ) controlling the growth of usps's long - term costs , all while ( 4 ) having usps continue to provide universal postal service to the public . postal service ( usps ) , a self - supporting , independent agency of the executive branch . the proximate cause for the recent efforts at postal reform is the usps's troubled financial condition . the paea was the first broad revision of the 1970 statute that replaced the u.s. post office , a federal agency dependent upon appropriations , with the u.s . 2005 ( a ) ( 2 ) ( c ) ) . the agency has requested congress to abolish the annual rhbf payment ; permit the usps to move its workforce off the federal employee health benefits program ( fehb ) ; recalculate the usps's contributions to the civil service retirement system ( csrs ) and refund to the usps $75 billion ; recalculate the usps's contributions to the federal employees retirement system ( fers ) and refund to the usps $12 billion ; authorize the usps to override collective bargaining prohibitions on layoffs so as to enable the usps to eliminate an additional 120,000 positions by fy2015 ; require arbitrators during collective bargaining between the usps and postal unions to consider the financial condition of the usps when rendering a decision ; permit the usps to reduce mail delivery to five days per week ; increase the usps's authority to raise its prices ; and allow the usps to offer a wider range of products and services . 109-435 ; 120 stat . at present , the usps appears to be suffering from both a short - term liquidity crisis ( i.e. , dwindling cash and borrowing authority ) and a long - term structural deficit ( i.e. , stagnating revenues and rising overhead costs ) . were it not for congressional action to reduce a statutorily required payment to the usps's retirees health benefits fund ( rhbf ) , the usps would have lost an additional $9.5 billion . since fy2005 , the usps's debt has risen to $13 billion from $0 , $2 billion below its maximum statutory borrowing authority ( 39 u.s.c . in the first half of fy2012 , the usps had an operating loss of $6.4 billion , which included a $6.1 billion charge for payments due to the rhbf in fy2012 . as the usps's finances have deteriorated , its ability to absorb operating losses has been diminished . the current year has brought further losses . the agency has asked congress to enact a variety of reforms to improve the usps's financial condition .
since opening to the public on december 2 , 2008 , the capitol visitor center ( cvc ) has had more than six million visitors . added expenses were incurred because of higher - than - expected bids ; several design changes ; security upgrades following the terrorist attacks of september 11 , 2001 ; necessary changes to the air filtration system ; house and senate expansion space costs ; and extra costs associated with working around the capitol , such as security screening for the thousands of construction workers and vehicles that entered the construction site . a number of factors delayed the project's completion date and increased its cost . the cost of the center was an estimated $621 million . the square footage of the three levels of the center ( 580,000 square feet ) is nearly two - thirds that of the capitol itself ( 780,000 square feet ) . this report addresses the rationale and planning for the cvc , an overview of construction and funding , and subsequent legislation related to its operations and design . the footprint of the center covers approximately five acres ( 196,000 square feet ) and is larger than that of the capitol ( 175,000 square feet ) . unusually wet weather in 2003 , the discovery of asbestos in the part of the capitol connected to the center , and an undocumented century - old well under the construction site were unanticipated . located beneath the east front plaza , the cvc was designed to enhance the security , educational experience , and comfort of visitors to the u.s. capitol . the project's designers sought to integrate the new structure with the landscape of the capitol grounds and ultimately recreate the park - like setting intended by landscape architect frederick law olmsted sr. in his 1874 design for the site . the decision to build a subterranean facility largely invisible from an exterior perspective was made so the structure would not compete with , or detract from , the appearance and historical architectural integrity of the capitol . improvements to the screening of delivery vehicles and additional safety benefits of the center were also cited at subsequent house and senate hearings . the senate , after passing its own emancipation hall bill ( s. 1679 ) on november 15 , 2007 , agreed to the house bill by unanimous consent on december 6 . in addition to serving as the security screening entry for visitors to the capitol , the center was designed to provide improved accessibility for disabled persons and enhanced visitor services and educational exhibits . the september 11 , 2001 , terrorist attacks at the pentagon and in new york , and the subsequent discovery of anthrax in congressional office buildings , also highlighted concerns regarding the potential vulnerabilities of the capitol and the need for improved security on capitol hill . for information on the use of the capitol visitor center space for official events , see crs report rl34619 , use of the capitol rotunda , capitol grounds , and emancipation hall: concurrent resolutions , 101st to 112th congress , by matthew eric glassman and [author name scrubbed] . president george w. bush signed the bill into law ( p.l .
carbon capture and sequestration ( or storage ) — known as ccs — is a physical process that involves capturing manmade carbon dioxide ( co 2 ) at its source and storing it before its release to the atmosphere . an integrated ccs system would include three main steps: ( 1 ) capturing co 2 at its source and separating it from other gases ; ( 2 ) purifying , compressing , and transporting the captured co 2 to the sequestration site ; and ( 3 ) injecting the co 2 into subsurface geological reservoirs . congress has appropriated nearly $7 billion in total since fy2008 for ccs research , development , and demonstration ( rd&d ) at doe's office of fossil energy: nearly $3.5 billion in total annual appropriations ( including fy2015 ) and $3.4 billion from the american recovery and reinvestment act ( p.l . the u.s. department of energy ( doe ) has pursued research and development of aspects of the three main steps leading to an integrated ccs system since 1997 . u.s. environmental protection agency ( epa ) proposed rules and guidelines for reducing greenhouse gas ( ghg ) emissions from new and existing coal - fired power plants have been a focal point of discussion in congress about ccs .  ( in part , the roadmap was intended to lay out a path for rapid technological development of ccs so that the united states could continue to use fossil fuels despite potential carbon restrictions. ) . legislation regarding ccs in the last congress mainly focused on two issues: stopping or slowing implementation of the epa ghg rules and guidelines and providing federal incentives to accelerate the demonstration and development of ccs at commercial scales . the recovery act funding also was likely intended to help doe achieve its rd&d goals as outlined in the department's 2010 rd&d ccs roadmap . the large and rapid influx of funding for industrial - scale ccs projects from the recovery act was intended to accelerate development and demonstration of ccs in the united states . futuregen had experienced delays and multiple changes of scope and design since its inception in 2003 , and on february 3 , 2015 , doe announced that it was suspending the project . ccs could reduce the amount of co 2 emitted to the atmosphere from the continued use of fossil fuels at power plants and other large , industrial facilities . although doe has pursued aspects of ccs rd&d since 1997 , the energy policy act of 2005 ( p.l . 111-5 ; enacted february 17 , 2009 , hereinafter referred to as the recovery act ) . the energy independence and security act of 2007 ( eisa , p.l . 110-140 ) amended the energy policy act of 2005 to include , among other provisions , authorization for seven large - scale ccs demonstration projects ( in addition to futuregen ) that would integrate the carbon capture , transportation , and sequestration steps . however , the future deployment of ccs may take a different course if the major components of the doe program follow a path similar to doe's futuregen project . this report aims to provide a snapshot of the doe ccs program , including its current funding levels , together with some discussion of the program's achievements and prospects for success in meeting its stated goals .
sourcing policy refers , generally , to determining which sector — public ( government ) or private — will perform an agency's function ( s ) . efforts to address this issue , and related questions , have been the subject of the federal government's sourcing policy since at least the 1950s . both federal employees and contractor employees have valid roles to play in performing the work of the federal government . this combined workforce is known as a blended workforce . sourcing policy is not so much a product of coordinated planning and implementation as it is an amalgamation of statutory provisions , policy letters , administrative directives , and guidance issued by various presidential administrations . sourcing policy encompasses two major strains . sourcing policy has been at the root of contentious debates , which may complicate the somewhat murky picture . determining which sector will perform which functions , including determining when federal employee performance is , or should be , required can be challenging , however . this brief overview of the report is provided to assist in navigating the subject of sourcing policy . notably , the federal government's short - term and long - term responses to the terrorist attacks of september 11 , 2001 , involved a significant growth in service contracting . delving into the history of sourcing policy is necessary for understanding the strain that emerged in the 1950s , and for providing context for the strain that emerged during president barack obama's administration . the federal government invaded afghanistan and then iraq ; added a new department tasked with safeguarding the homeland ; and embarked upon a raft of new initiatives and programs involving , for example , intelligence , transportation security , and cybersecurity . the juxtaposition of the bush administration's competitive sourcing initiative and the obama administration's multi - sector workforce management effort aids in understanding different , yet potentially complementary , facets of sourcing policy . the following section examines the two strains of sourcing policy: competitive sourcing and multi - sector workforce management . the current circular ( or revision ) was released in may 2003 . the latter strain has not necessarily displaced , or replaced , the former strain , though it might not always be clear to outside observers what actions agencies are taking , or are expected to take . the strain that emerged first , with the issuance of three bureau of the budget ( bob ) bulletins in the 1950s , emphasizes governmental reliance on the private sector for the provision of goods and services . thus , the second strain of sourcing policy that has emerged focuses on ensuring that the federal government has the best , or most appropriate , mix of federal employees and contractor employees . generally , the term introduced by the administration of president george w. bush — competitive sourcing — is associated with this strain of sourcing policy . policy issues that may be of interest to the 112 th congress are also discussed . the complexity might be due , at least in part , to the ad hoc fashion in which sourcing policy has evolved and the mix of government documents involved . determining who should do the work of the federal government became more challenging as , for example , certain practices were called into question ( e.g. , using companies to conduct passenger screening at airports ) ; controversy swirled around some events that involved private security contractors ( e.g. , private security guards reportedly shot iraqi civilians in 2007 ) ; and concerns surfaced that , in the rush to expand its capabilities , the federal government was at risk of having contractor employees perform inherently governmental work .
in accordance with united states law , the u.s. government places conditions on the use of defense articles and defense services transferred by it to foreign recipients . violation of these conditions can lead to the suspension of deliveries or termination of the contracts for such defense items , among other things . the arms export control act ( aeca ) , as amended , authorizes the transfer by sale or lease of united states origin defense articles and services through the government - to - government foreign military sales ( fms ) program or through the licensed commercial sales process . on occasion , the president has indicated that such violations by foreign countries "may" have occurred , raising the prospect that termination of deliveries to or imposition of other penalties on such nations might take place . however , since the major revision of u.s. arms export law in 1976 , neither the president nor the congress have actually determined that a "substantial violation" did occur thus necessitating the termination of deliveries or sales or other penalties set out in section 3 of the arms export control act . this report reviews the pertinent sections of u.s. law governing permissible uses of u.s. - origin defense equipment and services by foreign nations , presidential and congressional options for dealing with such violations , and illustrative actions previously taken by the united states in response to possible violations . section 3 ( c ) of the arms export control act further sets out the circumstances under which a nation may lose ( a ) its u.s. foreign military financing , ( b ) its loan guarantees for purchases of u.s. defense articles and services , ( c ) its rights to have previously purchased u.s. defense articles or services delivered , ( d ) its rights to have previously made agreements for the sale of u.s. defense articles or services carried out . section 3 ( a ) ( 2 ) of the aeca specifically provides that to be eligible to purchase defense articles and services from the united states: ...[a] country or international organization shall have agreed not ... to use or permit the use of [a defense] article or related training or other defense service for purposes other than those for which furnished , unless the consent of the president has first been obtained... . section 3 ( a ) of the arms export control act sets the general standards for countries or international organizations to be eligible to receive united states defense articles and defense services provided under this act . section 3 ( c ) ( 1 ) ( a ) of the arms export control act stipulates , in part , that: no credits ( including participations in credits ) may be issued and no guarantees may be extended for any foreign country under this act as hereinafter provided , if such country uses defense articles or defense services furnished under this act , or any predecessor act , in substantial violation ( either in terms of the quantities or in terms of the gravity of the consequences regardless of the quantities involved ) of any agreement entered into pursuant to any such act ... by using such articles or services for a purpose not authorized under section 4 or , if such agreement provides that such articles and services may only be used for purposes more limited than those authorized under section 4 for a purpose not authorized under such agreement... .
the current fiscal environment , including concern over the federal deficit , has heightened congressional interest in the costs of disasters , leading to proposals to offset some portion of disaster assistance spending by implementing new budgetary mechanisms . in general , when a request is submitted , representatives from the federal emergency management agency ( fema ) meet with the state and compile a preliminary damage assessment ( pda ) . when a state is overwhelmed by an emergency or major disaster , the governor may request assistance from the federal government . congressional concern over the rising number of declarations is primarily focused on their associated costs because once declared , the majority of disaster relief costs ( at least 75% ) are shifted from the state to the federal government . the president has the authority to make the declaration or deny the request . for example , are incidents increasing or is the federal government being more generous in its interpretation of disaster or emergency criteria ? . under the stafford act , the primary federal agency responsible for coordinating the federal response is fema , located within the department of homeland security ( dhs ) . related criticisms and questions have been voiced concerning the declarations process . addressing the issue may be conceptualized as two approaches: ( 1 ) limiting the number of declarations and ( 2 ) limiting the amount of spending that can occur after a declaration has been made . the average number of major disaster declarations issued per year in the 1960s ( the first full decade for declarations ) was roughly 18.6 . the increase in declarations has led some critics to argue that thresholds for issuing major disaster declarations are set too low , allowing too many "marginal incidents" to receive a declaration . if the increase in the number of declarations is a concern for the federal costs that accompany them ( or for other reasons which have been discussed in this report ) , congress may choose to address the issue . today the principal authority governing federal assistance for emergencies and major disasters in the united states is the robert t. stafford relief and emergency assistance act ( p.l . the federal government's openness in describing factors considered for declarations may have led some state officials to believe they have met the factors under consideration and are entitled to support . in comparison to when disaster declarations were first introduced in 1953 , the average number of declarations issued per year has increased . fema then makes a recommendation to the president concerning whether a declaration should be issued . over the years , the disaster relief act has undergone a series of reforms and amendments , but the president's authority to issue declarations has been retained . calendar year 2011 was the busiest year on record with 97 major disaster declarations . many of the policy options described in this report would shift a greater share of disaster - related costs to states and localities . if the increase is tied to state policies then mechanisms such as the use of loans or other incentives could be implemented to help decrease the number of state requests for assistance . this report discusses a wide range of factors that might be contributing to the increase in declarations and provides policy options that might reduce the number of declarations and some of their associated costs .
various water supply shortages and greater demand for water supply related to energy development projects have brought increased attention to disputes over the control of water resources across the country . for example , new applications of energy extraction technologies have increased oil and gas production from shale formations in various regions of the united states . it examines the relevant constitutional and statutory authority of the corps to operate federal water projects , including the water supply act of 1958 ( wsa ) and the flood control act of 1944 ( 1944 fca ) . in particular , the demand for water supply to develop energy in the northern plains states has raised controversy over water use in the missouri river basin . this dual exercise of authority over water resources has led to questions over the corps' proposed actions at its missouri river reservoirs . although the federal government has fairly broad authority related to water resources management , water allocation has traditionally been a matter left to the states , which administer their own water rights systems . it also analyzes state authority over water within state boundaries and discusses the relationship between federal and state authority , including examples of congressional actions that have addressed competing federal and state roles regarding water resources . access to water for energy development purposes has created tension between federal and state interests when stakeholders seek access to freshwater from federal water projects . the corps has broad constitutional authority for its water projects . although the federal government has broad authority to regulate water , it historically has deferred to the states' authority regarding allocation of water resources within each state . thus , a state's authority over its waters is "subject to the power of congress to control the waters for the purpose of commerce. . accordingly , if congress authorizes the corps to impound water at one of its projects for purposes related to commerce , the federal authority over the water supersedes the state's authority for those purposes . in recent years , the u.s. army corps of engineers ( corps ) , which controls lake sakakawea and five other mainstem missouri river reservoirs , has identified surplus water in these reservoirs and considered how it would contract with industrial and municipal users interested in the temporary use of this water . one method of extraction , known as hydraulic fracturing , typically injects a pressurized freshwater - based liquid mixture into wells to fracture shale formations containing the oil or gas . on one hand , the corps' constitutional authority to manage its projects for a variety of authorized purposes is broad ; it has been delegated authority from congress to store water for m&i purposes ; and it has been authorized to charge for surplus water stored at the project . the supreme court historically has held that the corps' authority derives from the commerce clause and the significant interest in promoting navigation throughout the nation's waterways . this issue has been of particular interest at lake sakakawea , a reservoir created by the federal garrison dam along the missouri river in north dakota . on the other hand , it may also be argued that the corps' constitutional authority over water stored at its projects extends only to the amount of water necessary to meet the purposes of that project and not to any surplus water .
the report is split into two main parts: programs administered by the u.s. department of agriculture's food and nutrition service ( usda - fns ) , and programs administered by the administration on aging ( aoa ) , within the u.s. department of health and human services' administration for community living ( hhs - acl ) . this report gives an overview of the major federal programs that provide food assistance within the united states and the territories . within the usda - fns section are two subsections of programs: farm bill programs ( table 1 ) , and the special supplemental nutrition program for women , infants , and children ( wic ) and child nutrition programs ( table 2 ) . the report begins by discussing common concepts and themes across the network of domestic food assistance programs . usda's food and nutrition service ( fns ) administers domestic food assistance programs authorized in the farm bill ( table 1 ) , as well as wic and child nutrition programs ( table 2 ) . within the hhs - acl section , table 3 provides an overview of the older americans act ( oaa ) nutrition programs . 114-144 ) , which extended the act's authorization of appropriations for most programs , including senior nutrition , through fy2019 . the last oaa reauthorization occurred in 2016 , when the 114 th congress enacted the older americans act amendments of 2016 ( p.l . the administration on aging ( aoa ) within the u.s. department of health and human service ( hhs ) , administration for community living ( acl ) administers domestic food assistance programs authorized under the older americans act ( oaa ) . the tables within this report are intended to provide summary information , which can help illustrate the ways in which domestic food assistance programs are both similar and different . with respect to snap ( formerly known as the food stamp program ) , state agencies and legislatures have a number of options and waivers that can affect snap program operations from state to state . older individuals who meet certain income and other requirements may also be eligible for other domestic food assistance programs administered by usda , such as supplemental nutrition assistance program ( snap ) , the senior farmers' market nutrition program ( sfmnp ) , and the commodity supplemental food program ( csfp ) . the 2016 oaa reauthorization made two changes to the nutrition services programs . the programs in this report that include usda commodity foods are the emergency food assistance program ( tefap ) , commodity supplemental food program ( csfp ) , national school lunch program ( nslp ) , summer food service program ( sfsp ) , and child and adult care food program ( cacfp ) . second , where feasible , it added language for states to ensure that the nutrition project encourages the use of locally grown foods in meals programs and identifies potential partnerships and contracts with local producers and providers of locally grown foods . first , it required states to "utilize" the expertise of a dietician or other individuals with equivalent education and training in nutrition science , or an individual with comparable expertise ( rather than "solicit" ) .
the centers for medicare & medicaid services ( cms ) is the division of the department of health and human services ( hhs ) that is responsible for administering medicare , medicaid , and the children's health insurance program ( chip ) among other activities . the budget informs congress of the president's overall federal fiscal policy based on proposed spending levels , revenues , and deficit ( or surplus ) levels . the president's budget may also include legislative proposals for spending and tax policy changes . federal law requires the president to submit an annual budget to congress no later than the first monday in february . with the medicare physician payment adjustment , the estimated impact of the legislative proposals , and the estimated savings from program integrity investments ( $0.6 billion ) , the president's budget estimates cms's net outlays will be $829.4 billion in fy2013 , which is an increase of $72.3 billion , or 9.5% , over the net outlays for fy2012 . president obama submitted his fy2013 budget to congress on february 13 , 2012 . the budget request lays out the president's relative priorities for federal programs , such as how much should be spent on defense , education , health , and other federal programs . the president's fy2013 budget includes a number of assumptions and proposed legislative changes to cms programs and activities . the explanations of the president's legislative proposals are grouped by the following program areas: medicare , medicaid , program integrity , and health insurance programs . the president's fy2013 budget proposes to make a number of legislative changes to medicare , medicaid , program management , and health insurance programs . the president's budget estimates this adjustment will increase cms's net outlays by $9.2 billion in fy2012 and $25.6 billion in fy2013 . then , for each legislative proposal included in the president's budget , this report provides a description of current law and the president's proposal . the president's budget estimates that if these legislative proposals were implemented , cms's total net outlays would increase by $0.6 billion in fy2012 and decrease by $4.6 billion in fy2013 . this is an increase of $61.3 billion , or 11.7% , over the estimated net outlays for fy2012 . the discussion begins with the fy2013 budget baseline ( i.e. , an estimate of spending under current laws and current policy ) for cms and explains how much the president's budget amends the baseline through assumptions and legislative proposals to arrive at the president's fy2013 budget for cms . some are program expansions , and others are designed to reduce federal spending . the president's budget estimates that under current law cms mandatory and discretionary net outlays would amount to $809.0 billion in fy2013 . with this adjustment , cms's total net outlays are estimated to be $834.6 billion in fy2013 . the president's fy2013 budget increases the baseline for medicare spending by assuming that congress will block a proposed reduction in physician payments . for budgetary purposes , cms is divided into the following sections: medicare , medicaid , chip , program integrity , state grants and demonstrations , health insurance programs , the center for medicare and medicaid innovation ( cmmi ) , and program management .
security - related implications are of concern in the lead - up to a presidential election . on a given day the outgoing administration has the ability to change the policies of a nation and possibly affect the international security environment , yet the following day the president and the national security leadership team may be replaced by a new set of leaders who could have very different strategy and policy goals . a prospective presidential transition period — ranging from candidate's campaign - related activities through placement of new administration personnel — is a unique time in american politics and holds the promise of opportunity as well as a real or perceived vulnerability to the nation's security interests . these concerns are present when it is known there will be a change of administration or in cases where the sitting president is running for reelection against an opponent vying for the office . for example , according to a 2008 presidential transition - related report provided to the department of homeland security ( dhs ) by the homeland security advisory committee ( hsac ) , "briefings , research , and recent history have provided an appreciation of the potential vulnerabilities during transition periods . presidential transitions during times of global uncertainty , u.s. involvement in military operations , and risks to national security - related activities are not unique to the 2012-2013 presidential election period ( see appendix a ) . unlike other man - made incidents that may occur with little warning , the presidential election period offers a broadly defined time frame in which an enemy of the united states may decide to undertake an incident of national security significance to manipulate the electoral process or change the nation's foreign and domestic policies . history shows that some state enemies purposefully select periods of government transition to undertake significant acts of violence with a desire to disrupt a peaceful transfer of power ( see appendix b ) . other activities that the current and incoming administrations and congress may wish to consider undertaking during the presidential transition period include pursuing public outreach efforts to discuss possible risks to the nation , involving the national security representatives of presidential candidates in all transition - related discussions , establishing joint advisory councils responsible for addressing all transition - related risks , requiring the director of national intelligence ( dni ) to undertake efforts to support the nation's awareness of risks , reflecting the national security priorities of the newly elected administration in the upcoming budget , passing fiscal year appropriations without undue delay , quickly assigning newly elected and existing members of congress to committees focused on national security , holding hearings comprised of national security experts to gather ideas on prospective u.s. national security policies and goals , and holding hearings soon after the inauguration of the new president to determine the administration's national security - related priorities . the transition - related actions or inactions of the outgoing and incoming administration may have a long - lasting affect on a new president's ability to effectively safeguard u.s. interests and may also affect the legacy of the outgoing president . this political dynamic , coupled with the inherent uncertainty accompanying a presidential transfer of power , may provide an opportunity for those who wish to harm u.s. security interests .
recent congressional interest in u.s. energy policy has focused in part on ways through which the united states could secure more economical and reliable petroleum resources both domestically and internationally . canadian oil sands account for about 54% of canada's total crude oil production , and that number is expected to rise from its current level of 1.9 million barrels per day ( mbd ) in 2013 to 4.8 mbd by 2030 . many forecasters identify petroleum products refined from canadian oil sands as one possible solution . these impacts may include increased water and natural gas use , disturbance of mined land , effects on wildlife and water quality , trans - boundary air pollution , and emissions of greenhouse gases ( ghg ) during extraction and processing . increased production from canadian oil sands , however , is not without controversy , as many have expressed concern over the potential environmental impacts . while ghg emissions and other air quality issues originating in the upstream sectors of canada's petroleum industry may not directly impact u.s. national emissions inventories or u.s. ghg reporting per se , many environmental stakeholders and policy makers have noted that the increased use of more emission - intensive resources in the united states may have negative consequences for both u.s. and global energy and environmental policy . further , the infrastructure to produce , upgrade , refine , and transport the resource from canadian oil sands reserves to the united states is in place , and additional infrastructure projects — such as the keystone xl pipeline — have been proposed . the u.s. department of state ( dos ) , in response to comments on the 2010 draft supplementary environmental impact statement ( 2010 draft eis ) for the keystone xl pipeline project ( which would connect oil sands production facilities in the western canadian sedimentary basin with refinery facilities in the united states ) , commissioned a contractor to analyze the life - cycle ghg emissions associated with these resources in comparison to other reference crudes . life - cycle assessment ( lca ) is an analytic method used for evaluating and comparing the environmental impacts of various products ( in this case , the climate change implications of hydrocarbon resources ) . 161.12 ) nor executive orders 13337 and 12114 ( environmental effects abroad of major federal activities ) legally require that an eis include an assessment of environmental activities outside the united states . in this way , lca can serve to direct policy makers' attention to those areas in resource development that present the greatest challenges to ghg emissions control , and hence , the biggest potential benefits if adequately managed . in accordance with this process , dos released a revised draft supplementary eis ( draft eis ) for the revised project on march 1 , 2013 , and a revised final supplementary eis ( final eis ) on january 31 , 2014 , including an assessment of the indirect cumulative impacts and life - cycle ghg emissions of canadian oil sands crudes . they contend that the lack of transport infrastructure and the price discount it occasions has already affected production of the oil sands and , if continued , would further depress investment and development in the region .
the public health service act ( phsa ) establishes authority for a wide range of activities that directly or indirectly affect the health of the u.s. population . for example , institutions may receive title vii grants to implement residency programs at medical and dental schools ; recruitment and retention initiatives in community - based educational settings ; and health workforce data collection activities within state health departments . the aca also created the national health care workforce commission for federal health workforce planning , and state health care workforce development grants . many title vii programs and activities were reauthorized in the patient protection and affordable care act ( aca ; p.l . it supports institutions to expand the capacity to build and sustain the health workforce through training programs , mainly through grant awards and contractual agreements . in title vii , health professions education , the phsa supports an education and training pipeline for professionals and pre - professionals to work in the medical , dental , public health , and allied health professions . the medicare direct gme program is the largest source of federal support for health workforce development , followed by the medicaid gme payments ( both state and federal ) , which were $1.1 billion in fy2011 . the aca also made sweeping changes to health care financing and delivery by restructuring the private health insurance market and setting minimum standards for health insurance coverage . health policy experts expect this mandate combined with additional changes will increase health insurance coverage to be accompanied by a likely increased demand for health services and health care providers . title vii represents one among several federal efforts to support the development of the health workforce . for example , in fy2012 , the medicare graduate medical education ( gme ) payments contribute approximately $8.9 billion annually to residents' salaries , teaching compensation , and other direct costs . title vii provides support to both institutions and individuals . by comparison , title vii programs contributed approximately $266 million in fy2012 ( the president's fy2014 request is for approximately $212 million ) to education and training activities for physicians , physician assistants , dentists , therapists , and other health professionals . medicare and medicaid gme payments support education and training mainly for physicians . beginning in 2014 , the aca mandates that most u.s. citizens obtain health insurance or pay a penalty . it supports individuals by providing them with direct assistance to support academic preparation in the health professions through scholarships , loans , loan repayments , and fellowships . 111-148 , as amended ) . the text box below highlights other examples of federal support to develop or sustain the health workforce . these authorities , enacted in various statutes , are established to achieve different purposes and consequently receive different levels of support . it is divided into two major sections . title vii authorizes a broad range of programs and activities to develop and sustain the education and training pipeline for the health care workforce . this report describes programs and activities authorized in title vii of the phsa . a state partnership may reserve no less than 60% of total funds to make competitive grant awards to regional partnerships .
as the largest single payer of ltss in the united states , medicaid ltss spending in 2015 ( combined federal and state ) totaled $149.4 billion and accounted for 42.5% of all ltss expenditures ( $351.8 billion ) . medicaid plays a key role in covering long - term services and supports ( ltss ) to eligible aged and disabled individuals . an estimated 4.1 million medicaid beneficiaries ( or 5.9% ) of the 68.5 million total enrolled medicaid population received ltss in fy2013 . in 2015 , medicaid ltss accounted for 31% of all medicaid spending despite the fact that ltss recipients represent a relatively small share of the total medicaid population . however , states have a range of options that allow ltss coverage of home and community - based services ( hcbs ) for medicaid beneficiaries based on need , and that allow states to target such coverage to particular groups of individuals ( i.e. , older adults and individuals with physical disabilities , or individuals with a specific disease or condition such as hiv / aids ) . in more recent decades , federal medicaid statutory authority has expanded to assist states in increasing and diversifying their medicaid ltss coverage to include optional hcbs . for example , the addition of the section 1915 ( c ) hcbs waiver to medicaid law in 1981 and subsequent statutory amendments that created new medicaid state plan benefit options have allowed states to further the provision of hcbs . ltss are also a substantial portion of spending within the medicaid program relative to those served . moreover , the share of medicaid ltss spending for hcbs has nearly tripled over time , from 18% of medicaid ltss spending in fy1995 to over half ( 53% ) of total medicaid ltss spending in fy2014 . the original 1965 medicaid law established that eligible medicaid beneficiaries are entitled to nursing facility care . about half of states that reported activities to expand hcbs plan to implement or expand the financing and delivery of medicaid ltss through managed care arrangements ( 19 states in fy2016 and 18 states in fy2017 ) . federal law requires that state medicaid programs cover certain ltss for eligible beneficiaries , such as nursing facility care . one important issue for medicaid ltss coverage is its perceived bias in favor of institutional care . subsequent legislative and administrative activities to expand medicaid hcbs , in part , were prompted by the u.s. supreme court decision in olmstead v. l.c . medicaid funds ltss for eligible beneficiaries in both institutional settings and home and community - based settings , though the portfolio of services offered differs substantially by state .  , which held that the institutionalization of people who could be cared for in community settings was a violation of title ii of the americans with disabilities act ( ada ) . these flexibilities under medicaid law have led to widespread variation in state medicaid ltss benefit packages offered to elderly and disabled individuals . specifically , the aca established or extended several medicaid state plan options ( section 1915 ( i ) hcbs state plan option and section 1915 ( k ) community first choice state plan option ) . a discussion of aca's changes to medicaid law with respect to medicaid ltss coverage options is also provided .
as a result , the federal debt held by the public increased from 39% of gross domestic product ( gdp ) in 2008 to 72% of gdp in 2013 , which was its highest share of gdp since after world war ii . the congressional research service ( crs ) does not take a position on the best way to reduce the deficit . the federal budget has been in deficit ( i.e. , spending has exceeded revenues ) since 2002 , and deficits were significantly larger from 2009 to 2012 than in any other year since world war ii . congress has expressed interest in examining policy options to reduce the deficit . at some point , spending cuts or revenue increases will be needed to restore fiscal sustainability , although the recent decline in the deficit has provided policymakers more flexibility on the timing of these changes . the fiscal outlook has improved significantly since then , although the budget is projected to remain in deficit under current policy . this report first discusses the size of projected budget deficits , then discusses how much the deficit would need to be reduced to return to long - term sustainability , then analyzes alternative time frames for reducing the deficit , and finally discusses broad policy choices for reducing the deficit . in the past , persistent deficits have proven sustainable because periods of moderate growth in the debt relative to gdp have been followed by periods when debt fell relative to gdp ( typically , because the debt grew more slowly than gdp ) . from 1946 to 2008 , budget deficits averaged 1.7% of gdp and exceeded 5% of gdp only three times ( equaling 7.2% in 1946 , 6.0% in 1983 , and 5.1% of gdp in 1985 ) . in 2014 , the baseline deficit is projected to be $492 billion or 2.8% of gdp . this increase is projected to be gradual — the debt does not increase relative to gdp until 2019 , is five percentage points higher by 2024 , and reaches 100% of gdp by 2036 or sooner . current policy is unsustainable because projected deficits are large enough to cause the federal debt to continuously grow faster than national income . despite the improvement , the deficit still remains above its historical average . the budget deficit was 10.1% of gdp in 2009 , falling to 7% of gdp in 2012 . not since the end of world war ii has the deficit fallen so much , so quickly . this report assumes a familiarity with basic budget terms and concepts ; for an overview , see crs report r43472 , the federal budget: overview and issues for fy2015 and beyond , by [author name scrubbed] . this report organizes and presents information to help policymakers frame the debate . medicare's sustainable growth rate ( sgr ) system is intended to constrain medicare payments to physicians . all legislative changes that increase ( decrease ) the deficit also increase ( decrease ) net interest payments on the debt in future years . the budget deficit increased by almost $1 trillion between 2008 and 2009 .
the rapid pace of technological advances , including the shift from voice to data , from wireline to wireless , and from copper to fiber is redefining the parameters of the telecommunications and media markets . in general terms , the regulatory debate focuses on a number of issues including the extent to which existing regulations should be applied to traditional providers as they enter new markets where they do not hold market power , the extent to which existing regulations should be imposed on new entrants as they compete with traditional providers in the same markets , and the appropriate regulatory framework to be imposed on new and / or converging technologies that are not easily classified under the present framework . the deployment , adoption , and regulatory treatment of broadband technologies continues to hold a major focus in the policy debate . the transition of the universal service fund to the connect america fund to support broadband deployment and adoption has generated concerns regarding consequences for small rate - of - return carriers . as these changes dramatically transform the marketplace , there is a growing consensus that existing laws and regulations be reexamined to address this transformation . the impact of broadband deployment on the media sector as consumers change their viewing patterns and adopt new delivery technologies is also central to the debate . if , and to what extent , the role of the federal communications commission and state regulatory bodies should be modified as networks transition from a circuit - switched to an internet protocol network and how to ensure that the core values ( e.g. , consumer protection , public safety , disability access , and competition ) are preserved in this new environment are also being addressed . how traditional policy goals , such as the advancement of universal service mandates in the provision of telecommunications services and the media market's long - standing policy objectives of localism , diversity of voices , and competition , should be applied , and / or revised , as these markets transform is also under consideration . some policymakers feel it is necessary to take steps to ensure access to the internet for content , services , and applications providers , as well as consumers , while others feel that such actions will slow deployment of and access to the internet , and limit innovation . the ability of new wireless technologies to deliver a variety of communications services and the increasing demand for mobility has placed increased pressure on usable spectrum as consumer demand fuels commercial demand for spectrum . the allocation and regulation of radio - frequency spectrum has also become a crucial component in the policy debate . the public sector also requires spectrum for a variety of government and emergency uses . policymakers are increasingly being called upon to balance the needs of both the public and the private sector . internet regulation and the fcc's authority to implement such regulations , which is currently facing court challenge , is an issue of growing importance in the wide ranging debate over broadband regulation . according to the federal communications commission's ( fcc's ) national broadband plan , the lack of adequate broadband availability is most pressing in rural america , where the costs of serving large geographical areas , coupled with low population densities , often reduce economic incentives for telecommunications providers to invest in and maintain broadband infrastructure and service .
by the 1980s , agricultural conservation policies broadened to include environmental issues beyond soil and water , especially issues related to production ( off the farm ) . the conservation title ( title ii ) of the agricultural act of 2014 ( p.l . many of the current agricultural conservation programs were enacted as part of the 1985 farm bill ( p.l . total mandatory spending for the title is projected at $28.3 billion over 5 years ( fy2014-fy2018 ) and $57.6 billion over 10 years ( fy2012-fy2023 ) . the estimated spending impact of the 2014 farm bill's conservation title is projected to decrease by $208 million over 5 years and close to $4.0 billion over 10 years . agricultural conservation began in the 1930s with a focus on soil and water issues associated with production and environmental concerns on the farm . 2642 ) and the senate - passed farm bill ( s. 954 ) reauthorized many of the largest conservation programs and consolidated others to create new ones . 99-198 , food security act of 1985 ) . the major difference between the two bills was the extension of conservation compliance provisions to the federally funded portion of crop insurance and the total reduction in funding for the title . both the house - passed farm bill ( h.r . while the number of programs has increased and new techniques to address resource problems continue to emerge , the basic approach has remained unchanged — voluntary farmer participation encouraged by financial and technical assistance , education , and basic and applied research . these programs have been reauthorized , modified , and expanded , and several new programs have been created , particularly in subsequent omnibus farm bills . 113-79 ) , the 2014 farm bill , was largely uncontroversial . while many did not consider conservation to be controversial , nonetheless , a number of policy issues shaped the final version of the title and ultimately its role in the enacted farm bill . the 2014 farm bill reauthorized , repealed , consolidated , and amended a number of conservation programs . most of these programs are authorized to receive mandatory funding ( i.e. , they do not require an annual appropriation ) and include authorities that expire with other farm bill programs at the end of fy2018 . generally , farm bill conservation programs can be grouped into the following categories based on similarities: working land programs , land retirement programs , easement programs , conservation compliance programs , and other programs and overarching provisions ( see table 1 and page 2 for a list of conservation program acronyms ) . the 2014 farm bill included several program consolidation measures , including the repeal of 12 active and inactive programs , the creation of two new programs , and the merging of two programs into existing ones . agricultural conservation has been a stand - alone title in farm bills beginning with the agriculture and food act of 1981 ( 1981 farm bill , p.l . most of these programs have permanent authorities and receive appropriations annually through the discretionary appropriations process . other types of conservation programs — such as watershed programs , emergency programs , and technical assistance — are authorized in other non - farm bill legislation .
the provisions that most directly relate to small businesses are ( 1 ) an employer penalty for not providing health insurance , ( 2 ) a tax credit to increase the affordability of health care for the smallest firms , and ( 3 ) small business health insurance exchanges designed to increase plan options and lower plan costs . the patient protection and affordable care act ( aca ; p.l . 111-152 ) contains several provisions to encourage employer - sponsored health coverage , particularly among small businesses . on june 4 , 2013 , the department of health and human services ( hhs ) announced that it is delaying enforcement of the aca's requirement that the small business health options program ( shop ) exchanges offer more than one plan from 2014 to 2015 . some maintain that the direct costs of the employer penalty and related compliance costs will be damaging to small businesses . it is now up to the states to choose whether to expand their respective medicaid programs and increase health care coverage and affordability among some low - income workers . core issues regarding the employer penalty as related to small businesses include hiring and workforce decisions , as well as their administrative costs . the aca's employer penalty aims to encourage employers to retain or offer health coverage to their employees . several events have altered the aca's implementation since its enactment in 2010: the supreme court ruled in 2012 that the aca's requirement that states extend their medicaid benefits to all adults under the age of 65 with incomes up to 133% of the federal poverty level was unconstitutional . the implementation of the aca's provisions to encourage employer - sponsored health coverage , particularly those provisions that relate to small businesses , has been the subject of increasing attention . on february 10 , 2014 , the department of the treasury issued a final regulation that would delay implementation of the employer penalty for firms with fewer than 100 full - time equivalent ( fte ) employees ( i.e. , firms with 50 fte employees to 99 fte employees ) from 2015 to 2016 . on july 2 , 2013 , the obama administration announced a delay in the implementation of the employer penalty for all applicable firms until 2015 , citing the need to simplify administrative complexities for businesses and give businesses more time to comply with an appropriate plan . although the employer penalty may not affect the decisions of employers with fewer than 50 employees because they are not subject to the penalty , the penalty could be part of decision - making calculations for employers that are on the margins of the penalty threshold and considering expanding their business . 111-148 and p.l . lastly , this report presents several approaches that could address some criticisms of the aca's employer penalty and reduce its effects on small businesses . because there is no single , precise definition of a small business in the aca , this report discusses issues that are relevant to businesses that are sometimes considered to be small in more general terms ( e.g. , fewer than 500 employees ) . third , it analyzes each provision for potential economic effects on small businesses .
3080 , the water resources reform and development act of 2013 ( wrrda 2013 ) , and the senate - passed s. 601 , the water resources development act of 2013 ( wrda 2013 ) . the water resources reform and development act of 2014 ( wrrda 2014 , p.l . 113-121 ) became law on june 10 , 2014 . the conference report adopted water resources reform and development act for the act's title . 3080 and s. 601 represented omnibus authorization legislation focused on water resource activities , principally of the u.s. army corps of engineers , and a few other environmental issues . wrrda 2014 authorized a fixed set of 34 new construction projects totaling $25.65 billion ( $15.64 billion in federal costs and $10.01 billion in nonfederal costs ) and increased the authorization of appropriations for eight previously authorized projects . the earmark debate and concerns about congressional roles also shaped each bill's approach . 113-449 , resolved differences between the house - passed h.r . the two most recent communications consisted of a december 11 , 2013 , letter from the assistant secretary of the army ( civil works ) , hereinafter referred to as the asa , to the conference managers ; and army corps testimony before the u.s. house committee on transportation and infrastructure ( t&i ) , subcommittee on water resources and environment , on april 29 , 2014 . 3080 on october 23 , 2013 , it would have authorized a fixed set of 23 new construction projects at a total cost of $13.0 billion ( $7.7 billion in federal costs and $5.3 billion in nonfederal costs ) . some members also expressed interest in authorizing new projects and deauthorizing older unconstructed projects . during the house and senate deliberations , some members expressed frustration with how long corps projects take . the bills addressed many similar issues , but often used different means . others supported more funding for harbor maintenance and improved inland waterway construction . when the senate passed s. 601 on may 15 , 2013 , there were an estimated 19 construction projects representing approximately $10.8 billion ( $6.3 billion federal and $4.5 billion nonfederal ) that appeared to meet the new project authorization criteria in s. 601 . it requires an "annual report" from the asa to congress identifying proposed new studies ( including studies proposed by nonfederal entities ) and completed feasibility and project modification reports . authorizing projects . wrrda 2014 created a one - time process aimed at deauthorizing previously authorized projects with federal costs to complete totaling $18 billion ; the asa is responsible for leading the process , and is required to provide opportunity for public input and congressional disapproval . it established expedited house procedures for the remainder of the 113 th congress and expedited senate procedures through 2018 for bills authorizing construction projects that meet specified criteria . the enacted legislation also included certain water infrastructure provisions of the clean water act ( cwa ) that were not included in h.r . 3080 and s. 601 , encouraged completion of corps studies within three years , limited study costs , and established new procedures intended to expedite corps completion of environmental compliance requirements , including the national environmental policy act ( nepa ) .
between 1997 and 2011 , card payments rose from accounting for 23% of payments to 48% . american consumers increasingly rely on credit and debit cards to pay for goods and services . in 2012 , credit card losses in the united states totaled $5.33 billion , an increase of 14.5% from 2011 . now that october 1 , 2015 , has passed , exploring and understanding the ramifications of the transition — or the failure to transition — is likely to become increasingly important for congress , especially if additional major breaches occur . in 2011 , consumers made 49 billion debit transactions totaling $1.8 trillion and 26 billion credit transactions totaling $2.1 trillion . if the merchant has a chip point - of - sale ( pos ) terminal , but the bank has not issued a chip card to the customer , the bank will be liable . there are many policy issues related to emv adoption in the united states and elsewhere in the world . in 2012 , mastercard and visa — also called "payment brands" — set october 1 , 2015 , as the date by which u.s. card issuers — banks and credit unions — would need to have replaced existing credit and debit magnetic stripe cards with chip cards , and for merchants to begin accepting them . historically , the issuer has paid about 60% of losses and retailers have paid 40% . between 2004 and 2010 , fraud using u.s. - issued bank credit cards rose 70% . although the number of incidents in 2013 ( 198 ) is small compared to 2011 ( 855 ) , a lot of attention has been paid to those breaches in the news . increasing financial impact of fraud . the cost of a complete transition in the united states is expected to be at least $6 billion , but the costs for issuers and merchants that do not meet the adoption deadline could be even greater: now that the deadline has passed , the liability for fraudulent transactions will shift to the party that has not switched to chip cards . the report also discusses resolved and remaining impediments to completing the emv transition in the united states and identifies areas of potential congressional interest . that attention appears to have created the perception that the number of breaches is increasing more than it actually is , raising concern among consumers , as well as policymakers . although the number of breaches dipped significantly between 2011 and 2012 , there has been a modest increase between 2012 and 2013 . during the same period , payment by cash and checks dropped from 70% to 35% . merchants , card issuers , and consumers are adversely affected by increases in fraud . there were four significant drivers of emv adoption in the united states: l iability shift . emvco membership has now expanded to include the payment brands of american express , jcb , discover , and unionpay . the october 1 , 2015 , deadline that shifted liability to the party that has not switched to chip cards is seen as a strong incentive for merchants and issuers to make the switch .
in 2013 , an estimated 19.8 million individuals in the united states aged 12 or older ( 7.5% of this population ) were current ( past month ) users of marijuana . marijuana is the most commonly used illicit drug in the united states . the past decade has seen a decline in youth perceptions of risk tied to smoking marijuana ; however , the rate of past - month marijuana use among youth declined between 2011 and 2013 ( 7.1% ) . while reported marijuana use is similar to that in 2012 , it has generally increased since 2007 when 5.8% of individuals aged 12 or older were current users of marijuana . indeed , marijuana availability in the united states has increased , according to the drug enforcement administration ( dea ) . this increase has been linked to factors such as rising marijuana production in mexico and increasing marijuana cultivation in the united states led by criminal networks including mexican drug trafficking organizations .  ( b ) the drug or other substance has no currently accepted medical use in treatment in the united states . as of november 2014 , over half of all states and the district of columbia allowed for the medical use of marijuana in some capacity . the uptick in availability and use of marijuana in the united states is coupled with a general shift in public attitudes toward the substance . these moves have spurred a number of questions regarding their potential implications for related federal law enforcement activities and for the nation's drug policies on the whole . this indicates that the federal government has determined that ( a ) the drug or other substance has a high potential for abuse . in the november 2012 elections , voters in washington state and colorado voted to legalize , regulate , and tax small amounts of marijuana for recreational use . in addition , 60% indicate that the federal government should not enforce federal laws prohibiting marijuana use in those states that allow for its use .  ( c ) there is a lack of accepted safety for use of the drug or other substance under medical supervision . in the november 2014 elections , voters in the district of columbia , oregon , and alaska also passed recreational legalization initiatives . it then analyzes relevant issues for u.s. federal law enforcement as well as for the criminal organizations involved in producing , distributing , and profiting from the black market sale of marijuana . this report provides a background on federal marijuana policy as well as an overview of state trends with respect to marijuana decriminalization and legalization — for both medical and recreational uses . this report also outlines a number of related policy questions that congress may confront . in 1969 , 12% of the surveyed population supported legalizing marijuana ; today , more than half ( 52% ) of surveyed adults feel that marijuana should be legalized . while the federal government maintains marijuana's current place as a schedule i controlled substance , states have established a range of views and policies regarding its medical and recreational use . even prior to the federal government's move in 1970 to criminalize the manufacture , distribution , dispensation , and possession of marijuana , there were significant discussions over marijuana's place in american society .
lawmakers and the public have expressed increasing concern over the solvency of the disability insurance ( di ) trust fund , from which social security disability insurance ( ssdi ) benefits are paid . in november 2015 , the bipartisan budget act of 2015 ( h.r . 114-74 ) extended the projected solvency of the di trust fund by authorizing a reallocation of the social security payroll tax rate between the di and the old - age and survivors insurance ( oasi ) trust funds to provide di with a larger share . until recently , the di trust fund was projected to be depleted in the fourth quarter of calendar year 2016 , at which time ongoing revenues to the di trust fund were projected to be sufficient to pay only about 80% of scheduled benefits . although the reallocation averted a potential benefit cut in late 2016 , without additional legislation action ( i.e. , revenue increases , cost reductions , or some combination thereof ) , the di trust fund is projected to be unable to pay scheduled benefits in full and on a timely basis by the early 2020s . 1314 ; p.l . it begins with background information on the ssdi program and the financing of the social security trust funds . next , the report examines the financial status of the di trust fund over the past 20 years and the causes of the di trust fund's financial imbalance . this report provides an overview of the di trust fund and its current financial outlook . it then discusses the projected status of the di trust fund under prior law and under the bipartisan budget act of 2015 . lastly , the report provides background information on the use of reallocations by congress in the past , as well as on a house rules change in the 114 th congress concerning payroll tax reallocations . the appendix of the report provides a congressional rationale for the creation of a separate di trust fund as part of the social security amendments of 1956 ( p.l . the board is composed of six members: the secretary of the treasury , who is the managing trustee ; the secretary of labor ; the secretary of health and human services ; the commissioner of social security ; and two public representatives , who are nominated by the president for a term of four years and subject to confirmation by the senate . the board of trustees of the federal old - age and survivors insurance and federal disability insurance trust funds presents an annual report to congress on the current and projected financial status of the social security trust funds . one of the main concerns among members who opposed the bill was the uncertainty over its potential cost . 84-880 ) . enacted in 1956 under title ii of the social security act , ssdi is part of the old - age , survivors , and disability insurance ( oasdi ) program , more commonly known as social security . to improve the financial outlook of the di trust fund over the long term , congress could consider a variety of legislative changes to increase tax revenues , reduce program cost ( i.e. , alter benefit levels or program eligibility requirements ) , or some combination of those approaches .
this program involves work directly on nuclear weapons in the stockpile , such as monitoring their condition ; maintaining them through repairs , refurbishment , life extension , and modifications ; conducting r&d in support of specific warheads ; and dismantlement . the fy2016 request was $3,187.3 million ; the enacted amount , on a comparable basis , for fy2015 was $2,797.2 million . the senate appropriations committee recommended $3,039.5 million for fy2016 . 2028 , energy and water development and related agencies appropriations act , 2016 , by a vote of 240-177 , without amendments to the weapons activities section of the bill as reported from committee . the house appropriations committee recommended $3,354.3 million for fy2016 . the house passed h.r . specific items under dsw include the following . according to nnsa , they "[focus] on rdt&e efforts to develop and maintain critical capabilities , tools , and processes needed to support science based stockpile stewardship , refurbishment , and continued certification of the stockpile over the long - term in the absence of underground nuclear testing. . for example , the science program's goals include improving the ability to assess warhead performance without nuclear testing , improving readiness to conduct nuclear tests should the need arise , and maintaining the scientific infrastructure of the nuclear weapons laboratories . the house appropriations committee expressed its concern about requests for construction funding . the senate appropriations committee recommended $1,766.3 million . the omnibus appropriations bill provides $1,818.5 million . the latter included two controversial and expensive projects , the uranium processing facility ( upf ) at the y - 12 national security complex ( tn ) and the chemistry and metallurgy research replacement ( cmrr ) project , which deals with plutonium , at los alamos national laboratory ( nm ) . rdt&e includes five programs . the omnibus appropriations bill followed the house lead and appropriated $2,279.1 million for infrastructure and operations . the omnibus appropriations bill provides $682.9 million for defense nuclear security and directed that $30 million should be used for the security improvements program that will address the backlog of security projects , as directed in the house report . many of these programs have significance for policy decisions . this program used to fund infrastructure and operations at nuclear weapons complex sites . congress rejected this approach ; p.l . however , beginning in fy2016 , its main funding elements were material recycle and recovery , recapitalization of facilities , and construction of facilities . within the infrastructure and operations budget area , it provides $430 million for upf and $155.6 million for cmrr . its goal was to eliminate duplication . both have been significantly revised over the past several years due to cost growth and schedule slippage . without this information , the committee cannot determine whether the projects requested are affordable and are being managed appropriately so that it may approve new start authority . this program "responds to and mitigates nuclear and radiological incidents worldwide and has a lead role in defending the nation from the threat of nuclear terrorism. . instead , nnsa proposed to "merge the nuclear counterterrorism incident response ( nctir ) and the counterterrorism and counterproliferation ( ctcp ) programs to eliminate confusion about nnsa nuclear counterterrorism programs and activities , change the nctir name to nuclear counterterrorism and incident response program , and move to the defense nuclear nonproliferation ( dnn ) appropriation. .
among them are whether ( 1 ) htf plays a role in exacerbating market fragility ; ( 2 ) it may heighten the market's systemic risk ; ( 3 ) it enhances or harms the quality of the securities market ; ( 4 ) certain kinds of hft may constitute an illegal form of front - running ; ( 5 ) hft helps foster a system of two - tiered trading markets that benefits certain traders at the expense of others due to their access to faster trading data and advantageous trade infrastructure ; and ( 6 ) the presence of hft has been to the detriment of non - hft investors and investor confidence in the securities market . it examines ( 1 ) recent developments regarding probes and investigations of hft , ( 2 ) what equities hft is , ( 3 ) the nature of the general equities hft landscape , ( 4 ) how equities hft works and who conducts it , ( 5 ) equity hft's perceived benefits and disadvantages , ( 6 ) the flash crash of 2010 and the alleged role of hft , ( 7 ) sec programmatic and regulation - related initiatives to potentially monitor hft and address its potentially negative market impact , ( 8 ) european union hft regulatory developments , ; and ( 9 ) various domestic hft regulatory ideas under discussion . as in earlier major market disruptions , such as the october 1987 market crash ( when the djia lost almost 22% in a single day , setting off a global stock market decline ) , congressional interest in the flash crash derives in part from congress's decades - old legislative mandate that , among other things , delegated to the securities and exchange commission ( sec ) responsibility for investor protection ( through a regime of mandatory disclosure ) and maintaining fair and orderly markets . 2292 ( markey ) would require the commodity futures trading commission ( cftc ) to provide a regulatory definition of hft in the derivatives markets that the agency oversees . dubbed the flash crash , the event led to several analytical studies and reports and to greater scrutiny of a broad trading protocol known as high - frequency trading ( hft ) , a form of algorithmic securities trading , which has no formal consensus definition . in addition to the heightened scrutiny it received after the flash crash , hft , which accounts for a large share of total domestic securities trades , has raised other public policy concerns . in the 113 th congress , congressional interest in hft has been reflected in legislation that would levy securities transaction taxes on securities trades , presumably raising the cost and thus reducing the incidence of conducting hft . on may 6 , 2010 , the dow jones industrial average ( djia ) , a broad stock index , fell by nearly 1,000 points over the course of several minutes and then quickly rebounded . specifically , in the 113 th congress , s. 410 ( harkin ) , h.r . this was one of the largest intraday declines in the history of the djia and was described by one commentator as "one of those eye - opening events that exposed many flaws in the structure of the market. .
the hundreds of iraqi interpreters who work for the u.s. military conceal their identities in distinctive ways . in january 2006 , the 109 th congress enacted the first in a series of legislative provisions to enable certain iraqi and afghan nationals to become u.s. lawful permanent residents ( lprs ) based on their service to the u.s. government . section 1059 of the fy2006 national defense authorization act ( ndaa ) made certain iraqi and afghan nationals who had worked directly with u.s. armed forces as translators eligible for special immigrant visas ( sivs ) . congress subsequently broadened the special immigrant classification for translators and also authorized a second special immigrant classification for certain iraqi and afghan nationals who had worked for , or on behalf of , the u.s. government in iraq or afghanistan , respectively . a house judiciary committee report on a related bill in the 109 th congress to provide special immigrant status for iraqi and afghan translators ( h.r . this danger will only escalate after u.s. forces leave or reduce their strength in iraq and afghanistan . special immigrants comprise a category of permanent employment - based admissions under the immigration and nationality act ( ina ) . one wears a bulletproof kevlar helmet and a black mask . upon admission to the united states , holders of sivs are granted lpr status . given the seeming consensus that the u.s. government should assist its iraqi and afghan employees in need , an ongoing question for congress is whether the existing siv provisions are sufficient to accomplish this , or whether further extensions of the temporary siv programs for iraqis and afghans who worked for , or on behalf of , the u.s. government , or other changes to the siv provisions are warranted . it discusses the legislative changes to the individual iraqi and afghan special immigrant programs since their initial authorization , provides statistics on visa issuances , and considers challenges that have faced the programs . 2293 ) described the need for the legislation , as follows: a number of alien translators currently working in iraq and afghanistan embedded with units of the u.s. armed forces are providing extremely valuable services . targeted for death by insurgents , they also face suspicion from their employers and often lie to relatives for fear that word of their job will get out . for example , a former afghan interpreter for the u.s. military , profiled in a january 2017 article , said that it was too dangerous for him to return from the afghan capital to his native province because of the taliban . what they share is the extraordinary danger of their job . their cooperation and close identification with the u.s. military have put these individuals and their families in danger . principal applicants accounted for about 26,000 of the total ; dependent spouses and children accounted for the remaining 53,000 . iraqi and afghan translators and interpreters table 2 in the main body of the report provides data on visa issuances to iraqis and afghans ( combined ) under the special immigrant program for translators and interpreters . the term special immigrant is defined in section 101 ( a ) ( 27 ) of the ina . this report analyzes the siv classifications for iraqis and afghans within the context of both the larger ina special immigrant category and selected other permanent admissions categories .
for these reasons , congress , through the clean air act ( caa ) has required emission standards for new automobiles since 1965 , and has amended these requirements on several occasions . further , over the last five decades , the scientific understanding of the effects of air pollutants has led to a tightening of air quality standards . the caa , as amended , requires the u.s. environmental protection agency ( epa ) to set national ambient air quality standards ( naaqs ) for common pollutants from numerous and diverse sources , which may reasonably be anticipated to endanger public health and welfare . despite nationwide reductions in each of these major air pollutants by over 50% since 1970 , air quality still fails to meet ambient standards in areas where about one - third of the nation's population lives . the agency reports that in 2013 on - road vehicles accounted for about 34% of carbon monoxide emissions in the united states , 38% of nitrogen oxides , 12% of volatile organic compounds , and 3% of particulate matter . since the 1960s , emission standards for motor vehicles , coupled with standards for the fuels they burn , have reduced emissions from new cars and trucks by at least 95% . nevertheless , because there are more vehicles on the road , because they are being driven more miles , and because the average useful life of a car exceeds the statutorily defined "useful life" over which emission standards must be met , emissions from motor vehicles continue to be a major component of the nation's air pollution problems . in sum , epa estimates the annual compliance cost of the overall program in 2030 would be approximately $1.5 billion ( $760 million for the vehicle program and $700 million for the fuel program ) , and the 2030 benefits would be between $6.7 billion and $19 billion , or 4.5 to 13 times greater than the costs of the program . as with tier 2 , the tier 3 standards consider the vehicle and its fuel as an integrated system and include changes to both vehicle emission limits and fuel formulation rules , lowering the allowable sulfur content of gasoline . more controversial has been the potential impact on the cost of gasoline . the agency estimates that the annual monetized health benefits of the tier 3 standards in 2030 ( 2011$ ) would be between $7.4 billion and $19 billion , assuming a 3% discount rate ( or between $6.7 billion and $18 billion assuming a 7% discount rate ) . the american petroleum institute contends that the tighter sulfur controls would impose almost $10 billion in refinery capital expenditures , create an annual compliance cost of $2.4 billion , increase gasoline manufacturing costs from 6 to 9 cents per gallon , and increase refinery ghg emissions by 1% . epa contends that many variables determine the retail price of gasoline , including the price of crude oil on the global market , taxes , transportation costs , and distribution and marketing costs , as well as refinery costs . as finalized , the tier 3 standards set requirements on tailpipe emissions for the sum of non - methane organic gases ( nmog ) and nitrogen oxides ( no x ) , presented as nmog+no x , and for particulate matter ( pm ) .
such relief may include an injunction to halt the patent infringement or an award of damages to compensate for any harm . the u.s. court of appeals for the federal circuit has jurisdiction over appeals from district court decisions . a patent is an intellectual property right granted by the federal government to an inventor to exclude others from making , using , or selling the invention for a limited time , in exchange for public disclosure of the invention . patent infringement is the unauthorized making , using , offering for sale , selling , and importing of a patented invention . because patents are exclusively governed by federal law , federal district courts have original jurisdiction in all civil cases relating to patents . article i , section 8 , clause 8 of the u.s. constitution grants congress the authority to offer this protection to patent holders . recently introduced patent reform legislation seeks to minimize abuses with , among other provisions , changes to pleading requirements for a patent infringement claim . the patent provides the patent holder with the right to protect against such infringement by suing for relief in the appropriate federal court . this report will discuss the rules and procedure for initiating a patent infringement claim in federal court . the u.s. constitution provides congress with the authority to reform the patent system . some commentators believe that the possibility of a large financial award together with the minimal information required to bring a patent infringement claim has encouraged abuses of the patent system in courts by "patent trolls. . this act authorizes the u.s. supreme court to promulgate rules of procedure , including the federal rules of civil procedure , for federal courts . however , others believe that the information required by the patent infringement complaint is sufficient to provide notice to the defendant of the pending claims , reserving the disclosure of more detailed information for the discovery stage of litigation . pursuant to this power , congress has the authority to enact changes to judicial processes and procedures . congress has delegated this authority through such legislation as the rules enabling act of 1934 . the constitution also specifically grants congress the power to create federal courts , other than the supreme court , and to determine their jurisdiction . the amount of patent infringement litigation has substantially increased during the last decade . the complaint must also contain sufficient information to satisfy rule 12 ( b ) ( 6 ) . the discussion will focus on the level of detail necessary for a patent infringement complaint . however , congress still retains the authority to make any changes to judicial procedural rules such as patent infringement pleadings . because of congress's constitutional authority to change judicial rules , these objections reveal more prudential concerns about congress bypassing the "deliberative process congress established in the rules enabling act" and the judicial conference's involvement in the process . however , members of the judicial branch have raised objections to the patent pleading reforms and have suggested potential separation of powers issues triggered by these proposed changes . however , the patent abuse reduction act also would direct the u.s. supreme court to review and amend form 18 to ensure that it is consistent with the proposed pleading requirements .
111-148 , as amended ) provided appropriations for fy2014 and fy2015 , and the medicare access and chip reauthorization act of 2015 ( macra ; p.l . the state children's health insurance program ( chip ) is a federal - state program that provides health coverage to certain uninsured , low - income children and pregnant women in families that have annual income above medicaid eligibility levels but do not have health insurance . chip is jointly financed by the federal government and the states and is administered by the states . for instance , the patient protection and affordable care act ( aca ; p.l . however , the continuing resolution enacted on january 22 , 2018 ( p.l . chip medicaid expansions must follow the federal medicaid rules for benefits and cost sharing . 115-120 ) , and the bipartisan budget act of 2018 ( bba 2018 , p.l . for separate chip programs , the benefits are permitted to look more like private health insurance , and states may impose cost sharing , such as premiums or enrollment fees , with a maximum allowable amount that is tied to annual family income . the federal government sets basic requirements for chip , but states have the flexibility to design their own version of chip within the federal government's basic framework . participation in chip is voluntary , and all states , the district of columbia , and the territories participate . it describes various aspects of federal chip funding , such as the federal appropriation , state allotments , the child enrollment contingency fund , redistribution funds , and outreach and enrollment grants . states may design their chip programs in one of three ways: a chip medicaid expansion , a separate chip program , or a combination approach in which the state operates a chip medicaid expansion and one or more separate chip programs concurrently . chip benefit coverage and cost - sharing rules depend on program design . 114-10 ) added appropriations for fy2016 and fy2017 . in recent years , the appropriations had been provided a couple years at a time . the federal government's share of chip expenditures ( including both services and administration ) is determined by the enhanced federal medical assistance percentage ( e - fmap ) rate . federal appropriations for chip are provided in statute . the report ends with a section about the recent legislative activity that has resulted in federal funding for chip being provided through fy2027 . 115-123 ) together provided 10 years of chip funding . 115-96 ) was enacted to extend continuing appropriations for most federal agencies and programs ( among other things ) through january 19 , 2018 . 115-96 ( 1 ) provided $2.85 billion in appropriations for chip for the period of october 1 , 2017 , through march 31 , 2018 , and ( 2 ) extended the special rule for redistribution funds that was added by p.l . this report provides an overview of chip financing , beginning with an explanation of the federal matching rate . as a result , there is significant variation across chip programs . currently , chip is funded through fy2027 . the full - year chip appropriation for fy2018 was included in the continuing resolution enacted on january 22 , 2018 ( p.l .
the general services administration ( gsa ) is the federal government's primary civilian real property management agency with 11 regional offices that oversee gsa owned and leased properties across the nation . congress also enacted the federal property and administrative services act of 1949 , which established the general services administration ( gsa ) , and gave the gsa administrator ( administrator ) responsibility for administering federal real property . at the end of fy2012 , gsa — through its real property office , the public buildings service ( pbs ) — owned or leased 8,708 buildings with more than 422 million square feet of floor space , which represents about 12.6% of the government's 3.354 billion total building square footage . until congress enacted the public buildings act in 1926 , construction authority for each federal building was approved and funded in separate pieces of legislation . congress later enacted the public buildings act of 1949 to authorize the planning , site acquisition , and design of federal buildings located outside of washington , dc , and for improvements to existing federal buildings . the 1959 act re - established earlier requirements to provide for direct federal construction of public buildings through the congressional authorization and appropriation process . as part of the president's annual budget submission to congress , gsa requests funding for new construction projects , as well as for purchasing , renovating , and leasing existing properties . gsa is responsible for the design and construction of its buildings and courthouses , and for repairs and alterations to existing facilities , including those that are leased . when authority for lease - purchase contracts expired in 1957 , congress approved a successor statute , the public buildings act of 1959 . this act , as amended and re - codified over the years , remains the basic statute authorizing the administrator to construct , own , lease , operate , maintain , and renovate buildings to serve civilian agencies of the federal government . the 1926 act provided the basic authority for the construction of federal buildings through the congressional authorization and appropriation process . in 1954 , congress amended the public buildings act of 1949 to authorize the administrator to acquire titles to real property and to construct federal buildings through lease - purchase contracts . congress authorizes appropriations for these projects , however , through the prospectus approval process , which is discussed below . gsa's inventory includes offices , courthouses , and land ports of entry . given the breadth of gsa's holdings , the agency is sometimes referred to as "the government's landlord. . title to the property was vested in the federal government at the end of the contract period , which could range from 10 to 30 years . notably , while gsa works with many executive branch agencies and the judiciary to meet their space needs , it generally does not perform real property functions on behalf of the legislative branch . the bill would make numerous changes to the way that the public buildings service ( pbs ) — the office within gsa responsible for real property management — constructs and leases space , reports on the size and cost of gsa's portfolio , and tracks administrative expenses , such as travel and conference costs .
the disability insurance portion of the old - age , survivors and disability insurance ( oasdi ) program was enacted in 1956 and provides benefits to disabled workers under the full retirement age ( fra ) in amounts based on an individual's career - average earnings in covered employment . a statutory formula determines monthly payment levels for social security disability insurance ( ssdi ) . in addition , the law also eliminates from benefit calculations one year of a ssdi beneficiary's lowest earnings for every five years of earnings ( also known as the one - for - five rule ) , which equates to a maximum of five "disability dropout years" for an individual with 25 or more years of earnings . by statute , ssa also applies "childcare dropout years" ( cdys ) for years in which a beneficiary has zero earnings due to leaving the workforce to care for an infant child . the application of cdys is not common , affecting approximately 0.16% of ssdi beneficiaries between 2000 and 2013 . ssdi benefits , like those of the old - age and survivors insurance ( oasi ) program , are meant to replace income from work that is lost by incurring one of the risks the social program insures against . to be eligible for ssdi benefits , a worker must be ( 1 ) disability insured , and ( 2 ) unable to engage in substantial gainful activity ( sga ) by reason of a medically determinable physical or mental impairment expected to result in death or last at least 12 months . at five elapsed years , a disability dropout year may be credited ( in addition to the two cdys ) for three total dropout years . the ssdi benefit payment is based on a disabled worker's average indexed monthly earnings ( aime ) , which is used in the computation of the individual's primary insurance amount ( pia ) . in addition , a beneficiary's payment increases each year from the year of eligibility to the year of benefit receipt based on the social security cost - of - living adjustment ( cola ) . also known as the one - for - five ( or one - fifth ) rule , for every five elapsed years of earnings , the lowest year ( s ) of earnings will be dropped , up to a maximum of five total disability dropout years for a worker with 25 or more years of earnings . this report describes how workers become insured for ssdi benefits , how ssdi benefits are calculated , and the use of dropout years in benefit calculations . during this period , 84.5% of beneficiaries ( 1,129 ) who were credited with cdys had a pia of less than $1,000 . generally , an individual must have one quarter of coverage ( also referred to as "credits" ) for each calendar year after the age of 21 up to the year before the individual ( 1 ) reaches the age of 62 , ( 2 ) dies , or ( 3 ) becomes disabled . authorized by the social security disability amendments of 1980 ( p.l . the ssdi program is financed primarily through a payroll tax levied on workers , their employers , and self - employed individuals in jobs covered by social security .
the senate energy and water development subcommittee reported out a bill june 25 , totaling $34.4 billion , and the full appropriations committee approved the bill , s. 1245 , on june 27 . on june 18 , 2013 , the house energy and water development subcommittee approved a fy2014 bill totaling $30.4 billion . the request totaled $34.4 billion . 113-76 ) , containing appropriations for all 12 fy2014 appropriations bills , including energy and water development programs ( division d ) . on october 16 , 2013 , congress passed the continuing appropriations act , 2014 , h.r . 113-46 , extending funding for all federal programs , including energy and water development , through january 15 , 2014 , at the fy2013 post - sequestration spending level . president obama's fy2014 budget request for energy and water development was released in april 2013 . the energy and water development bill includes funding for civil works projects of the u.s. army corps of engineers ( corps ) , the department of the interior's central utah project ( cup ) and bureau of reclamation ( reclamation ) , the department of energy ( doe ) , and a number of independent agencies , including the nuclear regulatory commission ( nrc ) and the appalachian regional commission ( arc ) . 2609 , passed the house with amendments on july 10 . 113-67 ) , which contained the bipartisan budget act establishing less stringent spending caps for fy2014 and fy2015 than the bca , thus easing the way for an appropriations agreement . 3547 , the consolidated appropriations act , 2014 ( p.l . on january 17 , 2014 , the president signed h.r . on december 26 the president signed h.j.res . the energy and water development bill provides funding for the civil program of the u.s. army corps of engineers ( corps ) , an agency in the department of defense with both military and civilian responsibilities . the bill , h.r . independent agencies that receive funding from the energy and water development bill include the nuclear regulatory commission ( nrc ) , the appalachian regional commission ( arc ) , and the denali commission . 59 ( p.l . in addition to the regular appropriation for the corps , congress appropriated $1.724 billion in supplemental funding for response and recovery related to 2012 flooding and $5.35 billion in supplemental funding related to hurricane sandy . 2775 , p.l . the energy and water development bill has funded all doe's programs since fy2005 . 113-76 provided more than any of these ; under the enacted bill , the agency's civil works appropriations for fy2014 totaled $5.468 billion . congress provided the corps with $4.718 billion ( post sequestration , post rescission ) , or $13 million less than the $4.731 billion requested by the administration . the senate appropriations committee recommended $5.272 billion for the corps , or $546 million more than the administration's request . major doe activities funded by the energy and water bill include research and development on renewable energy and energy efficiency , nuclear power , fossil energy r&d , the strategic petroleum reserve , energy statistics , general science , environmental cleanup , and nuclear weapons programs .
the fair labor standards act ( flsa ) , enacted in 1938 , is the federal legislation that establishes the general minimum wage that must be paid to all covered workers . states generally have three options in setting their minimum wage policies: ( 1 ) they can set their own minimum wage provisions that differ from those in the flsa , ( 2 ) they can explicitly tie their minimum wage provisions to the flsa , or ( 3 ) they can include no specific minimum wage provisions in state law . 110-28 in 2007 , which increased the minimum wage from $5.15 per hour to its current rate of $7.25 per hour in three steps ( the final step occurring in 2009 ) . while most states' scheduled state minimum wage rate changes ( due to inflation adjustments or statutorily scheduled changes ) occurred on january 1 of each year , a few states have rate increases scheduled for later in the year . since its establishment , the minimum wage rate has been raised 22 separate times . the most recent change was enacted through p.l . it also specifies certain categories of workers who are not covered by general flsa wage standards , such as workers with disabilities or certain youth workers . the flsa mandates broad minimum wage coverage . next , the report discusses the interaction of federal and state minimum wages over time , and finally , the appendix provides detailed information on the major components of minimum wage policies in all 50 states and the district of columbia . the state policies covered in this report include currently effective policies and policies enacted with an effective date at some point in 2019 . it then provides a summary of state minimum wage laws , followed by an examination of rates and mechanisms of adjustments in states with minimum wage levels above the flsa rate ( table 1 provides summary data ) . the minimum wage provisions of the flsa have been amended numerous times since then , typically to expand coverage or raise the wage rate . in 2019 , the range of state minimum wage rates is as follows: 29 states and the district of columbia have enacted minimum wage rates above the federal rate of $7.25 per hour ; 2 states have minimum wage rates below the federal rate ; 5 states have no state minimum wage requirement ; and the remaining 14 states have minimum wage rates equal to the federal rate . in 1938 , the flsa established a minimum wage of $0.25 per hour . as discussed previously , for those states with current or scheduled minimum wages above the federal rate , three main mechanisms are in place to adjust future rates: ( 1 ) scheduled increases , ( 2 ) indexation to inflation , or ( 3 ) reference to the federal rate plus an add - on ( i.e. , a state minimum wage is a percentage or dollar amount above the federal rate ) . following the three - step increase in the federal minimum wage from $5.15 to the current $7.25 ( 2007-2009 ) , 15 states , comprising 33% of the civilian labor force , had rates above the federal minimum wage in 2010 .
in the 1970s , the number of requests for tribal recognition by the department of the interior ( department ) increased exponentially in the wake of the decisions in united states v. washington , which recognized tribal treaty fishing rights in the pacific northwest , and joint tribal council of passamaquoddy v. morton , which recognized a tribal land claim on the east coast . in the 19 th century and first half of the 20 th century , the federal government made determinations about which groups of indians were tribes on an ad hoc basis when negotiating treaties and determining which groups of indians could reorganize their governments under the indian reorganization act . a positive determination under the regulations means that the group has inherent sovereign authority independent of the state in which it is located and independent of the united states , although it remains a domestic dependent nation . one scholar on tribal acknowledgment explains the significance of tribal recognition as follows: an administrative determination that a group is a tribe ( i.e. , that it merits federal acknowledgment or recognition ) establishes a government - to - government relationship between it and the united states . faced with many requests for tribal recognition , in 1978 , the department adopted a uniform process and uniform criteria for considering whether a group should be acknowledged as an indian tribe . a tribe , consequently , has sovereign immunity and may exercise jurisdiction over its territory and establish tribal courts , administer funds under the indian self - determination and education assistance act , establish gaming facilities under the indian gaming regulatory act , bring a land claim under the indian trade and non - intercourse act , exercise treaty hunting and fishing rights , and obtain other federal benefits and exercise their own sovereign authority , except as limited by federal law . for example , possession of liquor is prohibited in indian country absent publication of a certified liquor ordinance , and the sale of land is limited . if a petitioner satisfied criterion ( e ) , ofa would then consider criteria ( a ) ( tribal existence ) , ( d ) ( governing document ) , ( f ) ( membership ) , and ( g ) ( congressional prohibition or termination ) . accordingly , the proposed rule would change part 83 in an effort "to make the process and criteria more transparent , promote consistent implementation , and increase timeliness and efficiency , while maintaining the integrity of the process. . thus , a determination that a group is or is not a tribe is a decision with significant impacts on the group itself , federal and state governments , other indian tribes , and non - indians . current criteria 87.3 ( b ) and ( c ) require proof of community and proof of political authority from historical times to the present . in may 2014 , interior proposed a new rule for part 83 that would comprehensively change the acknowledgment process . first , the proposed rule would change criterion ( a ) from identification as an indian entity from 1900 to the present to a narrative explaining , and proof of , tribal existence at some point in 1900 or before .
in response to the disclosure of various national security agency ( nsa ) surveillance and data collection programs , a number of legislative changes to the government's intelligence operations authority have been suggested . many of these proposals include amendments to the practices and procedures of the foreign intelligence surveillance court ( fisc ) , and the fisa court of review , which reviews rulings of the fisc . currently , the government's applications for surveillance orders to the fisc are classified , as are most fisa opinions themselves . a number of proposals seek to increase government transparency by requiring public disclosure of fisa opinions . these proposals might be understood to raise separation of powers issues , namely , the scope of the executive branch's control over national security information . requiring the public disclosure of fisa opinions concerns many policy questions involving national security ; this report , however , is limited to the legal implications of such a requirement . this report will first address current fisc procedures regarding disclosure , and will continue by analyzing the legal implications of mandating executive branch release of fisa opinions . at least one group has proposed that all fisa decisions should be published in their entirety ; other proposals would allow the government to conduct a declassification review of the material first , substituting a summary of material when appropriate . on the other hand , at least according to the public record , the fisa court of review has sat only twice ; and both times the court released its opinion with sensitive information redacted . congress and the president thus share power over access to national security information . while traditional federal courts also review classified information in camera , their final opinions are rarely kept confidential . this analysis will include an examination of judicial doctrine and statutory practice regarding control of national security information , concluding that neither branch enjoys exclusive power over the matter ; rather , authority is shared between congress and the executive branch . according to the fisc , traditional "courts operate primarily in public , with secrecy the exception ; the fisc operates primarily in secret , with public access the exception. . congress enjoys power to regulate access to classified information ; however , the president generally makes the specific determination about what particular information is classified . fisa opinions , in contrast , are not released publicly except in special circumstances . the central issue is the extent to which congress may regulate control over access to national security information , including mandating that the executive branch disclose specific materials — a question not definitively resolved by the courts . under the foreign intelligence surveillance act ( fisa ) , the fisc reviews government applications to , inter alia , conduct surveillance and engage in data collection for foreign intelligence purposes . fisa opinions and orders , most of which contain at least some sensitive facts pertaining to national security , are a mixture of legal reasoning and sensitive national security information . in the latter , the executive branch could conceivably alter its strategy of what information to include in applications to the fisc , thus alleviating concerns about compelling the release of classified information ; although such an effect might raise separate constitutional questions of its own .
a health insurance exchange has been established in every state , as required by the patient protection and affordable care act ( aca ) . a state can choose to establish its own state - based exchange ( sbe ) . if a state opts not to , or if the department of health and human services ( hhs ) determines that the state is not in a position to administer its own exchange , then hhs will establish and administer the exchange in the state as a federally facilitated exchange ( ffe ) . each exchange has two parts , a marketplace where individuals can shop for and enroll in health insurance coverage , and a small business health options program ( shop ) exchange for small employers . the center for consumer information and insurance oversight ( cciio ) at cms is responsible for implementing aca's private health insurance reforms and administering the grant programs discussed above . each exchange is expected to generate its own funds to sustain its operations beginning january 1 , 2015 . in some cases , a state has partnered with hhs to establish and administer the exchange , and in other cases hhs is administering the individual exchange while the state administers the shop exchange . cms has requested an increase of $227 million for its program management account in fy2015 for aca implementation and other activities . those funds included ( 1 ) discretionary funds transferred from other hhs accounts under the secretary's transfer authority ; ( 2 ) expired discretionary funds from the nonrecurring expenses fund ( nef ) ; ( 3 ) mandatory funds from the hirif ; and ( 4 ) mandatory funds from the prevention and public health fund ( see table 2 ) . exchanges are not intended to supplant the private market outside of exchanges , and the aca does not require that individuals and small businesses obtain coverage through an exchange . this report provides a state - by - state breakdown of the grants awarded to date . some individuals are eligible to receive financial assistance for their coverage obtained through an exchange , and some small employers can obtain tax credits toward coverage purchased through a shop . to fund the establishment of exchanges , the aca authorizes the hhs secretary to award grants to states through 2014 . it then briefly describes the requirement for exchanges to be self - sustaining , and concludes with a discussion of the sources and amounts of funding that hhs has used and plans to use to support ffe operations . fourteen states and dc established sbes in 2014 , while the remaining 36 states have ffes . the remaining $125 million came from the health insurance reform and implementation fund ( hirif ) , a $1 billion fund within hhs that was established and funded to help pay for the administrative costs of aca implementation . in many states with ffes , the exchange is wholly operated and administered by hhs . figure 1 shows the total amount of funding each state has received from the grants as well as the type of exchange ( sbe or ffe ) each state has in 2014 . of that amount , $629 million is from cms's program management account , and the remaining $1,159 million is projected to come from ffe user fees .
social security's minimum benefit provision , the special minimum primary insurance amount ( pia ) , is an alternative benefit formula that increases benefits paid to workers who had low earnings for many years and to their dependents and survivors . in 2017 , about 39,347 ( or about 0.6% ) of the 62 million social security recipients qualified for the minimum benefit . unlike the standard social security benefit formula , which is based on a worker's average lifetime earnings , the special minimum pia is based on the number of years a person has worked . because of the way regular social security benefits and the special minimum pia are computed , the number of recipients who qualify for the special minimum pia has been decreasing . to be eligible for a social security retired - worker benefit , a worker generally needs 40 earnings credits ( also called quarters of coverage ) . beneficiaries receive the higher of the two amounts . it then presents arguments for and against expanding the special minimum pia , discusses elements to be considered in proposals for change , and describes some specific options for increasing benefits paid to people with low earnings or low income . the primary insurance amoun t ( pia ) is the benefit a worker would receive if the worker elects to begin receiving retirement benefits at the worker's full retirement age ( fra , sometimes called the normal retirement age ) . after 1999 , the provision has benefited only newly entitled beneficiaries whose regular benefit is subject to the wep ( see figure 2 ) . as table 2 shows , almost 73% of the affected beneficiaries were workers and about 19% were widow ( er ) s. spouses and child beneficiaries accounted for the remainder . in 2018 , a worker earns one credit for each $1,320 of covered earnings ( i.e. , earnings subject to social security payroll taxes ) , up to a maximum of four credits for covered earnings of $5,280 or more . the difference between the regular pia and the special minimum pia for a low earner with 30 years of coverage has declined , with an estimated difference of $4 for a worker becoming eligible in 2010 ( see figure 3 ) . this report explains how the special minimum pia functions under current law and provides some historical background on minimum benefit provisions in the social security act . ssa's office of the chief actuary , the congressional budget office ( cbo ) , and ssa's office of retirement policy have all published detailed analyses of the effects of various minimum benefit options . some proposals would address poverty among long - term , low - wage workers and their dependents by targeting benefit increases to single or divorced women or to people who live into advanced old age . the social security administration projects that the provision will have no effect on people turning 62 years old in 2019 or later . the estimates of the impact the special minimum pia has on monthly benefits show that in june 2013 , the special minimum pia increased average benefits of those affected by the provision by an average of $46 per month ( see table 2 ) .
the u.s. constitution imposes on the government a system of restraints to provide that no unfair law is enforced and that no law is enforced unfairly . recent high - profile military justice issues include dismissal of charges by setting aside findings in an aviano court - martial related to sexual offenses ; alleged sexual assault of a civilian by an officer serving as the chief of the air force sexual assault prevention & response branch at the pentagon ; and sexual assaults by instructors on recruits and tech school trainees at lackland air force base . widely publicized allegations of sexual assault in the military have led to questions on how the military pursues claims of sexual misconduct . under this authority , congress has enacted the uniform code of military justice ( ucmj ) , which is the code of military criminal laws applicable to all u.s. military members worldwide . for example , the house version includes at least 20 provisions requiring statutory changes to the ucmj , modification of the rules for courts - martial , and other policy changes ; while the senate version , as reported by the senate armed services committee , incorporates at least 26 changes . congress , exercising its constitutional authority to raise , support , and regulate the armed forces , has attempted to address the issue of sexual assaults and other sex - related offenses under the ucmj through the introduction of various legislative proposals . the constitution , in order to provide for the common defense , gives congress the power to raise , support , and regulate the armed forces , but makes the president commander in chief of the armed forces . under article i , section 8 of the u.s. constitution , congress has the power to raise and support armies ; provide and maintain a navy ; and provide for organizing and disciplining them . the mcm contains the rules for courts - martial ( rcm ) , the military rules of evidence ( mre ) , and the ucmj . the proposed language , if enacted , would prohibit the enlistment of individuals previously convicted of sexual offenses , eliminate the statute of limitations on prosecution of sexual offenses , and prohibit commanders from overturning a court - martial conviction as part of the post - trial review process . the house and senate have included numerous provisions addressing sexual assault , including those mentioned above , in the respective versions of the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2014 ( fy2014 ndaa ) . the president implemented the ucmj through the manual for courts - martial ( mcm ) , which was initially prescribed by executive order 12473 ( april 13 , 1984 ) . s. 967 addresses sex - related offenses under the ucmj by modifying the authority to proceed to trial by court - martial , modifying the manual for courts - martial to eliminate the factor relating to character and military service of the accused on initial disposition , modifying the authority to convene general and special courts - martial , creating a deadline for a military judge to call general and special courts - martial into session , modifying clemency authority of the convening authority , and requiring command action on reports of sexual offenses .
many decisions the senate makes — from routine requests for additional debate time , to determinations of how legislation will be considered on the floor — are arrived at by unanimous consent . senate rules , procedures , and precedents give significant parliamentary power to individual senators during the course of chamber deliberations . many hold requests take the form of a letter addressed to the majority or minority leader ( depending on the party affiliation of the senator placing the hold ) expressing reservations about the merits or timing of a particular policy proposal or nomination . efforts to modify the original request may be undertaken — a process that can require extensive negotiations between and among senate leaders and their colleagues — but there is no guarantee that a particular objection can be addressed to the satisfaction of all senators . the senate hold emerges from within this context of unanimous - consent decision - making as a method of transmitting policy or scheduling preferences to senate leaders regarding matters available for floor consideration . when a unanimous consent request is proposed on the floor , any senator may object to it . with hold - inspired negotiations underway , the senate can turn its attention to more broadly - supported matters . unless the target of a hold is of considerable importance to the majority leader and a supermajority of his colleagues — 60 of whom might be required to invoke cloture on legislation under senate rule xxii — the most practical course of action is often to lay the matter aside and attempt to promote negotiations that could alleviate the concerns that gave rise to the hold . if objection is heard , the consent request does not take effect . more often than not , senate leaders — as agents of their party responsible for defending the political , policy , and procedural interests of their colleagues — honor a hold request because not doing so could trigger a range of parliamentary responses from the holding senator ( s ) , such as a filibuster , that could expend significant amounts of scarce floor time . the senate has considered a variety of proposals targeting the senate hold in recent years , two of which the chamber adopted . as such , efforts to regulate holds are inextricably linked with the chamber's use of unanimous consent agreements to structure the process of calling up measures and matters for floor debate and amendment . a second challenge to hold regulation involves the nature of the transmission itself . senate holds are predicated on the unanimous consent nature of senate decision - making . an example of a hold letter is displayed in appendix a . accordingly , rather than restricting the process itself , recent attempts to alter the operation of holds have focused on making the secrecy of holds less absolute . as agents of their party , senate leaders value the information that holds provide regarding the policy and scheduling preferences of their colleagues . while not all holds are intended to prevent the consideration of a particular measure , some do take that form , and senate leaders justifiably perceive those correspondences as implicit filibuster threats . until recently , many holds were considered a nonymous ( or secret ) because the source and contents of the request were not made available to the public , or even to other senators .
under federal law , states and leas are required to provide all children with equal access to a public elementary and secondary education , regardless of their immigration status . while much of the congressional interest initially focused directly on immigration policy , the implications for other areas , including education , are now arising as well . upon arrival in the united states , unaccompanied alien children generally are initially served through programs operated by the department of health and human services' ( hhs's ) office of refugee resettlement ( orr ) . rather , the first part of this report includes a discussion of three federal elementary and secondary education programs administered by the u.s. department of education ( ed ) : ( 1 ) title i - a grants to local educational agencies ( leas ) authorized by the elementary and secondary education act ( esea ) , ( 2 ) english language acquisition grants ( title iii - a ) authorized by the esea , and ( 3 ) part b grants to states authorized by the individuals with disabilities education act ( idea ) with an emphasis on how these programs could currently serve unaccompanied alien children or possibly be modified to increase support for these children . the number of children coming to the united states who are not accompanied by a parent or legal guardian is raising a host of policy questions . the first is the emergency immigrant education act ( eiea ) , which preceded the english language acquisition program . the second is the temporary emergency impact aid for displaced students program , which was enacted following hurricanes katrina and rita to provide aid to states that enrolled elementary and secondary students who were displaced as a result of the storms . this program has been of particular interest to congress because it provided aid on a short - term basis to schools and leas that experienced an unexpected influx of students . while in these programs , children are provided with basic education services and activities and are not enrolled in local school systems . in response to congressional interest in these issues , this report addresses possible sources of federal support for schools and local educational agencies that have enrolled unaccompanied alien children . it is not intended to provide a comprehensive review of all programs that could potentially serve these children . however , once an unaccompanied alien child is released to an appropriate sponsor ( e.g. , parent , other family member , or other adult ) , the child has the right to enroll in a local school , just like any other child living in that area , even while awaiting immigration proceedings . the next section of the report provides an overview of the refugee school impact aid program administered by orr , which funds activities aimed at the effective integration and education of refugee children . the last section of the report addresses the challenge of providing funds to leas and schools that are absorbing newly arriving unaccompanied children in light of the lack of local area data on the number of unaccompanied alien children that have been released from orr custody . the second part of the report examines two programs that were previously administered by ed but are no longer funded .
under the authorization of the adult education and family literacy act ( aefla ) , the federal government makes grants to states to support services to improve literacy and other basic skills among adults who are not enrolled in school . under the wioa provisions , section 202 of aefla specifies that the purpose of the legislation is to create a partnership between the federal government , states , and localities to provide services to ( 1 ) assist adults to become literate and obtain the knowledge and skills necessary for employment and economic self - sufficiency ; ( 2 ) assist adults who are parents or family members to obtain the education and skills that - ( a ) are necessary to becoming full partners in the educational development of their children ; and ( b ) lead to sustainable improvements in the economic opportunities for their family ; ( 3 ) assist adults in attaining a secondary school diploma and in the transition to postsecondary education and training , including through career pathways ; and ( 4 ) assist immigrants and other individuals who are english language learners in - ( a ) improving their - ( i ) reading , writing , speaking , and comprehension skills in english ; and ( ii ) mathematics skills ; and ( b ) acquiring an understanding of the american system of government , individual freedom , and the responsibilities of citizenship . aefla programs are administered at the federal level by the u.s. department of education ( ed ) through its office of vocational and adult education ( ovae ) . paragraph ( 3 ) expands the program purpose to include transition to postsecondary education and training . this means that , as of this writing , both the federal government and states are operating their adult education programs under the wia provisions of aefla while preparing to implement the wioa provisions . paragraph ( 4 ) is a new provision in wioa and has no direct counterpart in prior law . this report will focus on the wioa provisions of aefla , though it will discuss prior wia provisions as necessary . in july 2014 , aefla was reauthorized as title ii of the workforce innovation and opportunity act of 2014 ( wioa , p.l . total appropriation reservation for national leadership activities ( 2% of total appropriation ) unreserved funds ( 98% of total appropriation ) english literacy and civics education state grants ( 12% of unreserved funds ) adult education state grant funds ( 88% of unreserved funds ) subgrants to local providers ( at least 82.5% of adult education state grant funds ) state leadership activities ( up to 12.5% of adult education state grant funds ) administrative costs ( up to 5% of adult education state grant ) as noted in table 1 , the aefla provisions of wioa repealed two reservations that were enacted in the aefla provisions of wia . under wioa , adult education is defined as: [a]cademic instruction and education services below the postsecondary level that increase an individual's ability to — ( a ) read , write , and speak in english and perform mathematics or other activities necessary for the attainment of a secondary school diploma or its recognized equivalent ; ( b ) transition to postsecondary education and training ; and ( c ) obtain employment .
however , they also reflect long - standing debate over whether and to what degree the federal procurement process should be used to promote socioeconomic goals that one court described as "only indirectly related to conventional procurement considerations" ( i.e. , acquiring the supplies and services that best meet the government's needs at the lowest price ) . congress has sought to discourage corporate inversions by barring certain contracts with inverted domestic corporations ever since it enacted the homeland security act of 2002 ( p.l . these questions are shaped , in part , by the broader debate over whether such corporations are to be seen as "deserters," who change their corporate citizenship to avoid paying u.s. taxes , or as evidencing systemic problems in the u.s. tax code . many questions pertain to the current restrictions on contracting with inverted domestic corporations , including ( 1 ) the nature of the restrictions , ( 2 ) what constitutes an inverted domestic corporation for purposes of the restrictions , and ( 3 ) whether the restrictions can be waived . recent reports that certain entities continued to receive federal government contracts after reincorporating overseas have prompted questions about current and proposed restrictions on contracting with "inverted domestic corporations. . thus , some members of the 114 th congress have proposed legislation to reduce or remove opportunities for inverted domestic corporations to receive government contracts . as amended , this act prohibits the department of homeland security from awarding a contract to an inverted domestic corporation , or a subsidiary thereof , unless the secretary of homeland security determines that a waiver is necessary in the interest of national security . there have also been calls by members of both the 113 th and 114 th congresses for the executive to take action to further restrict agencies' ability to contract with inverted domestic corporations . the act also establishes its own definition of inverted domestic corporation , which is different from that in the internal revenue code . subsequent legislation imposed similar prohibitions upon other agencies , although only as to funds appropriated or otherwise made available under specific acts of congress . similar legislation was introduced in the 113 th congress . this report provides the answers to 14 frequently asked questions regarding the current restrictions on contracting with inverted domestic corporations , proposed amendments thereto , and the relationship between the prohibitions upon contracting with inverted domestic corporations and other provisions of law that restrict dealings with "foreign" contractors . 1809 , the no federal contracts for corporate deserters act ; s. 975 , the american business for american companies act ) . yet other questions concern the relationship between the current or proposed restrictions on contracting with inverted domestic corporations and other provisions of federal law that ( 1 ) generally require federal agencies to purchase "domestic" items , and ( 2 ) expressly or effectively preclude some or all foreign corporations from performing certain contracts . 107-296 , â§835 ) . other questions and answers pertain to legislation introduced in the 114 th congress that would make the preexisting ban on contracting with inverted domestic corporations permanent law and strengthen it ( h.r . however , some commentators have argued that inverted domestic corporations have continued to receive federal contracts because of "loopholes" or "gaps" in these measures .
these include significant government ( military , intelligence , and civil ) and commercial interests . maintaining the benefits afforded by space is central to a wide range of u.s. national interests . the 2011 national security space strategy declared , "space is vital to u.s. national security and our ability to understand emerging threats , project power globally , conduct operations , support diplomatic efforts , and enable global economic viability. . in recent years , recognition has been growing among space - faring nations and the international scientific community that the mass of man - made debris in low - earth orbit ( leo ) has reached a critical density that will lead to a slow but unstoppable growth of space debris that could have profound implications for those interests . possible questions could focus on the perceived severity of the problem , whether mitigation efforts to date are adequate , and whether there should be any commitment to pursue remediation in earnest . regarding possible appropriations considerations , the 2011 national research council study found that new resources would be required if nasa is to pursue the 2010 national space policy goals of research and development of technologies and techniques to mitigate and remove on - orbit debris . although congress may not need to make key decisions immediately , congress may want to begin to focus on measures the united states may take to mitigate the threat associated with orbital debris . congress might also consider requiring dod and nasa to develop a roadmap outlining a range of possible remediation programs to consider . a few hearings in recent years have touched on orbital debris issues , but congress might consider additional hearings from major stakeholders in the military , intelligence , civil , and commercial sector on whether proposed mitigation measures are in the national interests of the united states . for this reason , more aggressive measures , such as active debris removal , could be considered to protect u.s. national security interests in space and the long - term sustainability of the space environment . significant debris - generating events in the past decade have heightened the issue , and a number of national and international studies confirm that the amount of current leo debris is both unstable and increasing . remediation is complex and would likely require significant resources , technological advances , and international cooperation . congress might find it useful to begin investigating those potential budgetary costs , and whether funding should borne wholly by nasa or by dod or some combination . if the technologies to remove on - orbit debris are developed and implemented , the management requirements on nasa may become as significant as those associated with any major nasa program . although space debris is not the sole threat to u.s. space assets , this report focuses on the threat posed by orbital debris , the steps that have been taken thus far to mitigate it , and what might be done to ensure the long - term sustainability of the space environment . the 2013 iadc comparison study recommended that the international community "initiate an effort to investigate the benefits of environment remediation , explore various options , and support the development of the most cost - effective technologies in preparation for actions to better preserve the near - earth environment for future generations. .
the surge of central american children coming to the united states who are not accompanied by a parent or legal guardian and who lack proper immigration documents is raising complex and competing sets of humanitarian concerns and immigration control issues . by contrast , two statutes and a legal settlement ( as well as the ina ) most directly affect u.s. policy for the treatment and administrative processing of unaccompanied children: the flores settlement agreement of 1997 ; the homeland security act of 2002 ( hsa ; p.l . the treatment of adults and families with children is prescribed by the immigration and nationality act ( ina ) , as notably amended by the illegal immigrant reform and immigrant responsibility act of 1996 . adults and families from the same three countries — el salvador , guatemala , and honduras — have also been coming in increasing numbers over the same period . 107-296 ) ; and the trafficking victims protection reauthorization act of 2008 ( tvpra , p.l . these three countries have been experiencing high violent crime rates , poor economic conditions fueled by relatively low economic growth rates , high rates of poverty , and the presence of transnational gangs . under the ina , foreign nationals present in the united states may apply for asylum with the united states citizenship and immigration services bureau ( uscis ) in the department of homeland security ( dhs ) after arrival into the country , or may seek asylum before the department of justice's ( doj's ) executive office for immigration review ( eoir ) during removal proceedings . the most notable and recent revisions to asylum policy that pertain to unaccompanied children were included in the william wilberforce trafficking victims protection reauthorization act ( tvpra ) of 2008 . current law requires that unaccompanied alien children are treated differently than unauthorized adults or unauthorized families with children who come to the united states seeking asylum . although these factors may prompt nationals of these countries to emigrate and may also elicit a humanitarian response from the receiving nations , the factors do not necessarily lead to a determination that those fleeing are refugees or asylees under the law . as congress faces the challenges posed by an influx of unaccompanied alien children , whether to revise the law on how unaccompanied children are treated in terms of asylum and expedited removal is a key question . rather , proponents of current law maintain that the prudent response to the surge of unaccompanied children is to temporarily increase appropriations so that it can be expeditiously implemented . the asylum provisions of the tvpra were part of a larger set of provisions that revised the initial processing , temporary placement , and immigration relief options for unaccompanied children . to bring clarity to the unique policies toward unaccompanied children , this report compares their treatment to that of unauthorized adults and families with children in the specific contexts of asylum and expedited removal . the legislative road to the tvpra provisions on asylum for unaccompanied children began in the 1980s and 1990s , when immigration rights and child welfare advocacy groups challenged the policies of treating unauthorized children much the same as unauthorized adults under the ina . those who support current law assert that the policies in place strike the proper balance , notably by affording unaccompanied children the opportunity to recover from their potentially traumatizing journey before they make their asylum claims .
on june 15 , 2012 , the department of homeland security ( dhs ) announced that certain individuals without a lawful immigration status who were brought to the united states as children and meet other criteria would be considered for relief from removal from the country for two years , subject to renewal . citizenship and immigration services ( uscis ) began accepting requests for consideration of daca on august 15 , 2012 , and issued its first approvals in september 2012 . dhs's u.s . prior to that , from june 15 , 2012 , to august 15 , 2012 , dhs's immigration and customs enforcement ( ice ) granted deferred action under the daca process in some cases . this initiative is known as deferred action for childhood arrivals , or daca . the daca recipient must satisfy the following criteria: the individual did not depart from the united states on or after august 15 , 2012 , without first obtaining advance parole ; the individual has continuously resided in the united states since submitting his or her latest approved daca request ; and the individual has not been convicted of a felony , a significant misdemeanor , or three or more misdemeanors , and is not a threat to national security or public safety . more than 580,000 requests for consideration of daca have been approved through june 2014 . individuals granted deferred action under the daca process may request renewal of their deferral for another two years , in accordance with uscis procedures . an individual granted deferred action ( an initial grant or a renewal ) is not given a lawful immigration status and is not put on a pathway to a lawful immigration status . to request a renewal of deferred action under daca , an individual must file the following three forms with dhs / uscis ( the same forms as required for an initial daca request ) : form i - 821d , consideration of deferred action for childhood arrivals form i - 765 , application for employment authorization form i - 765ws , worksheet the forms are available on the uscis website , http: / / www.uscis.gov . however , if the individual filed the renewal request 120 days before the expiration of the period of deferred action and employment authorization , and uscis was delayed in processing the request , uscis may provide the individual with deferred action and employment authorization on a short - term basis while it completes processing . the individual does have to submit any new documents related to removal proceedings or criminal history . answers to frequently asked questions about daca and the renewal process are provided below . an individual requesting a daca renewal does not have to submit any documents that he or she previously provided to uscis in connection with an approved daca request . an individual who was granted deferred action under daca by ice should file the same three forms to request a renewal as an individual who was initially granted deferred action under daca by uscis ( see " what forms and other materials does an applicant for daca renewal have to file ? . unless the individual was under age 18 at the time of submitting the renewal request , he or she would be considered to be unlawfully present during the intervening period ( see " are daca recipients granted lawful immigration status ? .
5278 , the puerto rico oversight , management , and economic stability act ( promesa ) , which representative duffy introduced on may 18 , 2016 . amendments agreed to include technical corrections and extensions of certain studies on the puerto rico government and economy , among others . the major provisions of the bill , however , were unaffected . this bill is a revised version of h.r . a brief description of puerto rico , its relationship with the federal government , and its fiscal challenges is presented below . 4900 , which representative duffy had introduced on april 12 , 2016 . the house committee on natural resources had circulated two discussion drafts in late march 2016 similar in structure to h.r . according to that rule , the text of the measure was inserted into an unrelated senate - passed bill ( s. 2328 ) upon house passage . 5278 on may 25 , 2016 . many changes clarified or modified existing provisions , although some new provisions were added and other provisions were dropped . the president signed the bill on june 30 , 2016 . seven amendments were agreed to , but a proposal to strike a minimum wage provision ( §403 ) was not . 770 ) that made consideration of eight amendments in order . the house committee on natural resources marked up h.r . t his report provides a summary and analysis of h.r . the senate then concurred with the house amendment to s. 2328 on june 29 , 2016 , by a 68-30 vote , thus approving promesa . the house rules committee issued a rule ( h.res . the house passed an amended version of h.r . appendix a also describes other measures introduced to address puerto rico's fiscal condition . 5278 on june 9 , 2016 , by a 297-127 vote . a short overview of the bill , along with a comparison with previous legislation involving control boards , follows . most sections are similar or identical . the measure is organized into seven titles , which are summarized below . appendix a gives a background on puerto rico's fiscal situation and aspects relevant to h.r . the body of the report provides a section - by - section description of h.r . 4900 and h.r . appendix b contains a summary of provisions of the federal bankruptcy code cited in h.r . 5278 . 5278 . 4900 . 5278 . the puerto rico oversight , management , and economic stability act ( promesa ; h.r . an oversight board created under the provisions of the bill would be comprised of seven ( 7 ) voting members with six ( 6 ) selected by the president from a list of recommendations submitted by house and senate leadership . promesa would establish an oversight board with broad powers of budgetary and financial control over puerto rico . 5278 ) would create a structure for exercising federal oversight over the fiscal affairs of territories . the minority leader of the house would submit the names of three ( 3 ) individuals ; and the minority leader of the senate would submit the names of at least three ( 3 ) individuals . the senate majority leader would submit the names of at least four ( 4 ) individuals .
9 ) by a vote of 24 to 8 , and the senate judiciary committee passed the patent act ( s. 1137 ) by a vote of 16 to 4 ; both bills are awaiting floor action . in june 2015 , the house judiciary committee approved the innovation act ( h.r . congress has shown significant interest in altering the current patent system in response to concerns about entities that engage in patent litigation tactics that have been criticized as abusive or deceptive . this report describes how the major provisions of current patent litigation reform legislation , with a particular focus on these two bills that have seen the most legislative activity , would change existing patent law to address the perceived problems in the patent litigation system . many congressional hearings on the topic of patent litigation abuse have been held in the 114 th and 113 th congresses , and several legislative proposals have been introduced ; one bill in the 113 th congress , h.r . 3309 , the innovation act , was passed by the house in december 2013 . the remainder of this report discusses and analyzes the key provisions of legislative proposals that have been introduced in the 114 th congress related to patent litigation abuse . the u.s. supreme court recently adopted a rule , which went into effect on december 1 , 2015 , that abolished federal rules of civil procedure's form 18 . the subject matter of the patent law reforms is presented below in no particular order . according to form 18 , a complaint for patent infringement needed to include four statements that assert jurisdiction , patent ownership , patent infringement by the defendant , and a demand for relief . both the innovation act and patent act would also explicitly eliminate the federal rules of civil procedure's form 18 . similarly , both bills also exempt from the proposed heightened pleading requirements any civil action that includes a claim for relief arising under section 271 ( e ) ( 2 ) of the current patent act relating to certain drug claims . plaintiffs typically relied upon the federal rules of civil procedure's form 18 to structure their patent infringement complaint . 9 , proposes additional heightened initial pleading requirements for an infringement claim , as compared to the current requirements under the federal rules of civil procedure's form 18 . under these new requirements , a party alleging infringement in a complaint must include specific details regarding the following: each patent allegedly infringed ; all claims necessary to produce the identification of each process , machine , manufacture , or composition of matter ( "accused instrumentality" ) that is alleged to infringe any claim of each patent identified above ; for each accused instrumentality alleged to infringe a claim , an identification with particularity ( if known ) of the name or model number of each accused instrumentality or a description of each accused instrumentality ; for each accused instrumentality , a clear and concise statement of how it infringes each claim of each patent ; for each claim of indirect infringement , the acts of the alleged indirect infringer that contribute to , or are inducing , a direct infringement ; the authority of the party alleging infringement to assert each patent and the grounds for the court's jurisdiction ; and each complaint filed that asserts any of the same patents like the innovation act , the senate's patent act also proposes heightened pleading requirements , including such details as the identification of each patent allegedly infringed ; the identification of each claim of each patent that is allegedly infringed ; the identification ( including the name , model number , or description ) of the accused instrumentality that has allegedly infringed the patent ; a description of how the accused instrumentality is allegedly infringing specific elements of the claim ; and a description of the acts of the alleged infringer that allegedly contributed to or induced the direct infringement , for claims of indirect infringement .
it specifically discusses appropriations for the components of dhs included in the third title of the homeland security appropriations bill — the national protection and programs directorate ( nppd ) , the office of health affairs ( oha ) , and the federal emergency management agency ( fema ) . this report is part of a suite of reports that discuss appropriations for the department of homeland security ( dhs ) for fy2016 . the suite of crs reports on homeland security appropriations tracks legislative action and congressional issues related to dhs appropriations , with particular attention paid to discretionary funding amounts . the report provides an overview of the administration's fy2016 request for protection , preparedness , response , and recovery , and the appropriations proposed by congress in response , and those enacted thus far . the reports do not provide in - depth analysis of specific issues related to mandatory funding — such as retirement pay — nor do they systematically follow other legislation related to the authorization or amending of dhs programs , activities , or fee revenues . rather than limiting the scope of its review to the third title , the report includes information on provisions throughout the proposed bill and report that directly affect these functions . the appendix to crs report r44053 , department of homeland security appropriations: fy2016 , explains several of these concepts , including budget authority , obligations , outlays , discretionary and mandatory spending , offsetting collections , allocations , and adjustments to the discretionary spending caps under the budget control act ( p.l . collectively , congress has labeled these components in recent years as "protection , preparedness , response , and recovery. . a more complete discussion of those terms and the appropriations process in general can be found in crs report r42388 , the congressional appropriations process: an introduction , by [author name scrubbed] , and the government accountability office's a glossary of terms used in the federal budget process . discussion of appropriations legislation involves a variety of specialized budgetary concepts . 112-25 ) . discretionary appropriations provide roughly two - thirds to three - fourths of the annual funding for dhs operations , depending how one accounts for disaster relief spending and funding for overseas contingency operations . the first four are thematic groupings of components: departmental management and operations ; security , enforcement , and investigations ; protection , preparedness , response , and recovery ; and research and development , training , and services . these increases reflect the net results of adjustments made to base funding ( including realignments of funds between ppas ) , programmatic increases , and programmatic decreases . appropriations measures for dhs typically have been organized into five titles . the senate committee reduced the total funding for infrastructure security compliance ppa by $5 million , but directed $13 million toward the ammonium nitrate security program . the remainder of the budget is a mix of fee revenues , trust funds , and mandatory spending . the request would increase funds for infrastructure protection activities by $24 million , cybersecurity activities by $65 million , and communications activities by $34 million , above fy2015 enacted levels .
if regular appropriations are not enacted by the start of the fiscal year ( october 1 ) , continuing appropriations may be used to provide temporary funding until the annual appropriations process is concluded . congress uses an annual appropriations process to fund discretionary spending , which supports the projects and activities of most federal government agencies . none of the fy2016 regular appropriations bills was enacted by the start of the fiscal year ( october 1 , 2015 ) . this process anticipates the enactment of 12 regular appropriations bills each fiscal year . the first two sections summarize the overall funding provided ( " coverage , duration , and rate " ) and budget enforcement issues associated with the statutory discretionary spending limits ( " the cr and the statutory discretionary spending limits " ) . if all 12 regular appropriations bills are not enacted by the time that the first cr for a fiscal year expires , further extensions of that cr might be enacted until all regular appropriations bills have been completed or the fiscal year ends . 719 , a cr for fy2016 , was passed by the house and senate and signed into law by the president on september 30 , 2015 ( p.l . crs may be enacted for a period of days , weeks , or months . this cr provides funds for covered projects and activities from the beginning of the fiscal year , october 1 , 2015 , through december 11 , 2015 . the third section of this report provides short summaries of the provisions in this cr that are agency - , account - , or program - specific . the purpose of this report is to provide an analysis of the continuing appropriations in h.r . continuing appropriations acts are often referred to as "continuing resolutions" or "crs. . 114-53 ) . in some instances , additional information about those appropriations and how they operate under a cr is provided . for general information on the content of crs and historical data on crs enacted between fy1977 and fy2015 , see crs report r42647 , continuing resolutions: overview of components and recent practices , by [author name scrubbed] . for information on the fy2016 appropriations process , see crs report r44062 , congressional action on fy2016 appropriations measures , by [author name scrubbed] . h.r . in addition , congress may identify other anomalies and provisions changing law for inclusion in the cr . these summaries are organized by appropriations act title . 719 . second , certain provisions may have the effect of creating new law or changing existing law . most typically , these provisions are used to renew expiring provisions of law or extend the scope of certain existing statutory requirements to the funds provided in the cr . these anomalies and provisions that change law may be included at the request of the president . congress could accept , reject , or modify these proposals in the course of drafting and considering appropriations measures that provide continuing appropriations . substantive provisions that establish major new policies have also been included on occasion . the purpose of anomalies is to preserve congress's constitutional prerogative to provide appropriations in the manner it sees fit , even in instances when only short - term funding is provided .
the manner by which hong kong selects its next chief executive ( ce ) in 2017 may be a bellwether for the prospects for the democratization of the city's governance system . although china's leaders have agreed in principle that the chief executive for the hong kong special administrative region of the people's republic of china ( hksar ) may be chosen by universal suffrage in 2017 , the conditions placed on the method of nominating candidates may prove to be unacceptable to the people of hong kong and the city's legislature , the legislative council ( legco ) . controversies over restrictions on the ce's proposal to legco imposed by an august 2014 decision of china's national people's congress standing committee ( npcsc ) have led to ongoing protests across hong kong and serious opposition from some legco members . first , the u.s. - hong kong policy act of 1992 ( 22 u.s.c . on june 18 , 2015 , legco voted 28 against and 8 in favor , thereby defeating the resolution . leung ) , submitted his proposed resolution to change the ce selection process to legco on june 17 , 2015 . despite the apparent promise in the npcsc's december 2007 decision , legislation in 2010 to make modest changes in the ce selection process were approved by legco only after the prc government and hong kong's democratic party struck a last - minute agreement . past attempts to reform hong kong's election process have had mixed results . hong kong's current chief executive , leung chun - ying ( c.y . since hong kong's reversion from british to chinese sovereignty in 1997 , many of the people of hong kong have looked forward to and campaigned for the fulfilment of the promise contained in the city's basic law — the election of the chief executive and legco by universal suffrage . the prospects for democratic election reforms in hong kong are of potential interest to congress for several reasons . it remains to be seen if this effectively ends prospects for reforming the ce selection method before the 2017 election , or if the npcsc , ce leung , or legco will identify a new path toward the ce's election by universal suffrage . in december 2005 , legco voted down proposed ce election reforms after up to 250,000 people rallied against the proposed reforms . on december 29 , 2007 , in response to a request from then ce donald tsang yam - kuen , the npcsc issued "decision on issues relating to the methods of selecting the chief executive of the hong kong special administrative region and for forming the legislative council of the hong kong special administrative region in the year 2012 and on issues relating to universal suffrage," which stated that the chief executive may be elected by universal suffrage in 2017 . fourth , the resolution of hong kong's political reforms may have an impact on relations between china and taiwan . 102-383 ) states , "support for democratization is a fundamental principle of u.s. foreign policy . second , how china handles the possible democratic election reforms in hong kong is one indicator of its commitment to its "one country , two systems" policy as it applies to hong kong , as well as its tolerance of political reform in general .
the u.s. congress has a long history of engagement on u.s. policy toward sudan — since the end of apartheid in south africa , there is no country in africa on which congress has focused more sustained attention . this bipartisan focus has been driven in part by diverse advocacy groups and public awareness campaigns on issues in sudan ranging from famine to modern - day slavery , religious persecution , genocide , and other violations of human rights and humanitarian law . prior to the secession of south sudan , sudan was africa's largest nation by area , and the site of its longest running civil war . the secession of south sudan was a major financial blow to sudan , which lost 75% of its oil production , two - thirds of its export earnings , and half of its fiscal revenues . u.s. sanctions limit sudan's access to u.s. dollars and , alongside debt arrears , impede sudan's access to international financial markets and institutions . mistrust between sudan and south sudan lingers , and unresolved disputes still threaten the stability of the region . the north - south split did not resolve other simmering sudanese conflicts , notably in darfur , blue nile , and southern kordofan ( see figure 1 ) . terrorism concerns have overlapped the policy debates . overlapping struggles between security forces and armed groups , among ethnic groups , and between nomadic and farming communities have caused extensive displacement and human suffering . the country carries a heavy external debt burden of $45 billion ( 78% of gdp ) , much of it in arrears . after the united states levied heavy fines against the french bank bnp paribas in 2014 for violating u.s. sanctions against sudan and other countries , most foreign banks stopped transacting with sudanese banks , tightening the foreign exchange market and adversely affecting its trade . iran has reportedly played a significant role in the development of sudan's military industry ( sudan now ranks as the third largest weapons manufacturer on the continent , after egypt and south africa ) . khartoum's internal military operations against restive regions continue to draw international condemnation and have prevented sudan from improving relations with many western countries , including the united states . relations between sudan and key arab gulf countries , which have been important sources of trade , investment , and project financing for khartoum , had cooled in recent years amid some arab countries' concerns over sudan's ties to iran and its perceived support for the muslim brotherhood in other countries . while annual aid appropriations measures continue to include provisions restricting u.s. aid to the government of sudan , congress has not passed standalone sudan legislation since 2007 ( prior to the outbreak of the conflict in the two areas ) . khartoum has since taken several conspicuous steps to address concerns about its relationship with iran , including by expelling iran's cultural attaché in september 2014 and closing its cultural centers in the country . the ongoing cost of waging war on multiple fronts compounds sudan's economic troubles and , combined with allegations of political repression , fuels domestic criticism of the government and sparks periodic public protests .
the u.s. poultry industry is experiencing a severe outbreak of highly - pathogenic avian influenza ( hpai ) . as of june 17 , 2015 , the u.s. department of agriculture's ( usda's ) animal and plant health inspection service ( aphis ) reported 223 cases of hpai in domestic flocks in 15 states . cases have been caused by several highly pathogenic h5 avian influenza ( ai ) strains that result in substantial mortality in domestic poultry . established u.s. animal health policy is to eliminate the ai virus ( both hpai and lpai strains ) , when it is found , through depopulation ( i.e. , euthanasia and disposal ) of affected poultry . according to the centers for disease control and prevention ( cdc ) , no infections in humans have been associated with the current hpai outbreak , and cdc considers the public health risk to be low .  ( in this context , a "case" is an affected premise. ) . the poultry export sector is also faced with numerous bans on shipments of u.s products . more than 48 million chickens , turkeys , and other poultry have been euthanized to stem the spread of the disease . outbreaks of low pathogenic avian influenza ( lpai ) are more frequent , but result in minor illness in poultry . prior hpai outbreaks in the united states occurred in 1924 , 1983 , and 2004 . with loss of production , consumers see higher retail prices . to control the 1983 outbreak , 17 million birds were euthanized in the u.s. northeast . nonetheless , efforts are made to also eliminate lpai outbreaks , because lpai strains could potentially mutate to become more pathogenic . commercial broiler farms have not been affected to date . aphis , state , and local animal health officials euthanize poultry , clean and disinfect premises and equipment , and then test for elimination of the virus to ensure that farms can be safely restocked . turkey and egg - laying hen farms in minnesota and iowa have been hardest hit . the 1924 and 2004 outbreaks were quickly contained . 114-82 ) accompanying the fy2016 agriculture appropriations bills also would direct usda to use its existing authority to transfer funds from ccc as needed to address the hpai outbreak . this process is time consuming , and poultry producers lose significant income as barns and laying houses are out of production for several months . on july 16 , 2015 , the senate committee on appropriations marked up the fy2016 agriculture appropriations bill ( s. 1800 ) , which would provide aphis with $52 million for avian health , unchanged from fy2015 . usda indemnifies poultry owners and pays for cleaning , disinfecting , and testing . the cost of the hpai outbreak to the poultry industry is high . the house and senate appropriations committee reports ( h.rept . with all flyways likely involved , hpai could be introduced into large poultry production areas in the southeastern united states that have not been affected so far . 3049 ) , which includes $55 million for avian health , $3 million more than appropriated for fy2015 . according to usda , the avian health program includes ai prevention and control activities ; avian health and management studies ; disease threat planning and response for the livestock , poultry , and zoological industries ; comprehensive poultry disease surveillance ( including wildlife surveillance ) ; and zoonotic disease prevention and response .
current aid programs reflect the diverse needs of the countries in the region ( see figure 1 for a map of latin america and the caribbean ) . foreign assistance is one of the tools the united states employs to advance u.s. interests in latin america and the caribbean , and the focus and funding levels of aid programs change along with broader u.s. policy goals . congress has identified foreign assistance as a potential area for spending cuts , placing greater scrutiny on the efficiency and effectiveness of u.s. aid programs . some countries receive the full range of u.s. assistance as they struggle with political , socioeconomic , and security challenges . although u.s. relations with the nations of latin america and the caribbean have become less defined by the provision of assistance as a result of this progress , foreign aid continues to play an important role in advancing u.s. policy in the region . congress authorizes and appropriates foreign assistance to the region and conducts oversight of aid programs and the executive branch agencies charged with managing them . others have made major strides in democratic governance and economic and social development ; these countries no longer receive traditional u.s. development assistance but continue to receive some support for security challenges , such as combating transnational organized crime . it analyzes historical and recent trends in aid to the region , the obama administration's fy2017 request for aid administered by the state department and the u.s. agency for international development ( usaid ) , and legislative developments on fy2017 foreign aid appropriations . it also examines policy issues congress may opt to consider , including the benefits and drawbacks of conditioning aid , the role of the department of defense in providing security assistance , and the potential for trilateral cooperation in the region . efforts to reduce budget deficits in the aftermath of the recent global financial crisis and u.s. recession have triggered closer examination of competing budget priorities . this report provides an overview of u.s. assistance to latin america and the caribbean . between 1946 and 2014 , the united states provided the region with nearly $165 billion in constant 2014 dollars ( or more than $79 billion in historical , non - inflation - adjusted dollars ) . in fy2010 , congress and the obama administration split the central american portion of the mérida initiative into a separate central america regional security initiative ( carsi ) and created a similar program for the countries of the caribbean known as the caribbean basin security initiative ( cbsi ) . increased funding for counternarcotics and security programs also contributed to the rise in u.s. assistance through 2010 . the united states has long been a major contributor of foreign assistance to countries in latin america and the caribbean . president obama's 2010 presidential policy directive on global development ( ppd - 6 ) asserted that long - term sustainable development "depends importantly on the choices of political leaders and the quality of institutions in developing countries . 5912 , included $33.3 billion for bilateral economic assistance and international security assistance globally , which was $1.1 billion ( 3.5% ) above the administration's request and $313.8 million ( 1% ) above the fy2016-enacted level .
some tax proposals have focused on broadening the tax base and lowering the rates of both individual and corporate income taxes . the bill proposed lowering both individual and corporate rates , while increasing the tax base through revising both business - related tax benefits ( such as accelerated depreciation ) and individual benefits ( such as itemized deductions ) . in some cases , these proposals have advanced a revenue - neutral tax reform . an example of a broad - based revenue - neutral income tax reform is h.r . given the challenges of adopting a broad income tax reform , some proposals have focused on business - only tax reform . the obama administration has proposed such a reform , which would be revenue neutral and include cutting the corporate rate , reducing business - related tax expenditures , reducing taxes on manufacturing , simplifying taxes for small business , and reforming the international tax system . in other instances , they have proposed revenue increases . a challenge to confining tax reform to businesses is that many provisions that expand the tax base may affect pass - through businesses . 1 and the administration's proposal . how , or whether , to offset the potential increase in tax burden on pass - through businesses arising from base broadening is an issue in a business - only tax reform . major changes to the international tax rules have been included in both h.r . the administration reform proposal included special provisions benefitting small business which was reported to lead to a net tax cut for small businesses ( although not for all pass - through businesses ) . 1 introduced in the 113 th congress by then ways and means chairma n dave camp . as a result , a revenue - neutral tax reform composed solely of corporate rate reductions and base - broadening provisions would likely increase the tax burden on pass - through businesses in the absence of other revisions . unlike income in regular corporations , which is subject to the corporate income tax rate , income in pass - through businesses passes through to the individual owners and is taxed at the individual income tax rate . this report discusses issues and options that might be considered in a business - only tax reform , including the approach of the administration's reform as well as other potential options to consider . it first outlines how firms operate as incorporated or unincorporated businesses for tax purposes and discusses the share of assets and income in the unincorporated sector . these changes could be considered in a stand - alone proposal and , since their effects are largely confined to the corporate sector , pass - through businesses would be largely unaffected . note that a narrower business reform is to limit changes to the international tax system . the effects on pass - throughs of broadening the tax base most likely could not be offset by generally lowering individual tax rates because the vast majority of those individual rates apply to labor or passive income . the next section examines corporate tax expenditures and the extent to which those tax expenditures affect pass - through firms . the final section discusses a number of options and issues that might be considered for business - only tax reform .
established as part of the patient protection and affordable care act ( aca ; p.l . 111-148 , as amended ) , the independent payment advisory board ( ipab ) is charged with developing proposals to "reduce the per capita rate of growth in medicare spending. . the board's proposals are to be implemented by the secretary of health and human services ( the secretary ) unless congress acts either by formulating its own proposal to achieve the same savings or by discontinuing the automatic implementation process defined in the statute . by statute , the ipab's proposals must ( 1 ) relate only to the medicare program ; ( 2 ) result in a net reduction in total medicare program expenditures at least equal to the savings target established by the chief actuary of cms [to reduce the expenditure per capita growth rate] ; ( 3 ) not include any recommendation to ration care , raise revenues or medicare beneficiary premiums , increase cost sharing , restrict benefits , or alter eligibility ; ( 4 ) not reduce payments to providers or suppliers scheduled to receive a reduction in payment as the result of certain productivity adjustments under aca section 3401 ; ( 5 ) include recommendations to reduce medicare payments under parts c and / or d ; and ( 6 ) include recommendations with respect to administrative funding for the secretary to carry out the board's recommendations . several proposals have been advanced over the years to create an independent policymaking entity that would ( 1 ) be charged with limiting the future growth in medicare expenditures ; ( 2 ) be insulated from special interests and lobbyists because its members would be appointed , rather than elected ; and ( 3 ) be comprised of officials who would serve for extended terms . in 2008 , senator daschle proposed the federal health board , modeled after the federal reserve board , with broad authority over both private and public health care programs , including benefit and coverage recommendations , regulation of private insurance markets , and improvements in quality of care . historic patterns of growth in overall health care spending , and in the medicare program in particular , are viewed as not being sustainable . prior proposals for similar entities include the following: in 2000 and 2001 , senators breaux and frist introduced reform proposals to increase the budget of the centers for medicare and medicaid services ( cms ) , create separate agencies to administer parts of the medicare program , and establish a medicare board to manage competition among private plans and traditional medicare ( referred to as "breaux - frist i," s. 1895 , and "breaux - frist ii," s. 358 ) . the congressional budget office ( cbo ) , in its cost estimate of the aca prior to passage , projected that the cumulative impact of the board's recommendations from 2015 through 2019 would reduce total spending by $15.5 billion ; during the same period , total medicare expenditures were projected to be $3.9 trillion with average spending per beneficiary increasing from $13,374 in 2015 to $15,749 in 2019 . while the council would have had authority to recommend broader policy reforms , its authority outside of medicare payment policy would have been limited .
congress also has determined that for economic security reasons , the united states should have a commercial fleet active in international commerce . long - standing u.s. policy has treated the u.s. - flag international fleet as a naval auxiliary to be available in times of war or national emergency . when the united states is involved in an extended military conflict overseas , 90% or more of military cargoes are typically carried by ship . this report explains the motivation behind cargo preference law , discusses issues concerning the cost - effectiveness of the program , and reviews attempts to apply cargo preference to the nation's oil trade . government - impelled cargo is government - owned cargo such as military supplies , foreign aid such as food , and any privately owned cargo financed by the federal government , such as goods purchased with an export - import bank loan . regulations suggested , but not formally proposed , by the u.s. maritime administration ( marad ) would also require that some u.s. - bound cargo financed by the government be carried on u.s. - flag ships . however , preference cargo is critical to some u.s. - flag ship lines , as u.s. - flag ships are not price - competitive with foreign - flag ships in carrying the overwhelming bulk of exports and imports transacted in the private sector . to support the u.s. - flag international fleet , congress has required that "government - impelled" cargo sent overseas be carried on u.s. - flag ships . cargo preference requirements are highly controversial , particularly among shippers of civilian aid cargoes , because they significantly increase shipping costs and may delay shipments . the report also identifies several disparate bills reflecting wide disagreement on the future direction of cargo preference policy . while the bank's authorization expired on july 1 , 2015 , the house and senate have passed reauthorization bills . the united states has three separate u.s. - flag fleets capable of carrying commercial cargo . u.s. food - aid policy has been increasing the use of cash payments and local or regional sourcing of food overseas , potentially reducing food - aid shipments from the united states . cargo reserved for u.s. - flag vessels is referred to as "preference cargo. . 1735 ) , which passed the house and the senate but was vetoed by president obama on october 22 , 2015 , expressed concern for a recent decline in military and food - aid cargoes , and would have increased operating subsidies for msp carriers from $3.1 million per ship to $3.5 million . 702 , as passed by the house , would increase msp operating subsidies to about $5 million per ship . the u.s. - flag domestic fleet comprises ships and barges that carry cargo and passengers between u.s. ports , including most u.s. island territories . congress is also reauthorizing the export - import bank , almost all of whose financed cargoes are carried on u.s. - flag ships . the authorization of the export - import bank that generated about 2% of u.s. - flag freight revenue from government - sponsored cargo in 2011 expired on july 1 , 2015 , although bills reauthorizing the bank have passed both houses .
the u.s. department of agriculture ( usda ) , under the authority of congress as enunciated in periodic farm legislation , provides support to the u.s. farm economy through a variety of federal farm programs . direct support can often involve the transfer of billions of dollars each year . for example , usda's commodity credit corporation ( ccc ) outlays on farm support programs have averaged $13.7 billion per year from 1996 through 2017 . this variation has generated considerable interest — by both the general public and congress — in who is eligible to participate in farm programs and , thus , may receive payments . program eligibility requirements and payment limits are central to how many u.s. farm programs operate and how support dollars are distributed across the nation . program payments vary across commodities and regions as well as by size of farm operations . the concern over program eligibility also derives , in part , from instances where farm payments have accrued to individuals who have never engaged in farming . a key aspect of eligibility for major farm revenue support programs is the requirement that a person be "actively engaged in farming" ( aef ) — that is , that a person contribute either labor or management time ( or both ) to the farm's operation . a number of statutory and regulatory requirements govern federal farm program eligibility for benefits under various programs . in particular , eligibility requirements and payment limits determine who receives federal farm program payments and how much they receive . gao has undertaken several studies of program eligibility and of usda efforts to monitor and enforce program payment limits . as a consequence of such criticism , the definition of aef has evolved over the years as congress and usda — via its regulatory powers — have attempted to tighten payment eligibility criteria . the 2014 farm bill ( §1604 ( b ) ( 3 ) ) instructed usda to consider the extent to which new regulations would "adversely impact" the long - term viability of the farming operation . the initial attempt to restrict payments to actual farmers was in 1987 , when congress enacted what is commonly known as the farm program payments integrity act ( omnibus budget reconciliation act of 1987 , p.l . not all farm programs are subject to the same aef criteria , and the criteria often apply differently based on the type of legal entity owning the farm operation . the current regulatory definition of a significant contribution of active personal management has been in effect for over 20 years ; congress has not mandated a more restrictive definition during that time , including in the 2008 farm bill . such consideration should take into account: the size , nature , and management requirements of a farming operation ; the changing nature of active personal management due to advancements of farming operations ; and the degree to which these new regulations will adversely impact the long - term viability of the farming operation . aef criteria are a required component of eligibility for payments under the principal revenue support programs of the 2018 farm bill , including the agriculture risk coverage ( arc ) and price loss coverage ( plc ) programs and benefits under the marketing assistance loan ( mal ) program .
this lack of consensus is the result of the confluence of factors and events that occurred during the nearly 70 years from when the glass - steagall act was enacted until its partial repeal by the gramm - leach - bliley act ( glba ) in 1999 . these factors include statutory changes to both the four glass - steagall act provisions and other laws that indirectly impacted the permissible securities activities of commercial banks ; evolving interpretations of the glass - steagall act by both federal administrative agencies and the courts ; and changes in financial markets and economic conditions . the dodd - frank wall street reform and consumer protection act ( dodd - frank act ) was congress's primary legislative prescription to prevent a similar financial crisis in the future . it did , however , include some arguably glass - steagall - like provisions , which were designed to , among other things , address perceived inadequacies of the financial regulatory system at the time of the great recession so as to promote financial stability going forward ; reduce various speculative activities of banks ; and reduce the likelihood that the u.s. government would have to provide taxpayer support to avert or minimize a future financial crisis . in this context , commercial banking refers to the activities engaged in by depository institutions , which this report also will refer to as "banks" or "commercial banks. . congress effected a separation of commercial and investment banking through four sections of the banking act of 1933 — sections 16 , 20 , 21 , and 32 — that were designed "to prevent the undue diversion of funds into speculative operations...." these four statutory provisions are commonly referred to as the glass - steagall act . some believe that a more effective way of accomplishing these policy objectives would be to fully reinstate the glass - steagall act . however , the exposure of a securities firm to price volatility primarily depends on the degree to which the securities firm has traded for its own account ( proprietary trading ) or otherwise contractually committed to the securities , rather than merely serving as the middleman for customers ( whether buyers or issuers of securities ) . in contrast , investment banking refers to activities engaged in by securities dealers and brokerage firms , which this report also refers to as "investment banks" or "securities firms. . the phrase "glass - steagall" generally refers to the separation of commercial banking from investment banking . in fact , multiple bills have been introduced in the 114 th congress with that stated purpose . the dodd - frank act neither reinstated the sections of the glass - steagall act that were repealed by glba nor substantially modified the ability of depository institutions to affiliate with securities firms . on the other hand , some policymakers argue that glass - steagall issues were not significant causes of the crisis , and that the glass - steagall act would have made responding to the crisis more difficult if it had remained in place . others argue that the glass - steagall act is ill - suited for the current financial system and that the recent financial crisis would have occurred even if glba had never partially repealed the glass - steagall act .
the american recovery and reinvestment act ( recovery act ; p.l . 111-5 , enacted february 17 , 2009 ) provided $3.4 billion for carbon capture and sequestration ( ccs ) projects and activities at the u.s. department of energy ( doe ) . the large and rapid influx of funding for industrial - scale ccs projects was intended to accelerate development and demonstration of ccs in the united states . congress has long been interested in the future of ccs as a mitigation strategy for lowering global emissions of carbon dioxide ( co 2 ) . recovery act funding was intended , in part , to help doe achieve its research , development , and demonstration ( rd&d ) goals as outlined in the department's 2010 carbon dioxide capture and storage rd&d roadmap . doe states that the mission for the doe office of fossil energy is "to ensure the availability of ultra - clean ( near - zero emissions ) , abundant , low - cost domestic energy from coal to fuel economic prosperity , strengthen energy security , and enhance environmental quality. . understanding these factors also might help to clarify the potential for ccs as a greenhouse - gas ( ghg ) mitigation strategy as congress debates whether and how to reduce co 2 emissions from large , stationary sources . of the $3.4 billion allocated for ccs activities , approximately $1.4 billion went unspent as of the 2015 spending deadline . authority to spend recovery act funds expired on september 30 , 2015 . recovery act funding represented the lion's share of ccs support at doe in the six - year period from fy2010 through fy2015 . this report provides a preliminary assessment of recovery act - funded ccs projects and discusses possible factors that led to project delay , suspension , or cancellation within the context of doe's broader ccs effort . the largest portion of the unspent funds , $795 million , was intended for doe's flagship ccs project , futuregen , which doe suspended in february 2015 . building on available first generation technologies , next generation carbon capture and storage ( ccs ) technologies or carbon dioxide utilization technologies , expected to become commercially available in the mid - 2020s , will help put us on a path to a clean energy option for a world currently dependent on fossil fuels for 80% of its energy . the obama administration has promulgated rules on co 2 emissions from current and future fossil fuel - burning power plants and entered into a global agreement to limit co 2 emissions . by comparison , doe separately allotted a total of approximately $2.3 billion over the same time period to ccs - related activities from annual appropriations — not recovery act funding — under its coal program activities within the office of fossil energy . however , several other large ccs demonstration projects were canceled , suspended , or failed to spend all of their recovery act funding before the deadline . doe , however , has continued to embrace ccs as part of the administration's strategy to reduce co 2 emissions from power plants: roughly one - third of u.s. carbon emissions come from power plants and other large point sources .
tax expenditures , like direct spending , are one of the ways that the federal government plays a role in shaping the economy . in some ways , tax expenditures resemble direct spending . they both have similar budgetary effects and provide incentives that alter the allocation of resources . tax expenditures — revenue losses associated with targeted provisions outside the normal tax code — are a long - standing feature of the u.s. income tax code . tax expenditures are a common target when base - broadening tax reform is pursued — like with the tax reform act of 1986 ( p.l . also , unlike direct spending programs , the revenue loss associated with most tax expenditures is only limited by eligibility — much like mandatory spending programs . a consequence of the limited oversight placed on tax expenditures is that activities may be supported by tax expenditures that have insufficient political support for funding through a direct spending program . tax expenditures , however , do not regularly receive the same level of scrutiny as direct spending programs . as congressional interest in tax reform intensifies , it is likely that tax expenditures will once again receive scrutiny as an avenue for broadening the tax base . section 3 ( 3 ) of the congressional budget and impoundment control act of 1974 ( budget act ) defines tax expenditures as … those revenue losses attributable to provisions of the federal tax laws which allow a special exclusion , exemption , or deduction from gross income or which provide a special credit , a preferential rate of tax , or a deferral of tax liability . common goals of tax expenditures include promoting the accurate measurement of income , altering the distribution of fiscal benefits and burdens to address differences in ability - to - pay , and promoting socially desirable activities . this may be the result of tax expenditures being defined as being outside the normal tax code — making them a clear source for base broadening . 99-514 ) . how tax expenditures are constructed and the structure of the income tax system affect both who will benefit from tax expenditures and how much they will reduce federal revenues . instead , listing tax expenditures increases the transparency of the tax system and allows congress to examine all federal programs relating to the same policy goals . it is important to note that listing a provision as a tax expenditure in no way implies any judgment about its desirability or effectiveness , whether by itself or relative to non - tax provisions that could address the same policy concern . the eitc , child tax credit , and the exclusions of social security and medicare benefits are examples of tax expenditures that target benefits to lower - income individuals and change the distribution of after - tax income . these changes are driven by the growth in the exclusion of employer contributions for health care ( health ) , growth in deferred taxes on active income of controlled - foreign corporations ( international affairs ) , and the enactment of the child tax credit ( education ) . tax expenditures can be categorized into the same set of budget functions as discretionary and mandatory spending and may be used to achieve similar policy outcomes .
to be sure , ideas and recommendations for legislation come from a wide variety of sources , such as individual senators ; committees and other senate working groups ; legislative staff ; party and chamber leaders ; executive branch agencies and the white house ; states and localities ; members of the media ; citizens ; and interest groups . any or all of these individuals or entities may participate in drafting legislation , but only a senator may formally introduce legislation in the senate . support for a measure may also hinge on how its costs are paid for . to become law , a bill or joint resolution must pass both houses of congress in identical form ( including the same text and bill number ) and be signed by the president . measures that are limited in scope but have broad bipartisan appeal may be passed ( or "cleared" ) by unanimous consent with minimal floor time expended . some common considerations taken into account when drafting a bill include the following: what problem does the bill seek to address ? . with few limits on senate debate , reaching a final vote on legislation often requires a supermajority of 60 senators to bring debate to a close , so some amount of bipartisan cooperation usually is needed to secure final passage . the senate's clearance system ( or "hotline" ) can facilitate swift action on noncontroversial proposals , but this pathway can be blocked by even a single objection . senators may agree about the merits of a bill but disagree with how its provisions are funded . an abundance of information is available to senators in the form of reports , studies , and presentations offered by a wide range of individuals , groups , and organizations , including crs . understanding the source of a problem is necessary in order to properly address it . for instance , if a proposal adds to the federal deficit , it may be subject to a point of order on the chamber floor for violating congressional budget rules ( many of which are codified in the congressional budget act of 1974 ) . senate rules tend to favor deliberation over decision , so building a coalition of support for a proposal can take time . a measure with many cosponsors , especially if they include committee and party leaders , could encourage the relevant committee chair to take some action on the legislation , such as hold hearings on it . an early introduction will give the senate more time to examine the measure's provisions . comprehensive legislation is likely to require a great deal of time to work through , both in committee and on the floor . the senate places a number of restrictions on legislation with budgetary consequences . is the measure best introduced at the beginning , in the middle , or toward the end of a congress ? . senators may also prefer that their bill be referred to a committee on which they serve in order to ensure continued involvement at the committee stage of proceedings . cosponsorship conveys a senator's support for a measure , so bills that attract many cosponsors could be seen as enjoying broad support within the chamber .
committees have existed within the house and senate since the first congress . communications to and within congress have evolved over the years . initially , committees were ad - hoc — temporarily convened to address specific pieces of legislation and disbanded after reporting to the house or senate . the system of permanent , standing committees was reinforced through changes made in the 1946 and 1970 legislative reorganization acts that further defined and refined committee jurisdiction . by the early 1800s , both the house and senate "developed a system of permanent , or standing , committees" that were organized around topics instead of an individual piece of legislation . for example , existing law and chamber regulations on the use of communication media such as the franking privilege have proven difficult to adapt to the new electronic technologies . despite the advantage of having a direct avenue of communication open between the committee and these groups , electronic communications have raised some concerns . these technologies have arguably served to enhance the ability of committees to share information directly with stakeholder groups , including other members , federal agencies , and individual private citizens . political scientist stephen frantzich once described congress as "the vortex of three discrete communications flows: it is the target , sender , and subject matter of communication. . the communication strategies of congressional committees have changed with the development of these online social networking services . this includes how social media is altering how members organize and manage their personal and committee offices and impacting the ability of members to gather support for political and policy goals . the idea that representatives , senators , and committees could communicate in real time with constituents was unfathomable . technology available today was unheard of 20 years ago . after providing an overview and background of social media platforms , the report analyzes patterns of committee use of twitter and facebook during a 4½ - month period in 2013 and discusses three potential implications of social media for committees in congress: increased direct interaction with the public , real - time interaction with advocacy groups , and outreach of public constituencies . further , when representatives and senators wanted to solicit constituent opinions , those opinions "arrived only sporadically , and members had to augment fragmented information with creative intuition to assess constituent desires and possible reactions. . many committees now use email , official websites , blogs , youtube channels , twitter , and facebook pages to communicate — technologies that were either nonexistent or not widely available until recently . perhaps most importantly , social media may transform the very nature of representation in the united states . as with any new technology , the number of committees using twitter and facebook and the patterns of use may change rapidly . this report examines how congressional committees are using social media . what follows is a brief discussion of three potential implications of social media for committees in congress: increased direct interaction with the public , real - time interaction with advocacy groups , and outreach of public constituencies . these advances are altering how members organize and manage their personal and committee offices and impacting the ability of members to gather support for political and policy goals .
the united republic of tanzania is an east african country of nearly 54 million people that is about twice as large as california . the international monetary fund ( imf ) estimates it to have been the 31 st - poorest country globally in 2016 when ranked by per capita gross domestic product ( gdp ) , which stood at $970 in 2016 . the country has substantial natural resource wealth and agricultural potential , however , and multiple socioeconomic development indicators have generally improved in recent years . such concerns have centered on the nullification of the 2015 election results ( and the subsequent rerun in 2016 ) in the semiautonomous coastal region of zanzibar , restrictions on civil liberties , and similar issues . since the 2015 elections , however , u.s. concerns about tanzania's governance have raised some tensions . its relative political stability and government reforms have attracted substantial official development aid , although there are abiding concerns regarding corruption and a difficult business climate . u.s. - tanzanian ties have generally been cordial and u.s. aid expanded significantly under the last two u.s . citing such concerns , in march 2016 , the u.s. millennium challenge corporation ( mcc ) board announced it would suspend its partnership with tanzania , deferring a vote on the country's continued eligibility for a potential second large development compact ; this effectively ended , for the time being , the development of a second mcc compact with tanzania , following its completion of an initial compact between 2008 and 2013 . despite such challenges , some sectors of the economy , most notably the extractive industries , are attracting private investment . president john magufuli was elected in 2015 and is serving his first five - year term in office . agency for international development ( usaid ) foreign aid budget submission to congress . the bulk of u.s. development aid for tanzania in recent years has been provided under obama administration presidential development initiatives , including feed the future ( ftf ) , the global health initiative , the global climate change initiative , power africa , and trade africa . the mcc had previously authorized and helped fund initial research and concept design activities focused on the development of a second compact , which had been expected to center on the electrical power sector — and in mid - 2015 had informed congress of its intent to negotiate such a compact tanzania . tanzania may also benefit from the fact that mark green , the new usaid administrator , is a former u.s. ambassador to the country ( 2007 to 2009 ) . in 2014 tanzania was selected as one of six initial partner countries under the obama administration's african peacekeeping rapid response partnership ( aprrp ) . these developments ran counter to a prior narrative of improving governance and economic development in tanzania and closer u.s. ties , underscored by former president obama's july 2013 visit to the country , during which he highlighted such progress , as well as growing u.s. trade and investment ties . in recent years , tanzania has been the second - or third - largest annual recipient of such aid in sub - saharan africa , with funding reaching a high of $634.1 million in fy2015 and a low of $546.6 million in fy2017 ( provisional current estimate ; see table 1 ) .
the national defense budget function ( identified by the numerical notation 050 ) comprises three subfunctions: department of defense ( dod ) - military ( 051 ) ; atomic energy defense activities primarily of the department of energy ( doe ) ( 053 ) ; and other defense - related activities ( 054 ) such as federal bureau of investigation ( fbi ) counterintelligence activities . national defense is one of 20 major functions used by the office of management and budget ( omb ) to organize budget data―and the largest in terms of discretionary spending . by contrast , mandatory ( or direct ) spending , which includes entitlement programs such as social security , medicare , and medicaid , is generally governed by existing statutory criteria . discretionary spending is , for the most part , provided by annual appropriations bills and the focus of congress's efforts to fund the federal government . since the terrorist attacks of september 11 , 2001 , outlays — money spent by a federal agency from funds provided by congress — for discretionary defense programs in nominal dollars ( not adjusted for inflation ) has almost doubled from $306 billion in fy2001 to $590 billion in fy2017 . the deficits are attributable in part to reduced tax revenues from the 2007-2009 recession and increased spending from the economic stimulus package known as the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 ( p.l . the security category was broad in scope and included budget accounts of the department of defense ( dod ) , the department of homeland security ( dhs ) , the department of veterans affairs ( va ) , the national nuclear security administration , the intelligence community management account , and international affairs ( budget function 150 ) . as part of an agreement to increase the statutory limit on public debt , the budget control act of 2011 ( p.l . congress provides budget authority by law to federal agencies to obligate money for goods and services . the bca amended the balanced budget and emergency deficit control act of 1985 ( p.l . they are projected to further decrease to 13.2% in fy2021 , as mandatory programs and net interest consume a larger share of the total ( see figure 1 ) . 112-25 ) aimed to reduce annual federal budget deficits by a total of at least $2.1 trillion from fy2012 through fy2021 , with approximately half of the savings to come from defense . defense discretionary outlays are projected to reach $655 billion in fy2021 . 99-177 ) by reinstating spending limits on discretionary budget authority beginning in fy2012 . yet as a percentage of total federal outlays , discretionary defense outlays declined over this period from 16.4% in fy2001 to 14.8% in fy2017 . between fy2009 and fy2012 , annual federal budget deficits topped $1 trillion and averaged 8.5% of gross domestic product ( gdp ) , the highest level since world war ii . congress does not directly control outlays , which occur when obligations are liquidated , primarily through issuing checks , transferring funds , or disbursing cash . congress has previously used budget enforcement mechanisms — such as a statutory limit on annual appropriations for discretionary activities — to mandate a specific budgetary policy or to obtain a fiscal objective .
investor - state dispute settlement ( isds ) provisions in international investment agreements ( iia ) enable an aggrieved investor , with an investment located in the territory of a foreign host government , to bring a claim against that government for breach of an investment agreement before an international arbitration panel . the primary forum for investment arbitration is the international centre for settlement of investment disputes ( icsid ) , which is affiliated with the world bank . ongoing trade negotiations among the united states and several pacific rim countries regarding the proposed trans pacific partnership ( tpp ) agreement — and between the united states and the european union with respect to the proposed transatlantic trade and investment partnership ( t - tip ) agreement — have rekindled debate over the value of including isds provisions in bits and trade agreements . the united states has negotiated a number of bilateral investment treaties ( bit ) and free trade agreements ( fta ) that contain isds arbitration procedures for resolving investors' claims that a host country has violated substantive obligations intended to protect foreign investors and investments from discriminatory , unfair , or arbitrary treatment by the host government . the centre was established by the 1965 convention on the settlement of investment disputes between states and nationals of other states ( icsid convention ) . other observers have raised questions about the extent to which isds may affect a government's ability to regulate in the public interest . under most iias , the investor and respondent country may agree that the tribunal will conduct the proceedings according to certain procedural rules , such as the icsid rules of procedure for arbitration proceedings ; the united nations commission on international trade law ( uncitral ) arbitration rules ; or the icsid additional facility rules for disputes in which either the investor's home country or the host country , but not both , is a member of icsid . some commentators have argued that isds arbitration procedures , along with substantive protections for investors and investments in iias , facilitate foreign direct investment ( fdi ) by depoliticizing investment disputes and providing stability and predictability to investors seeking to conduct business in a foreign nation . bits , and the korea - u.s. free trade agreement ( korus ) , which has the most recent congressionally approved fta investment chapter , to show the types of provisions u.s. diplomats may seek to include in the tpp and t - tip . although an investor submitting a claim under a u.s. iia must typically consent to the mandatory procedural rules contained therein , the parties to an investment dispute generally may jointly choose the forum as well as many of the procedural rules under which the tribunal conducts the arbitration . among other things , it discusses who may bring a claim under an iia ; how arbitrators conduct such proceedings ; the remedies available to the disputing parties ; and how tribunals have interpreted certain substantive obligations contained in u.s. iias . in addition to jurisdictional issues , isds proceedings have raised questions about the rules governing: ( 1 ) the independence and impartiality of arbitrators , including rules addressing their selection and disqualification ; ( 2 ) the transparency of arbitral proceedings , including access to documents and hearings ; ( 3 ) early dismissal of frivolous claims ; and ( 4 ) participation of third parties as amicus curiae ( "friends of the court" ) .
t he national aeronautics and space administration ( nasa ) was created in 1958 by the national aeronautics and space act ( p.l . 85-568 ) to conduct civilian space and aeronautics activities . pending final action on fy2017 appropriations for nasa , the further continuing and security assistance appropriations act , 2017 ( p.l . 114-605 ) and the senate committee on appropriations ( s. 2837 , s.rept . this report will be updated as congress takes additional action on fy2017 appropriations legislation . while congress is generally supportive of most nasa programs , government - wide fiscal constraints make funding decisions challenging . 114-254 ) provides continuing appropriations at 99.8% of the fy2016 level through april 28 , 2017 . this report presents an overview and selected highlights of nasa's proposed fy2017 budget and the fy2017 appropriations legislation reported by the house committee on appropriations ( h.r . the human exploration and operations mission directorate is responsible for human spaceflight activities , including the international space station and development efforts for future crewed spacecraft . the most recent authorization act ( the nasa authorization act of 2010 , p.l . the senate bill would provide $19.306 billion . 114-239 ) . the administration has requested $19.025 billion for nasa in fy2017 . in addition , nasa's office of education manages formal and informal education programs for school children , college and university students , and the general public . 2039 , ordered reported by the house committee on science , space , and technology in april 2015 , but not yet reported ) the nasa transition authorization act of 2016 ( s. 3346 , passed by the senate on december 10 , 2016 ) , and the nasa transition authorization act of 2016 ( h.r . it has four mission directorates . the nasa authorization act for 2016 and 2017 ( h.r . the space technology mission directorate develops new technologies for use in future space missions , such as advanced propulsion and laser communications . the house bill would provide $19.508 billion . in the fy 2017 budget , the president proposes fully - paid - for one - year mandatory funding to accelerate progress in science , aeronautics , space technology , and exploration , as well as additional multi - year mandatory funding for aeronautics to support research and development for low carbon emission aircraft , including associated transportation systems , as part of a multi - agency effort to enable a 21 st century clean transportation system . the administration explains this as follows: the president believes that arbitrary funding caps are harmful to the economy and the nation . 111-267 ) authorized appropriations through fy2013 . this amount is 1.3% less than the fy2016 appropriation of $19.285 billion . the house and senate bills include no mandatory funding . unusually , the fy2017 request includes $763 million in mandatory funds . although the recent bipartisan budget act provided important relief from sequester cuts , the constrained top line for discretionary funding , especially in fy 2017 , has made it difficult to appropriately fund important national priorities , including research and development . the aeronautics research mission directorate conducts research and development on aircraft and aviation systems .
title i - a of the elementary and secondary education act ( esea ) authorizes the largest grant program in the esea , funded at $14.9 billion in fy2016 . the u.s. department of education ( ed ) determines title i - a grants to local educational agencies ( leas ) based on four separate funding formulas: basic grants , concentration grants , targeted grants , and education finance incentive grants ( efig ) . it is designed to provide supplementary educational and related services to low - achieving and other students attending pre - kindergarten through grade 12 schools with relatively high concentrations of students from low - income families . the state then makes specific adjustments to the grant amounts , including reserving funds for administration and school improvement and determining grants for charter schools that are their own leas . the esea was comprehensively reauthorized by the every student succeeds act ( essa ; p.l . the leas , in turn , distribute funds to schools , often based on the percentage of children in each school eligible for free or reduced - price lunch . 114-95 ) on december 10 , 2015 . this report provides a general overview of the key components of each of the four formulas used to allocate title i - a funds and changes to these factors made by the essa . under title i - a , funds are allocated to leas via state educational agencies ( seas ) using four different allocation formulas specified in statute: basic grants , concentration grants , targeted grants , and education finance incentive grants ( efig ) . changes to the title i - a formulas under the essa will take effect beginning in fy2017 . after calculating grants , ed provides each state with information on the grants calculated for leas in it . currently , there are two sources of esea funds for school improvement: ( 1 ) a reservation of 4% of the funds received by the state under title i - a , and ( 2 ) the school improvement grants ( sig ) program . after making adjustments to the grant amounts calculated by ed , the state then provides funds to the leas . the formula child population used to determine title i - a grants for the 50 states , the district of columbia , and puerto rico consists of children ages 5 to 17 ( 1 ) in poor families , according to estimates for leas from the census bureau's small area income and poverty estimates ( saipe ) program ; ( 2 ) in institutions for neglected or delinquent children or in foster homes ; and ( 3 ) in families receiving temporary assistance for needy families ( tanf ) payments above the poverty income level for a family of four ( hereinafter referred to as tanf children ) . the essa made few changes to the title i - a formulas . the effort factor is the same for all leas in a given state . in fy2016 , about 43% of title i - a appropriations will be allocated through the basic grants formula , 9% through the concentration grants formula , and 24% through each of the targeted grants and efig formulas .
during recent congresses many bills have been introduced that would provide funding to states aiming to facilitate improvements in the quality of , and access to , early childhood education ( ece ) programs . the importance of early learning for children's healthy development and positive outcomes in school and the workforce has become a subject of increasing interest to the public , members of congress , and the adm inistration . increased congressional interest in early childhood care and education issues has been driven , in part , by research on the role of ece programs in raising academic achievement and other desired student outcomes . the effectiveness of ece programs is usually measured by assessing children's cognitive functioning , school readiness , and / or social behavior . results have generally shown that quality early childhood care and education help improve outcomes , particularly for disadvantaged students . in addition , there is a growing body of research exploring the cost - effectiveness of investments in high quality preschool . the national institute for early education research ( nieer ) estimated the average lifetime benefits of universally available preschool for all three - and four - year - olds to be considerably larger than the costs for two years of prekindergarten . nieer based its estimates on data from studies of two high quality preschool programs serving low - income children — the chicago child parent center ( ccpc ) and the perry preschool program . there is no formal , federally mandated system of preschool , and states and localities make their own decisions about whether or not to offer such programs . one group that has established benchmarks for use in assessing program quality , nieer , found that only six states met all 10 of their benchmarks for quality in sy2014-2015 . currently , access to high - quality preschool programs varies throughout the united states . acronyms used in this report appendix c. differences between pdg programs on december 10 , 2015 , the elementary and secondary education act ( esea ) was comprehensively reauthorized by the every student succeeds act ( essa ; p.l . in part , this fragmentation has led to a lack of comprehensive national data on the supply and quality of existing preschool initiatives and the rules that govern them . in sy2014-2015 , approximately 29% of four - year - olds and 5% of three - year - olds were enrolled in state - funded preschool nationally . in the absence of a cohesive public preschool system , a fragmented landscape of private and public providers has emerged , with funding coming from a combination of private , state , local , and federal sources , and with program eligibility and quality varying widely . follow - up of the children who participated in the ccpc at age 20 found they were less likely to be held back in school , to have needed remedial help , or to have been arrested . states are required to indicate in their application how they will meet the following requirements: ( 1 ) begin serving eligible children within one year of receiving the grant , ( 2 ) subgrant at least 95% of funding for the implementation of high - quality preschool programs in two or more high - need areas , and ( 3 ) use no more than 5% of funding for improving preschool infrastructure .
the fy2017 appropriation for agriculture and related agencies was enacted on may 5 , 2017 , as part of the consolidated appropriations act ( p.l . the discretionary total of the enacted appropriation is $20.877 billion , which is $623 million less than enacted in fy2016 ( - 2.9% ) . 5054 , s. 2956 ) in april and may 2016 , with some of the earliest subcommittee action in two decades ( figure 1 ; appendix ) . the fiscal year started on october 1 , 2016 , under a continuing resolution ( cr ) that lasted until december 9 , 2016 ( p.l . in regular action , the house and the senate appropriations committees reported their fy2017 agriculture appropriations bills ( h.r . the appropriation also carries mandatory spending — largely determined in separate authorizing laws — that totaled about $132.5 billion . the white house released its fy2017 budget request on february 9 , 2016 , along with the detailed justification from the u.s. department of agriculture ( usda ) . the discretionary caps were set so as not to trigger sequestration under limits established by the bipartisan budget act of 2015 ( p.l . the overall total therefore exceeded $153 billion ( table 1 ) . but no further action on the individual bills occurred until they were incorporated into the omnibus appropriation . it also funds the food and drug administration ( fda ) in the department of health and human services . a third cr extended until may 5 ( p.l . 115-31 , division a ) . the new administration released an outline for fy2018 appropriations on march 16 , 2017 . a second cr lasted until april 28 , 2017 ( p.l . the crs continued fy2016 funding with a few exceptions . 114-74 ) . 115-30 ) . 114-254 , division a ) . agencies with sustained real increases ( that is , inflation - adjusted ; figure 4 ) since fy2008 include fda and cftc ( related agencies ) and , to a lesser extent , foreign food assistance . 114-223 , division c ) . over time , changes by title of the agriculture appropriations bill have generally been proportionate to changes in the bill's total discretionary limit , though some activities have sustained relative increases and decreases . since then , total agriculture appropriations have increased ( figure 3 ) . the $20.877 billion enacted in the fy2017 agriculture appropriation is officially $623 million smaller t han the fy2016 discretionary appropriation ( in terms of its allocation that counts against the budget limit , the "302 ( b ) " subcommittee allocation ) .  - $46 million , comprised primarily of $25 million more for agriculture and food research initiative ( afri ) grants , and $26 million more for agricultural research service ( ars ) operations , offset by $112 million less for ars buildings and facilities . agriculture appropriations include both mandatory and discretionary spending , but discretionary amounts are the primary focus since mandatory amounts are generally set by authorizing laws . the agriculture appropriations act funds all of usda , except for the u.s. forest service . the scope of the appropriation is shown by the major allocations in figure 2 .
those issues include the following: the prospects for u.s. energy exports , including exports of natural gas and coal ; prospects for u.s. energy companies' investments in china ; chinese investment in the u.s. energy sector ; manufacturing competitiveness between the united states and china ; china's ability to meet its global commitments to reduce greenhouse gas emissions in order to combat climate change ; china's ability to reduce the severe air pollution that hangs over parts of the country , and thus reduce the airborne pollutants that have been shown to travel from china to the west coast of the united states ; china's political and economic relationships with such regions as central asia , a major supplier of natural gas to china via pipelines , and the middle east , currently a major supplier of oil and lng to china ; china's plans for disputed waters in the south china sea , which may contain significant hydrocarbon resources ; and china's management of its energy - rich but troubled xinjiang region , which has a large ethnic turkic population and has been the subject of human rights concerns from governments and groups outside china , and of chinese government concerns about separatism , terrorism , and religious extremism . china is the sixth largest natural gas producer in the world , with its production almost tripling over the course of 2005-2014 ( see figure 1 ) . when it comes to global supply and demand for natural gas , china is the main wildcard . china's production is currently less than 20% of u.s. natural gas production . its natural gas resource base is large , and its shale gas endowment is estimated to be nearly double that of the united states . in addition , congress has oversight and appropriations roles related to u.s. dialogues and other cooperation with china on natural gas issues . agencies involved in those efforts include the u.s. department of energy , the u.s. department of state , and the u.s. trade and development agency . to address air pollution and to meet recent global commitments it has made to reduce its greenhouse gas ( ghg ) emissions , china has prioritized expanding consumption of cleaner energy sources , including natural gas . china's natural gas plans have implications for a number of issues in which congress has expressed a strong interest . yet , natural gas made up only 6% of china's primary energy consumption in 2014 ( see figure 2 ) , while natural gas accounted for 30% of the u.s. fuel mix . this is partly due to its geology , regulatory regime , and a lack of technical skills , all of which make it difficult to bring natural gas to market , among other issues ( see " domestic industry concerns " ) . china has struggled to manage serious environmental problems caused , in part , by its longtime reliance on coal for electric power . in the 114 th congress , members have expressed interest in chinese policy related to natural gas in hearings , such as the senate committee on energy and natural resources' january 2015 hearing on s. 33 , the lng permitting certainty and transparency act , and the same committee's february 2015 hearing on the fiscal year 2016 budget request for the u.s. department of energy .
there are several ways to measure traffic safety: the number of highway fatalities ; the number of serious injuries from crashes ; the economic loss to people involved in crashes ; and the social cost of emergency response and accident - induced traffic delays . to understand these numbers in context , other measures are often applied to produce rates such as number of events per million miles traveled , per million registered drivers , and per million persons in the total population . as figure 1 indicates , the fatality rate has improved significantly since the passage of the first federal highway safety legislation in 1966 . the fatality rate per 100 million vehicle miles traveled ( vmt ) is the most commonly cited measure of traffic safety , due in part to the seriousness of that outcome and in part to the fact that fatalities are closely tracked and unambiguous . the rate of crashes resulting in serious injuries was significantly higher in 2013 than in 2008 , and the overall crash rate has been rising ( figure 2 ) . in contrast , crashes involving injuries or property damage may be reported inconsistently by local public safety agencies or may not come to the attention of authorities ; reported data on the numbers of serious crashes and of crashes involving injuries are estimated based on sampling . instead , it has had to rely on both carrots ( incentive grants ) and sticks ( penalties that reduce federal transportation funding ) to influence state governments to adopt and enforce traffic safety measures affecting driver behavior . there have been four periods of abrupt declines in the fatality rate since 1970 , all of which coincided with recessions ; in each instance , the decline was followed by a period of little improvement or even an increase in the fatality rate as the economy emerged from recession . however , the improvement has not been continuous . similar measures can reveal trends for narrower categories such as vehicle occupants and bicyclists . however , some of the change in accident and fatality rates over the past several decades is attributable to factors beyond the scope of federal highway safety policies . as the fatality rate has become lower , reductions in that rate have necessarily become more modest: over the past 20 years it dropped from around 1.8 to 1.1 . although the fatality rate from motor vehicle crashes has fallen to a record low , other measures indicate that improvement in traffic safety has stalled . these tools may be used , in different ways , to achieve three traffic safety goals: reducing the number of crashes ; reducing the severity of crashes ; and improving medical care for people injured in crashes . the number of people killed in traffic - related crashes dropped from a high of around 55,000 in 1972 to around 33,000 in 2013 . highway safety rates and trends vary by state . nearly every crash involving a fatality is investigated and clearly identified as a vehicle - related incident . in addition , some states have relatively strict laws concerning safety matters , such as enforcement of mandatory seat belt use and requirements that motorcyclists wear helmets , while other states have fewer safety laws or enforce such laws less vigorously .
for the united states , singapore is a crucial partner in trade and security cooperation , as the obama administration executes its rebalance to asia strategy . though only about three times the size of washington , dc , and with a population of 5.5 million , the city - state of singapore punches far above its weight in both economic and diplomatic influence . as a result , the nation is a firm supporter of both u.s. trade policy and the u.s. security role in asia . its stable government , strong economic performance , educated citizenry , and strategic position along key shipping lanes make it a major player in regional affairs . singapore's value has only grown as the administration has given special emphasis to the association of southeast asian nations ( asean ) as a platform for multilateral engagement . singapore's heavy dependence on international trade makes maintaining regional stability one of its foremost priorities . because of its location on the strait of malacca — one of the world's busiest maritime thoroughfares — singapore's port soon became one of the world's busiest , and the country attracted foreign businesses and investment . maintaining strong relations with both china and the united states is a keystone of singapore's foreign policy . taiwan and singapore have held large - scale military exercises annually for over 30 years and , in 2010 , announced the launch of talks related to a free - trade pact under the framework of the world trade organization . opposition parties tallied their best results in singapore's history in 2011 parliamentary elections , garnering about 40% of the popular vote and leading pap leaders to vow reforms that would respond to public concerns about widening wealth disparities and the country's expanding reliance on foreign laborers . in september 2015 , following several gradual policy shifts including the imposition of some limits on foreign labor and improved benefits for the poor and elderly , the pap won nearly 70% of the popular vote in nationwide polls , leaving it with 83 of parliament's 89 seats . renewed u.s. engagement in the asia pacific under the obama administration has pleased singapore and may have allowed it more diplomatic space to stand up to beijing on key issues . despite concerns about singapore's economic prospects and its scant resource base , the economy quickly grew . greater , and generally freer , use of the internet may be threatening to some of the leadership ; in the past the government attempted to tighten control over bloggers , who may not exercise the same restraint as the mainstream media in limiting criticism of the ruling party or touching on sensitive issues such as race in singapore's multi - ethnic environment . new media controls have been stepped up as well: in 2013 the government issued new regulations for online news sites that report on singapore , prompting international internet companies with a presence in the city - state to criticize the move as backward - looking . as an english colony , singapore was a trading post for the east india company , but in 1959 , singapore gained a large degree of self - rule .
to provide legal context for this debate , this report will address three overarching questions: ( 1 )  what are the constitutional rules governing an officer's use of force ; ( 2 ) what role has congress played in providing a remedy for a violation of these rules ; and ( 3 ) what are the potential reforms to these rules and remedies ? . however , a number of recent high - profile police shootings and other law enforcement - related deaths have reignited the debate about how much force police should wield in a democratic society that values both law and order and the personal liberty of each of its citizens under law . by the very nature of their job , law enforcement officers are tasked with using physical force to restrain individuals and protect themselves and others from harm . president obama responded by establishing the task force on 21 st century policing in december 2014 to develop best policing practices and recommendations . similarly , the house judiciary committee held a hearing on policing strategies on may 19 , 2015 , and various measures have been introduced in the 114 th congress to address both use of force tactics and data collection by state and local police departments . police officers must stop and seize violent suspects , serve search warrants in hostile environments , and maintain the peace and safety of the communities in which they serve . the task force's final report issued in may 2015 offered a set of policy recommendations focused on training , investigations , prosecutions , data collection , and information sharing . of more recent vintage ( 1994 ) is 42 u.s.c . these deaths , and others , have prompted a call for legal accountability against the officers involved in these killings , but also , more broadly , for systemic police reform on both the federal and state level . as then - justice rehnquist observed , "[p]olicemen on the beat are exposed , in the service of society , to all the risks which the constant effort to prevent crime and apprehend criminals entails: because these people are literally the foot soldiers of society's defense of ordered liberty , the state has an especial interest in their protection. . section 14141 , which permits the department of justice ( doj ) to sue local police departments that engage in a "pattern or practice" of constitutional violations , including the use of excessive force . "black lives matter," a movement that sprung up in response to the treyvon martin shooting and other police - related deaths , has recently released an initiative called "campaign zero," which contains a set of policy proposals to limit police use of excessive force , including a call for a national standard governing the use of deadly force and better reporting requirements on instances of excessive force by law enforcement officers . proponents of reform have countered that federal intervention is warranted as state and local governments and police departments have not adequately held their officers legally accountable for the improper use of force . the shooting of michael brown by a ferguson , missouri police officer in the summer 2014 served as a flashpoint for this debate , but it is just one in a spate of recent law enforcement - related deaths .
the bureau of reclamation ( reclamation ) , part of the department of the interior , operates the multipurpose federal central valley project ( cvp ) in california , one of the nation's largest water conveyance systems ( see figure 1 ) . the current congress may consider these and other related changes , as well as oversight of cvp operations and implementation of wiin act cvp provisions . legislation enacted in the 114 th congress ( subtitle j of s. 612 , the water infrastructure improvements for the nation ( [wiin] act ) incorporated provisions from multiple california drought - related bills that had been considered dating to the 112 th congress . a separate major project operated by the state of california , the state water project ( swp ) , delivers about 70% of its water to urban users ( including water for approximately 25 million users in the south bay [san francisco bay] , central valley , and southern california ) ; the remaining 30% is used for irrigation . the cvp extends from the cascade range in northern california to the kern river in southern california . this report provides high - level summary information on recent hydrologic conditions in california and their impact on state and federal water management , with a focus on deliveries related to the federal cvp . 23 , the gaining responsibility on water act ( grow act ) , incorporates a number of provisions that were included in legislation during the 112 th - 114 th congresses , including those that were proposed in the 114 th congress but were not included in the final version of the wiin act . congress may consider this and similar legislation , as well as oversight of cvp operations and implementation of wiin act cvp provisions . although some contractors south of the sacramento and san joaquin rivers' delta ( bay delta ) received a lower allocation in the initial march 2017 announcement ( 65% for agricultural contractors and 90% for municipal and industrial contractors , respectively ) , reclamation subsequently revised these allocations upward to 100% in april . the 115 th congress is considering legislation that proposes additional changes to cvp operations . 23 , the gaining responsibility on water act ( grow act ) incorporates a number of provisions that were included in previous legislation in the 112 th , 113 th , and 114 th congresses but were not enacted in the final version of the wiin act . opponents worried that the changes may have detrimental effects on species' survival in both the short and long terms and may limit agency efforts to manage water supplies for the benefit of species . legislation enacted at the end of the 114 th congress ( the wiin act , enacted december 16 , 2016 ) incorporated provisions from multiple california drought - related bills that had been under consideration . after several consecutive years of cutbacks , in a series of announcements in spring 2017 , reclamation provided its estimated water allocations for cvp contractors in water year 2017 ( october 2016 through september 2017 ) . these provisions directed pumping to "maximize" water supplies for the cvp ( in accordance with applicable biological opinions ) , allowed for increased pumping during certain high water events , and authorized expedited reviews of water transfers .
1487 ) and the north american energy infrastructure act ( s. 1228 ) . this report focusses on the presidential permit review processes for cross - border energy infrastructure as implemented by these agencies: the department of state for pipelines and similar facilities that transport liquids such as petroleum , petroleum products , and other hazardous liquids ; the federal energy regulatory commission ( ferc ) for natural gas pipelines and associated facilities ; and the department of energy ( doe ) for electricity transmission lines and associated facilities . for decades , executive permission in the form of a presidential permit has been required for the construction , connection , operation , and maintenance of certain facilities that cross the united states' borders with canada and mexico . most notable was the keystone xl pipeline approval act ( s. 1 ) , which was passed in congress but vetoed by president obama . however , questions remain about the manner in which this authority is exercised among the agencies to which it has been delegated . in particular , some members of congress and affected stakeholders seek greater clarity about how presidential permit applications are reviewed for various kinds of cross - border energy projects , including the degree to which there may be differences or similarities among the various agency approaches to evaluating environmental impacts of proposed projects and in determining whether they serve the national or public interest . the constitutional basis for the president's cross - border permitting authority was examined in a prior crs report . other legislative proposals in the 114 th congress included the american energy renaissance act of 2015 ( s. 791 and h.r . with few exceptions , requests for presidential permits for cross - border pipelines or electric transmission lines have involved projects extending a relatively short distance into a u.s. border state before connecting to some existing facility ( e.g. , a refinery in texas or a power plant in arizona ) . given the issues that arose in the wake of transcanada's application for the keystone xl pipeline , congress may again propose legislation intended to expedite approval of future applications for presidential permits . in particular , there has been significant national attention on the department of state's process for considering transcanada's permit application for its proposed keystone xl pipeline . in response to perceived delays in the review of the keystone xl permit application , several legislative proposals in the 114 th congress sought to change some specific or general aspects of the presidential permit process . in operation since 2010 , both projects transport oil sands crude from alberta , canada , deep into the united states via pipelines that are hundreds of miles long and cross multiple states . however , in the last decade , two long cross - border pipeline projects have been approved — transcanada's keystone and enbridge energy's alberta clipper . this report compares practices among these three agencies with respect to how they define a proposed project's scope ( which dictates the array of associated impacts they will review ) , conduct environmental reviews , and make final decisions on permit applications . it also includes a discussion of recent efforts by congress to change those permitting processes .
this report is intended to provide congress with information about how the military selective service act ( mssa ) , the selective service system ( sss ) , and associated requirements for registration have evolved over time . the united states has not used conscription to fill manpower requirements for over four decades ; however , the selective service system and the requirement for young men to register for the draft remain today . congress appropriates approximately $23 million annually to maintain the selective service agency . men who fail to register are subject to penalties in the form of lost benefits and criminal action . others have questioned whether the current requirements for registration are fair and equitable . this report does not discuss the state of the all - volunteer force or whether it is adequate to meet our nation's current or future manpower needs . still others have suggested amendments to the mssa to address issues of equity , efficiency , and cost . the first section of the report provides background and history on the military selective service act , the selective service system , and the implementation of the draft in the united states . the future of the selective service system is a concern for many in congress . the final section discusses policy options and consideration for congress for the future of the mssa and the selective service system . some have questioned the need to maintain this agency and the registration requirements . the second section discusses statutory registration requirements , processes for registering , and penalties for failing to register . it explains why the united states developed the sss , what the system looks like today , how constituents are affected by the mssa requirements , and what the options and considerations may be for the future of the selective service . in addition , it will not provide an analysis of other options for military manpower resourcing such as universal military service or universal military training . the third section discusses the current organization , roles , and resourcing of the selective service system . these questions and others will be reviewed by the national commission on military , national , and public service established by the national defense authorization act ( ndaa ) for fiscal year 2017 ( p.l . it also does not discuss the history of the draft and draft planning for health service workers . following the adoption of the all - volunteer force ( avf ) in 1973 , authority to induct new draftees under the military selective service act ceased . finally , this report does not evaluate whether the sss , as currently structured , is adequately resourced and organized to perform its statutory mission . at the same time , some see the preservation of the sss as an important component of national security and emergency preparedness . conscription into the armed forces of the united states was used just prior to , during , and immediately after world war ii ( wwii ) . the registration requirements and associated penalties affect young men in every congressional district . when first adopted in 1863 , national conscription was a marked departure from the traditional military policy of the united states , which from the founding era had relied on a small standing force that could be augmented by state militias in times of conflict .
the patient protection and affordable care act ( aca ; p.l . 111-148 , as amended ) requires health insurance exchanges ( also known as marketplaces ) to be established in every state . aca exchanges are virtual marketplaces in which consumers and small businesses can shop for and purchase private health insurance coverage and , where applicable , be connected to public health insurance programs ( e.g. , medicaid ) . they are not intended to supplant the private market outside of the exchanges but rather to provide an additional source of private health insurance coverage options . it describes individual and small business eligibility and enrollment processes , provides enrollment estimates , explains the financial assistance available to certain consumers and small businesses , and discusses consumer enrollment assistance options . this report provides an overview of key aspects of the health insurance exchanges . exchanges are intended to simplify the experience of obtaining health insurance . the report also reviews the role of exchanges in certifying participating plans and outlines the range of plans offered through exchanges . qhp certification involves a review of various factors , including the benefits a plan will cover , the network of providers it will include , its premium rates , its marketing practices , and its adherence to quality - of - care standards . the report includes summary information about the major functions of exchanges and how they are structured . it provides a high - level description of these exchange - related topics while referencing other crs reports with further information on specific topics , including on topics related to market stabilization policy considerations . for more information about certain issues addressed in or relevant to this report , see the following crs reports: crs report r45146 , federal requirements on private health insurance plans crs report r44425 , health insurance premium tax credits and cost - sharing subsidies crs report r44438 , the individual mandate for health insurance coverage: in brief appendix a . a primary function of the exchanges is to provide a way for consumers and small businesses to compare and purchase health plan options offered by insurers . states also can use other state funding to support their exchanges , and some have become ffes or moved to the federal it platform due to challenges and / or costs of maintaining their exchanges . exchanges' other administrative activities include collecting enrollment and other data , reporting data to and otherwise interacting with the departments of hhs and the treasury , and working with state insurance departments and federal regulators to conduct ongoing oversight of plans . it briefly addresses funding for the exchanges . however , in the 2019 payment notice , hhs announced that the fees won't be assessed for issuers selling plans under the new model of reduced federal it support ( see " changes in shop exchange web portal functionality " in this report ) . exchanges may generate funding to sustain their operations , including by assessing fees on participating health insurance plans . the aca provided an indefinite ( i.e. , unspecified ) appropriation for hhs grants to states to support the planning and establishment of exchanges . in addition to carrying out their consumer - facing activities that facilitate the purchase of coverage , exchanges are responsible for several administrative functions , including certifying the plans that will participate in their marketplaces .
since then , the u.s. environmental protection agency ( epa ) has issued regulations for more than 90 contaminants , and all states ( except wyoming ) have assumed primary responsibility for administering the federal drinking water program and overseeing public water system compliance . the quality of water delivered by public water systems has been regulated at the federal level since enactment of the 1974 safe drinking water act ( sdwa ) . among the key provisions , the 1996 amendments authorized a drinking water state revolving fund ( dwsrf ) program to help public water systems finance improvements needed to comply with federal drinking water regulations and to address the most serious risks to human health . congress last broadly amended the law in 1996 ( p.l . the law authorizes epa to make grants to states each year to capitalize a state revolving loan fund . states are authorized to use dwsrf funds to provide financial assistance ( primarily subsidized loans ) to eligible public water systems for expenditures that epa has determined , through guidance , will facilitate sdwa compliance or significantly further the act's health protection objectives . each state must match 20% of its annual capitalization grant . 104-182 ) in response to criticism that the statute had too little flexibility , too many unfunded mandates , and an arduous but unfocused regulatory schedule . the federal grants and state match — combined with funds from loan repayments , leveraged bonds , and other sources — are intended to generate an ongoing source of water infrastructure funding over time . the dwsrf program is patterned after the clean water act state revolving fund ( cwsrf ) program that congress authorized in 1987 for financing municipal wastewater treatment projects . public water systems eligible to receive dwsrf assistance include roughly 50,000 community water systems ( whether publicly or privately owned ) and 17,500 not - for - profit noncommunity water systems . projects to consolidate water supplies and enhance water system security may also be eligible . more specifically , the law directs each state to develop an intended use plan each year indicating how the allotted funds will be used and requires states to give funding priority to projects that address the most serious human health risks , are necessary to ensure compliance , and assist systems most in need on a per - household basis according to state affordability criteria . states generally may not provide dwsrf assistance to systems that lack the capacity to ensure compliance with the act or are in significant noncompliance with sdwa requirements unless these systems meet certain conditions to return to compliance . projects to replace aging infrastructure are eligible if they are needed to maintain compliance or to further health protection goals . although the law authorizes assistance to privately owned community water systems , some states have laws or policies that preclude privately owned utilities from receiving dwsrf assistance . systems owned by federal agencies are not eligible . projects eligible for dwsrf assistance include installation and replacement of treatment facilities , distribution systems , and certain storage facilities . they may not be used to pay for operation and maintenance activities or for projects needed primarily to accommodate growth . the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 ( p.l .
a "lame duck" session of congress is one that takes place after the election for the next congress has been held but before the current congress has reached the end of its constitutional term . since 1935 , the constitutional term of a congress has begun on january 3 of each odd - numbered year and has ended on january 3 of the next odd - numbered year . as a result , any meeting of congress that occurs between the congressional election in november of an even - numbered year and the following january 3 is a lame duck session . the significant characteristic of a lame duck session is that its participants are the sitting members of the existing congress , not those who will be entitled to sit in the new congress . for the purposes of this study , a lame duck session commences on the first day of consecutive sessions following an election . a lame duck session may occur under the following circumstances: ( 1 ) by a previously enacted law prescribing an additional session of congress ; ( 2 ) following a recess within a session but spanning the election ; ( 3 ) under authority granted to the leadership at the time of a contingent adjournment or recess of the session ; ( 4 ) by continuing to meet , perhaps in pro forma sessions , throughout the period spanning the election ; and ( 5 ) in response to a presidential proclamation calling an extraordinary session . it ends on the day of final sine die adjournment . although some of these methods have been used rarely and others not at all , each helps to illuminate the constitutional arrangements that make lame duck sessions possible and the conditions in which they may operate . since 2000 ( 106 th congress ) , both the house and senate have reconvened after every election ; see table 3 . congress was unable to resolve its differences on the appropriations bills . in seven of the nine 21 st century lame duck sessions , congress passed regular appropriations bills or continuing resolutions that maintained government funding . in the four of past five election years , the house or senate adjourned in january . congress also debated congressional reform issues , including restructuring the committee system and increasing congressional pay . under the twentieth amendment , lame duck sessions can still occur but only as a result of specific actions undertaken either by the congress already sitting or by the president . in both the house and senate , the average election break declined by 14 days in the post - 1998 period ( five days when omitting 1948 ) . in addition to the dhs , congress adopted several other significant measures , including the defense authorization act , the intelligence authorization act , and measures regulating terrorism insurance and seaport security . 83 ) combined several appropriations bills into one omnibus bill , including a continuing resolution . lame duck sessions were used sporadically by congress from 1935 , when the twentieth amendment became effective , to 1998 , when just the house met following the election . congress did pass legislation to adjust overtime pay for government workers and to provide for the military draft of 18- and 19-year - old men ( although congress deferred deciding whether to require a full year's training before sending them into combat ) .
some believe that the best course for veterans is to provide all needed care in facilities under the direct jurisdiction of the department of veterans affairs ( va ) , veterans health administration ( vha ) , health care system . policymakers and other stakeholders may hold a variety of views regarding the appropriate role of the private sector in meeting the health care needs of eligible veterans . on the other hand , some see the use of private sector providers as important in ensuring veterans' access to a comprehensive slate of services ( in particular , to specialty services that are needed infrequently ) , or in addressing geographic or other access barriers , such as long wait times for an appointment . on june 6 , 2018 , president donald trump signed into law the john s. mccain iii , daniel k. akaka , and samuel r. johnson va maintaining internal systems and strengthening integrated outside networks act of 2018 , or the va mission act of 2018 ( s. 2372 ; p.l . in addition , those who believe that all needed care should be provided by va providers in va - owned facilities express concern that private sector options for providing care to veterans may dilute the quality of care in the va health care system , and could fail to leverage key strengths of the va health care network . the department of veterans affairs expiring authorities act of 2018 ( s. 3479 ; p.l . 115-251 ) , enacted on september 29 , 2018 , made some changes and technical amendments to the va mission act . reaching the correct balance between providing care through vha's health care system and through non - va community providers has been an issue for policymakers , as well as for the va and other stakeholders , for many years . however , some propose that over the long term , having private sector options could improve the quality of services within the va health care system through competition . section 101 of this act , establishing the veterans community care program , or vccp , is a legislative outcome of this long - standing policy debate on the role of the private sector in the delivery of health care to the nation's veterans . furthermore , studies have shown that private sector community providers may not have the necessary training and skills to provide "complex and specialized multidisciplinary care including integrated behavioral health services that many veterans require. . some are concerned that if veterans leave the va health care system for the private sector , some vha sites and specialized medical services may be eliminated from the va health care system , if comparable care is provided in the private sector . to understand the key amendments made by the va mission act with respect to care provided through private sector community providers , this report begins with a brief history of key legislative changes to community care passed by congress from the 1920s onwards . in this report , such care is referred to as the veterans community care program , or vccp , as established by the va mission act . 115-182 ; h.rept . 115-671 ) . this is followed by summaries of the major provisions in the va mission act by title .
an officially secular nation , india has a long tradition of religious tolerance ( with periodic and sometimes serious lapses ) , which is protected under its constitution . although religious discrimination and intolerance of social dissent is hardly new to india , the 2014 election of the hindu nationalist bharatiya janata party ( bjp ) to majority status at the federal level — the party won 52% of parliament's lok sabha ( lower - house ) seats in that year's national elections — triggered concerns among human rights advocates that agents of overt hindu majoritarianism would be empowered . for some observers , prime minister modi's 2016 u.s. visit — and address to a joint session of congress — completed the "political rehabilitation" of a foreign leader who was at one time viewed by many in the united states as a pariah: in 2005 , modi had been denied a u.s. visa over concerns about his role in government during lethal anti - muslim violence in gujarat in 2002 . in early 2017 , the bjp won a sweeping state - level victory in north - central uttar pradesh ( up ) , india's most populous state with more than 200 million residents , one - fifth of them muslim . the visa denial had been lauded by some members of congress . in the weeks leading up to modi's june 2016 visit to washington , dc , some members issued public criticisms of india's human rights record . in its 2018 annual report , the u.s. commission on international religious freedom ( uscirf ) stated conditions for religious minorities have deteriorated over the last decade due to a multifaceted campaign by hindu - nationalist groups… . at present , reporting by the u.s. government and international human rights watchdogs indicates that india's minority religious communities face mounting repression . in 2017 , a bipartisan group of five u.s . indian prime minister narendra modi , leader of the bjp , took office after serving as chief minister of the western gujarat state for nearly 13 years . [religious minorities] face challenges ranging from acts of violence or intimidation , to the loss of political power , to increasing feelings of disenfranchisement and "otherness. . the earlier optimism of many u.s. policymakers and stakeholders about the likelihood of expanding u.s. - india commercial ties under the modi government has given way to intensifying concerns over existing trade and investment barriers . after four years of bjp rule at the federal level and expanded bjp power in state governments since 2014 , indicators of increasing hindu chauvinism and bigotry are more common in india . india's rising middle - class population , infrastructure and energy needs , and digital connectivity present u.s. commercial opportunities , but challenges are significant . the choice surprised and baffled many analysts , and elicited new fears of rising hindu chauvinism that chill many among the country's large muslim minority of up to 180 million persons , as well as in significant christian and other minority communities that number in the tens of millions . it is unclear if the president did so . legal restrictions on religious conversion in eight states ; lack of criminal investigations or accountability for cases related to rape , domestic violence , dowry - related deaths , honor killings , sexual harassment ; and discrimination against women and girls remained serious problems .
on january 21 , 2019 , venezuela's government - aligned supreme court issued a ruling declaring the national assembly illegitimate and its rulings unconstitutional . on january 21 , 2019 , venezuelan military authorities announced the arrest of 27 members of the national guard who allegedly stole weapons ( since recovered ) as they tried to incite an uprising against the government . the legislature also established a framework for the formation of a transitional government led by juan guaidó of the popular will ( vp ) party , the president of the national assembly who was elected on january 5 , 2019 , to serve until presidential elections can be held ( per article 233 of the constitution ) .  ( see " lead - up to maduro's january 2019 inauguration and aftermath ," below. ) . on january 10 , 2019 , the organization of american states ( oas ) passed a resolution rejecting the legitimacy of nicolas maduro's new term . in addition , the legislature approved amnesty from prosecution for public officials who facilitate the transition .  ( see " lead - up to maduro's january 2019 inauguration and aftermath ," below. ) . on january 15 , 2019 , venezuela's national assembly declared that president maduro had usurped the presidency . on january 8 , 2019 , the u.s. department of the treasury imposed sanctions on seven individuals and 23 companies involved in a scheme that stole $2.4 billion through manipulation of venezuela's currency exchange system under authority provided in executive order ( e.o. ) . on january 10 , 2019 , president nicolas maduro began a second term after a may 2018 election that has been deemed illegitimate by the democratically elected , opposition - controlled national assembly and much of the international community . two days prior , guaidó had said he would be willing to assume the presidency on an interim basis until new elections could be held ; he also called for national protests to occur on january 23 , 2019 . on january 13 , 2019 , venezuela's intelligence service detained , and then released , juan guaidó .  ( see " lead - up to maduro's january 2019 inauguration and aftermath ," below. ) . on december 14 , 2018 , the united nations launched an appeal for $738 million to support refugees and migrants from venezuela in 2019 . on january 10 , 2019 , the u.s. department of state issued a statement condemning maduro's "illegitimate usurpation of power" and vowing to "work with the national assembly ... in accordance with your constitution on a peaceful return to democracy. .  ( see " lead - up to maduro's january 2019 inauguration and aftermath ," below. ) .  ( see " u.s. policy ," below. ) . on december 17 , 2018 , a group of investors demanded the venezuelan government pay off the interest and principal of a defaulted $1.5 billion bond , the first step in a potential legal process by creditors to recover their assets . oversight issues may examine the role of external actors operating in venezuela ( such as russia and china ) and the impact of the crisis in venezuela on the broader region .
the funding authorization for the federal aviation administration ( faa ) , included in the faa extension , safety , and security act of 2016 ( p.l . 114-190 ) and the subsequent disaster tax relief and airport and airway extension act of 2017 ( p.l . 115-63 ) , is now set to expire on march 31 , 2018 . in addition to setting spending levels , faa authorization acts typically set policy on a wide range of issues related to civil aviation . many issues debated prior to passage of the faa extension , safety , and security act of 2016 are not discussed unless further congressional consideration appears probable . this report considers topics likely to arise as the 115 th congress continues to debate faa reauthorization . it does not attempt to be comprehensive . additional issues , not discussed in this report , may arise as congress moves forward . the lack of interest in privatization among u.s. airports could be the result of ( 1 ) readily available financing sources for publicly owned airports ; ( 2 ) barriers or lack of incentives to privatize ; ( 3 ) the potential implications for major stakeholders ; and ( 4 ) satisfaction with the status quo . most faa programs are financed through the airport and airway trust fund ( aatf ) , sometimes referred to as the aviation trust fund . 91-258 ) to provide for expansion of the nation's airports and air traffic system . none of those proposals has been enacted into law . the federal government supports the development of airport infrastructure in three different ways . in the 110 th congress , the senate voted to impose a $25-per - flight fee on all commercial and general aviation flights ( see s. 1300 , 110 th congress ) as an additional revenue source for the aatf . the aatf was established in 1970 under the airport and airway development act of 1970 ( p.l . first , the aip provides federal grants to airports for planning and development , mainly of capital projects related to aircraft operations such as runways and taxiways . the faa extension , safety , and security act of 2016 ( p.l . second , congress has authorized airports to assess a local passenger facility charge ( pfc ) on each boarding passenger , subject to specific federal approval . third , federal law grants investors preferential income tax treatment on interest income from bonds issued by state and local governments for airport improvements ( subject to compliance with federal rules ) . proposals in 2012 to increase the general aviation jet fuel tax were not adopted . these overflight fees partially fund the essential air service ( eas ) program . the clinton , george w. bush , and obama administrations all proposed per - flight user charges . in 2016 , the aatf had revenues of over $14.4 billion and maintained a cash balance of more than $14 billion . historically , about half of faa research funding has addressed efficiency and economic competitiveness , largely supporting modernization efforts like nextgen . about 37% of funding has gone toward research addressing safety issues , and the remainder has funded projects addressing energy and environmental impacts .
at issue for congress were determining the amount of funding for agencies and programs in the bill , and the terms and conditions of such funding . 6147 ( 115 th congress ) on july 19 , 2018 ; passed by the senate , also in h.r . 6147 ( 115 th congress ) on august 1 , 2018 ; and enacted in division e of p.l . this report focuses on fy2019 discretionary appropriations for interior , environment , and related agencies . the fy2019 appropriation was $7.28 billion ( 25.7% ) more than the president's request ( $28.34 billion ) , $305.5 million ( 0.9% ) more than the level passed by the house ( $35.31 billion ) , and $301.0 million ( 0.8% ) less than the level passed by the senate ( $35.91 billion ) . this report first presents a short overview of the agencies and other entities funded in the bill . next , it briefly compares the appropriations enacted for fy2018 with the fy2019 appropriations requested by the president ; passed by the house in h.r . they include the bureau of land management , environmental protection agency ( epa ) , u.s . they included proposals for relatively short - term as well as full - year funding , and are identified on the crs appropriations status table at http: / / www.crs.gov / appropriationsstatustable / index . the fy2019 appropriation was $300.0 million ( 0.8% ) more than the fy2018 regular appropriation of $35.31 billion , but $975.4 million ( 2.7% ) less than the fy2018 total appropriation of $36.59 billion , including $1.28 billion in emergency supplemental appropriations for disaster relief . the continuing resolution ( cr ) generally provided funds for continuing projects and activities under the same authority and conditions and to the same extent and manner as for fy2018 . finally , this report compares fy2018 and fy2019 funding for several agencies and issues that have been among those of interest to congress . in the 116 th congress , the house and senate considered a variety of measures to provide fy2019 funding to interior , environment , and related agencies . however , the cr included certain exceptions ( "anomalies" ) that changed the purposes or amounts of funds , extended expiring provisions of law , or made other changes to existing law . it then describes the appropriations requested by president trump for fy2019 for interior , environment , and related agencies . specifically , from the start of the fiscal year on october 1 , 2018 , through december 21 , 2018 , continuing appropriations were provided at the fy2018 level ( in division g of p.l . as a result of the lapse in funds , a partial government shutdown went into effect between december 22 , 2018 , and january 25 , 2019 . 31 , enacted as p.l . budget justifications for some agencies are large , often several hundred pages long and containing numerous funding , programmatic , and legislative changes for congressional consideration . in addition , for selected reports related to appropriations for interior , environment , and related agencies , such as individual agencies ( e.g. , national park service ) or cross - cutting programs ( e.g. , wildland fire management ) , see the "interior & environment appropriations" subissue under the "appropriations" issue area page on the congressional research service ( crs ) website .
generally , the va is funded through the military construction , veterans affairs , and related agencies ( milcon - va ) appropriations act . this report focuses on fy2018 appropriations and fy2019 advance appropriations for the department of veterans affairs ( va ) . although not part of annual appropriations , the report also discusses recent funding developments regarding the veterans choice program ( vcp ) , as that program plays an integral role in the delivery of health care to veterans through private community providers . the report provides funding levels for the accounts as passed by the house and recommended by the senate appropriations committee ; it does not provide funding levels at the subaccount , program , or activity levels . the report then describes the president's budget request for fy2018 appropriations and advance appropriations for fy2019 , along with congressional action . this report begins by providing a brief overview of the va. then it describes the va budget and advance appropriations . on june 22 , 2017 , the house appropriations committee reported its version of the fy2018 milcon - va appropriations bill ( h.r . for the veterans benefits administration ( vba ) , the president's budget request includes $106.97 billion for fy2018 . 3219 , which also included three other full - year fy2018 appropriations bills ( defense , energy and water , and legislative branch ) and was titled make america secure appropriations act for fy2018 . compared with the fy2017-enacted amount of $176.94 billion , this is a 3.23% ( or $5.72 billion ) increase . the administration's budget request of $106.97 billion for fy2018 also includes $12.44 million for veterans insurance and indemnities over the fy2018 advance appropriations of $107.90 million provided in the continuing appropriations and military construction , veterans affairs , and related agencies appropriations act , 2017 , and zika response and preparedness act ( p.l . the history of the present - day department of veterans affairs ( va ) can be traced back to july 21 , 1930 , when president hoover issued executive order 5398 , creating an independent federal agency known as the veterans administration by consolidating many separate veterans programs . the fy2018-requested amount includes $103.95 billion in mandatory budget authority and $78.71 billion in discretionary budget authority ( see table 3 ) . this amount includes funding for veterans entitlement programs such as compensation and pensions , readjustment benefits , insurance and indemnities , veterans housing programs , and vocational rehabilitation programs . the veterans health administration ( vha ) is responsible for providing health care and social support services to eligible veterans ; conducting medical and prosthetic research ; training health care professionals ; serving as a contingency backup to the department of defense ( dod ) medical system during a national security emergency ; and providing support to the national disaster medical system and the department of health and human services ( hhs ) , as necessary . 115-188 ) continues to highlight issues with va's electronic health record modernization and sharing of health information with the department of defense ( dod ) . the house - passed bill also provides advance appropriations for fy2019 totaling $107.71 billion for disability compensation , readjustment benefits , and veterans insurance programs .
the chesapeake bay ( the bay ) is the largest estuary in the united states . congress has and may continue to examine chesapeake bay restoration efforts . this report provides background on the physical and ecological properties of the bay and watershed , its economic value , the health of the ecosystem over time , and federal governance of bay restoration efforts . over time , the bay's ecological conditions have deteriorated due to land - use changes , increased sediment loads and nutrient pollution , the use and spread of chemical contaminants , overfishing and overharvesting of aquatic species , and the introduction of invasive species . it then discusses issues facing congress as work continues toward 2025 restoration goals set by several state and federal plans . it is home to more than 18 million people and thousands of species of plants and animals . since then , federal agencies have worked together under a watershed - wide agreement and through a restoration program spearheaded by the u.s. environmental protection agency ( epa ) . actions in the chesapeake watershed have served as examples for other estuary restoration efforts in the united states . these changes have resulted in reductions to economically important fisheries , such as oysters and crabs ; the loss of habitat , such as underwater vegetation and sea grass ; annual dead zones , as nutrient - driven algal blooms die and decompose ; and potential impacts to tourism , recreation , and real estate values . congress has described it as a "national treasure" ( p.l . 106-457 ) , and it is recognized as a "wetlands of international importance" by the ramsar convention . joint state and federal restoration attempts did not begin until the early 1980s . the chesapeake bay estuary resides in a more than 64,000-square - mile watershed that extends across parts of delaware , maryland , new york , pennsylvania , virginia , west virginia , and the district of columbia . the chesapeake bay has experienced various natural and man - made changes over the course of its existence . congress may examine the federal government's role in restoration efforts . in its oversight role , congress continues to weigh if and how chesapeake bay federal restoration efforts should continue . since the cbp's inception , stakeholders have considered whether appropriate progress is being made to restore the chesapeake bay and its resources . if there is a federal role , congress may consider how bay restoration is coordinated , how much funding is available and may be needed for bay restoration efforts , and what progress is being made in restoring the bay . congress may consider the mechanisms in place to guide restoration activities , what role the federal government has in bay restoration , and what federal agency authorities exist or are needed to complete , coordinate , and fund restoration activities in the bay . congress has been interested in tracking costs related to bay restoration and enacted the chesapeake bay accountability and recovery act in 2014 ( cbara ; p.l . congress continues to be interested in whether progress is being made in restoring the bay . congress , gao , and the epa office of inspector general ( oig ) have addressed the cbp's reporting of bay health and restoration progress .
providing for the national defense is a central concern of congress , and technological advantage has long provided u.s. forces with a battlefield overmatch , deterring potential conflicts and contributing to decisive u.s. military victories . congress plays a central role in how the department of defense ( dod ) creates and acquires leading - edge technologies , including establishing and refining the organizational structure of dod research and development activities , providing policy direction , and appropriating funds for r&d and innovation - related activities . underpinning u.s. technological advantage are leading - edge innovations built on a foundation of insights gained from research and development ( r&d ) activities . today , many analysts believe that u.s. technological overmatch — and , by extension , national security — is at risk due to a number of factors , including a rapidly evolving global landscape for innovation ; changes in the composition of r&d funding ; and the increasing technological prowess of potential adversaries . congress and the administration have undertaken actions in these areas in an effort to ensure that the united states maintains superiority over its potential adversaries . many policymakers believe that new approaches and mechanisms are required to maintain u.s. technological advantage . this report provides an overview of the changes that have occurred in the global r&d landscape , the administration's policies and perspectives on how to maintain u.s. military technological leadership , actions taken by congress , and potential issues for consideration . world war ii ( wwii ) initiated a vastly expanded role for the u.s. government in funding , administering , and conducting research and development . some have also expressed concerns about the extent and effectiveness of dod's engagement with leading - edge companies that have not historically been a part of the dod innovation ecosystem . in the mid - term and long - term , congress may want to focus its oversight efforts on outcomes of congressional and dod actions . prior to the 1940s , the united states depended on europe as a major source of scientific capital . in support of the war effort , new offices were established at the highest levels of the federal government to support the planning and oversight of scientific and technological efforts . president franklin roosevelt created the u.s. office of scientific research and development ( osrd ) by executive order in june 1941 to ensure "adequate provision for research on scientific and medical problems relating to the national defense. . china's emergence as a global science and technology leader is evidenced in part by its rising position among nations in the funding of r&d . despite continued u.s. science and technology ( s&t ) leadership , it is widely asserted that the gap between the united states and china has been decreasing in recent years . china is making significant and targeted investments in the same technologies of interest to the department.… china has made it a national goal to acquire foreign technologies to not only advance its economy , but also to use these technologies to advance its military capabilities , and it is doing so through both licit and illicit means . some assert that dod has been slow to react and adapt to this new reality , raising concerns that the united states military may be unable to maintain its historical technological advantages .
the electric power grid in the united states comprises all of the power plants generating electricity , together with the transmission and distribution lines and systems which bring power to end - use customers . electricity generation is vital to the commerce and daily functioning of the united states . the u.s. electric grid has historically operated with a high level of reliability ; however , the various parts of the electric power system are all vulnerable to failure due to natural , operational , or manmade events . the grid also connects the many publicly and privately owned electric utility and other wholesale power companies in different states and regions of the united states . adoption of digital technologies has improved the efficiency and speed of operations and processes , and allowed for an almost instantaneous exchange of information between connected devices . current efforts to ensure the reliability of the grid are highlighted , and potential grid vulnerabilities are explored with a focus on the electric power sector's mutual dependency on other critical infrastructure . while natural and operational failures can be mitigated somewhat by planning and prudent investments , cybersecurity is a growing concern for both electric utilities and other critical infrastructure entities . congress gave the federal energy regulatory commission ( ferc ) authority to oversee the reliability of the bulk - power system under the energy policy act of 2005 ( p.l . technologies and actions to address perceived future threats are described , and possible risks to approaches moored in technology - based cybersecurity defense systems . further attacks on u.s. critical energy infrastructure are expected , as nation states view disruption of the u.s. economy as a potential target . finally , since the possibility does exist for a major cyber and / or physical security attack to result in significant damage or impairment , the potential need to build resilience into the grid to enable a quicker recovery is discussed . often , these digital devices are also connected to the internet to increase the ability to share information with a multitude of users and devices . this report discusses the current state of electric grid cybersecurity , and the interconnected dependency of critical infrastructure with regard to electric sector reliability . in march 2018 , the united states computer emergency readiness team ( us - cert ) issued an alert concerning cyber intrusions at critical energy and manufacturing infrastructure companies . while these intrusions have not been reported as having resulted in significant disruptions , concerns have increased over the potential for these intrusions to result in damaging cyber attacks in the future . while the benefits of internet - connected digital technologies are many , so too are the risks of a cybersecurity breach from exposure to a globally internet - connected environment . the intrusions , which have been directed at the ics networks of energy , manufacturing , communications and nuclear entities , include the following: cyber intrusions on the scada systems of the bowman dam in rye , new york resulted in federal indictments against a group of hackers linked to iran's islamic revolutionary guard corps . the electric grid relies on a number of electronic devices , switches , and circuit breakers to regulate and report on the flow of electricity at different parts of the system .
this report provides an overview of the fy2019 budget request and appropriations for the international trade administration ( ita ) , the u.s. international trade commission ( usitc ) , and the office of the united states trade representative ( ustr ) . these three trade - related agencies are funded through the annual commerce , justice , science , and related agencies ( cjs ) appropriations . 115-141 ) , enacted on march 23 , 2018 . this report also provides a review of these trade agencies' programs . the consolidated appropriations act , 2018 , provided $482.0 million in direct funding for ita , $93.7 million for ustic , and a total of $72.6 million for ustr for fy2018 . when comparing the administration's fy2019 request with fy2018 funding , one may want to consider that the administration formulated its fy2019 budget request before full - year appropriations for fy2018 were enacted . the fy2018 appropriation for the three cjs trade - related agencies totaled $648.3 million . the consolidated appropriations act , 2019 , provided $484.0 million in direct appropriations for ita , $95.0 million in funding for usitc , and a total of $68.0 million for ustr . in this report , fy2018 funding levels reflect the amounts appropriated in the consolidated appropriations act , 2018 ( p.l . the fy2019 appropriations for three cjs trade - related agencies totaled $647.0 million , a 0.2% decrease from fy2018 appropriations . see the appendix for enacted budget authority for the trade - related agencies for fy2009-fy2019 . the request included reduced funding for all three trade agencies: $440.1 million in direct funding for ita ( an 8.7% decrease from the fy2018 appropriation ) , $87.6 million for usitc ( a 6.5% decrease ) , and $63.0 million for ustr ( a 13.2% decrease ) . in it , the administration requested a total of $590.8 million for the three cjs trade - related agencies ( see table 1 ) . the senate bill included a total of $655.6 million for the three agencies , which was $64.8 million ( 11.0% ) more than the administration's request and $7.3 million ( 1.1% ) more than the fy2018-enacted appropriation . the house committee bill included a total of $647.6 million for the three trade - related agencies , which was $56.8 million more ( 9.6% ) than the administration's request and $0.7 million less ( - 0.1% ) than the fy2018-enacted amount . despite the proposed overall decrease in funding for cjs trade - related agencies , the administration proposed increasing some trade enforcement activities within ita and ustr . the president submitted his fy2019 budget request to congress on february 12 , 2018 . ita went through a major organizational change in october 2013 in which it consolidated four organizational units into three more functionally aligned units: ( 1 ) global markets ; ( 2 ) industry and analysis ; and ( 3 ) enforcement and compliance . through february 15 , 2019 , the cjs trade - related agencies operated under continuing resolutions ( cr ) — with the exception of a three - week lapse in funding when agencies halted most operations .
india — south asia's dominant actor with about 1.3 billion citizens and the world's third - largest economy by purchasing power — has been characterized as a nascent great power and "indispensable par tner" of the united states . the influence of a relatively wealthy community of about 3 million u.s. residents of indian descent is reflected in senate and house india caucuses , among congress's largest country - specific caucuses . many analysts view india as a potential counterweight to china's growing international clout . in 2005 , the united states and india signed a ten - year defense framework agreement to expand bilateral security cooperation ; in 2015 , the agreement was renewed for another decade . indians accounted for 70% of all h1-b ( non - immigrant work ) u.s. visas issued in fy2016 , and more than 165,000 indian students are attending u.s. universities , second only to chinese . bilateral trade in goods and services has grown significantly , valued at over $115 billion in 2016 , more than double the amount in 2006 . president barack obama sought to build upon the deepened u.s. engagement with india that began under president bill clinton in 2000 and expanded under president george w. bush . to date , the administration has made public only one major policy change likely to affect aspects of the course and scope of the u.s. - india partnership: a june announcement of u.s. withdrawal from the paris agreement on climate change , discussed below . india's decades of economic growth and new status as a donor government have contributed to a reduction in u.s. foreign assistance to india over time , from more than $150 million in fy2005 to $85 million in fy2016 . cooperation has come through dozens of institutionalized dialogue mechanisms , as well as through people - to - people contacts ; investment partnerships , infrastructure and "smart cities" collaboration ; environment ; science , technology , and space ; health and education ; persistent efforts to bolster a growing defense partnership through trade and joint exercises ; and myriad cooperative initiatives in energy and climate . for more than a decade , washington and new delhi have pursued a "strategic partnership. . president donald trump's administration has requested $33.3 million in aid for fy2018 ( see table 2 ) . an annual , bilateral strategic dialogue , established in 2009 , met five times before its september 2015 "elevation" as the "strategic and commercial dialogue" ( s&cd ) . as described in this report , key legislative and oversight considerations for congress in u.s. - india relations include the following: what levels of u.s. foreign assistance to provide india ; whether to continue bilateral clean and renewable energy cooperation programs even in the absence of the administration's support for the paris agreement ; whether to enact legislation tightening u.s. immigration policy , especially with respect to h - 1b visas ; how vigorously to support bilateral defense trade with india , including whether to allow or otherwise seek to influence potential future major arms sales and / or co - production agreements , such as the one recently proposed for f - 16 combat aircraft ; what avenues of engagement on u.s. - india trade and investment issues to support , including whether to advocate for continuing u.s. - india bit negotiations ; whether to renew u.s. support for apec membership for india ; whether to support u.s. trade promotion and financing programs , such as ex - im bank , opic , and tda , that have been active in india ; whether to reconsider india's gsp status in light of concerns with the country's ipr protection and enforcement ; whether to continue efforts supporting india's membership in the nuclear suppliers group and other expert control regimes ; and how to respond to human rights abuses in india , among others .
the u.s. supreme court ( court ) has recognized the faa as evidencing "a national policy favoring arbitration. . the federal arbitration act ( faa or the act ) was enacted in 1925 to ensure the validity and enforcement of arbitration agreements in any "maritime transaction or ... contract evidencing a transaction involving commerce[.] . this report examines the faa and reviews the court's decisions involving the statute's preemption of state law requirements . in 2015 , for example , the consumer financial protection bureau found that tens of millions of consumers use consumer financial products that are subject to arbitration clauses . concern over a perceived lack of "meaningful choice" to decide whether to submit a claim to arbitration has also spurred recent federal regulatory action , as well as legislation that would amend the faa to render pre - dispute arbitration agreements unenforceable . under a growing number of consumer and employment agreements , companies are requiring disputes to be resolved through arbitration , a method of dispute resolution involving a neutral , private third party , rather than a judicial proceeding . the application of the faa , however , particularly in light of various state law requirements and the use of different types of arbitration agreements , has raised numerous legal questions and been the subject of several cases before the court . in nonunion workplaces , it is estimated that at least a quarter of all employees are now subject to mandatory arbitration agreements . while arbitration is often viewed as a faster and less expensive alternative to litigation , consumer advocates and others maintain that mandatory arbitration agreements create one - sided arrangements that deny consumers and employees advantages afforded by a judicial proceeding , such as the availability of a jury trial . in its october 2017 term , the court will consider three consolidated cases that challenge such agreements on the grounds that they violate the right to engage in "other concerted activities" under the national labor relations act ( nlra ) . the report also explores the court's decisions involving mandatory arbitration agreements that prohibit a consumer or employee from maintaining a class or collective action . the enactment of the new law "declared a national policy favoring arbitration and withdrew the power of the states to require a judicial forum for the resolution of claims which the contracting parties agreed to resolve by arbitration. . president calvin coolidge signed the united states arbitration act ( commonly referred to as the federal arbitration act ) on february 12 , 1925 . while congress's primary motivation for drafting the faa reflected its interest in protecting the enforcement of arbitration agreements as agreed to by the contracting parties , it also understood the potential benefits that would be provided by the law's enactment: it is practically appropriate that the action should be taken at this time when there is so much agitation against the costliness and delays of litigation . in snyder v. smith , for example , the u.s. court of appeals for the seventh circuit ( seventh circuit ) maintained that the courts should take into account congress's broad power to regulate under the commerce clause when deciding which contracts involve commerce .
the aia also limited the availability of patents claiming tax avoidance strategies . most recently , the leahy - smith america invents act ( aia ) of 2011 stipulated that "no patent may issue on a claim directed to or encompassing a human organism. . the courts and the u.s. patent and trademark office ( uspto ) have historically understood the language of section 101 to allow an expansive range of patentable subject matter . this situation changed over the past decade due to a series of decisions issued by the supreme court of the united states . some members of congress have expressed interest in the rules governing patentable subject matter for many years . the term "patentable subject matter" refers to the requirement of section 101 of the patent act of 1952 that an invention must consist of a "process , machine , manufacture , or composition of matter" in order to be patented . other observers believe that these decisions may lead to patents of appropriate scope , curb abusive patent litigation , and encourage patent lawyers to draft and procure higher quality patents . since the supreme court issued its decisions , section 101 has been more frequently invoked to invalidate issued patents and reject pending patent applications at the uspto . however , the courts have long held that several implicit exceptions exist to the four categories of patentable subject matter set out in section 101 . views differ on whether the recent prominence of section 101 in the u.s. patent system has been desirable . in particular , laws of nature , natural phenomena , and abstract ideas have been held to be unpatentable . concerned observers have declared the u.s. patent system to be in a "state of crisis" due to "confusing" legal standards established by the supreme court . this report reviews the current law governing patentable subject matter and recent proposals for legislative reform . for many years , section 101 was arguably a coarse filter that was rarely used to invalidate an issued patent or reject an application pending at the uspto . the former chief judge of the u.s. court of appeals for the federal circuit , the tribunal with exclusive jurisdiction over patent appeals , reportedly described the supreme court decisions as creating "total chaos" and marking "a very harmful and completely unnecessary departure from a sensible patent policy. . further , numerous patents granted by the uspto under earlier standards would likely be held invalid if they were subject to scrutiny by the agency or the courts . four supreme court opinions have issued since 2010 addressing patentable subject matter . however , other experts express concern that the lack of availability of patent rights will decrease innovation and investment in the united states . the report closes with a review of legislative reform options . it begins by providing a basic overview of the patent system and introducing the principles of patentable subject matter . the report then considers the implications of these decisions within the information technology and life sciences industries . as of the date this report was published , no bill has been introduced before congress addressing the law of patentable subject since the enactment of the leahy - smith america invents act in 2011 .
u.s. insurers and congress face new policy issues and questions related to the opportunities and risks presented by the growth in the international insurance market and trade in insurance products . insurance is often seen as a localized product and u.s. insurance regulation has addressed this through a state - centric regulatory system . the international aspects of insurance have spurred the creation of a variety of entities and measures , both domestic and foreign , to facilitate the trade and regulation of insurance services . the mccarran - ferguson act , passed by congress in 1945 , gives primacy to the individual states , and every state has its own insurance regulator and state laws governing insurance . the new federal involvement in insurance issues , both domestic and international , has created frictions both among the federal entities and between the states and the federal entities , and has been a subject of both congressional hearings and proposed legislation . financial services have been addressed in a number of u.s. trade agreements going back to the north american free trade agreement ( nafta ) in 1994 . the international association of insurance supervisors ( iais ) was created more than 20 years ago , largely under the impetus of the u.s. national association of insurance commissioners ( naic ) , to promote cooperation and exchange of information among insurance supervisors , including development of regulatory standards . while the risks of loss and the regulation may be local , the business of insurance , as with many financial services , has an increasingly substantial international component as companies look to grow and diversify . the 2007-2009 financial crisis sparked further international developments , with heads of state of the g - 20 nations creating the financial stability board ( fsb ) . the postcrisis 2010 dodd - frank wall street reform and consumer protection act ( dodd - frank ) altered the u.s. insurance regulatory system , particularly as it relates to international issues . with the states continuing as the primary insurance regulators , following dodd - frank , the federal reserve exercised holding company oversight over insurers who owned a bank subsidiary or who were designated for enhanced supervision ( popularly known as systemically important financial institutions or sifis ) by the new financial stability oversight council ( fsoc ) , which includes a presidentially appointed , independent voting member with insurance expertise . this report discusses trade in insurance services and summarizes the various international entities and agreements affecting the regulation of and trade in insurance . the fio is not a federal insurance regulator , but is tasked with representing the united states in international fora and , along with the united states trade representative ( ustr ) , can negotiate international covered agreements relating to insurance prudential measures . dodd - frank also created a new federal insurance office ( fio ) . it then addresses particular issues and controversies in greater depth , including the u.s. - eu covered agreement and issues relating to international insurance standards , and concludes with a section addressing legislation in the 115 th congress . the statute limits the preemption with a provision that ( j ) savings provisions .  — nothing in this section shall — ( 1 ) preempt — ( a ) any state insurance measure that governs any insurer's rates , premiums , underwriting , or sales practices ; ( b ) any state coverage requirements for insurance ; ( c ) the application of the antitrust laws of any state to the business of insurance ; or ( d ) any state insurance measure governing the capital or solvency of an insurer , except to the extent that such state insurance measure results in less favorable treatment of a non - united state insurer than a united states insurer ; further strictures are placed on the determination , including notice to the states involved and to congressional committees ; public notice and comment in the federal register ; and the specific application of the administrative procedure act , including de novo determination by courts in a judicial review .
the federal election commission ( fec ) is a six - member independent regulatory agency . the commission is responsible for administering federal campaign finance law and for civil enforcement of the federal election campaign act ( feca ) . one nomination is pending , and the status of future departures remains unclear . as of this writing , the commission again faces a potential loss of its policymaking quorum because only four commissioners remain in office . in 2008 , the fec lost its policymaking quorum for six months . these developments notwithstanding , it is unclear whether the agency will lose more commissioners . commissioners are appointed by the president and are subject to senate confirmation . congress created the fec in 1974 , after controversial fundraising during 1960s presidential campaigns and the early 1970s watergate scandal . the fec also discloses campaign finance data to the public , conducts compliance training , and administers public financing for participating presidential campaigns . the topic may be relevant for congressional oversight of the agency , particularly if it loses its policymaking quorum , and for senate consideration of nominations to the agency . feca requires that at least four of the six commissioners vote to make decisions on substantive actions . feca establishes six - year terms for commission members . other crs products provide additional information about campaign finance policy , the fec , and procedural issues . vacancies make the task harder by reducing opportunities for a coalition of at least four votes . because feca also requires bipartisan commission membership , achieving at least four agreeing votes is sometimes difficult , even with six members present . commissioners may continue in "holdover" status after those terms end . this report provides a brief overview of the fec's policymaking powers without at least four commissioners in office . this includes deciding on enforcement actions , advisory opinions , and rulemaking matters . in particular , this includes holding hearings ; making , amending , or repealing rules ; initiating litigation or defending the commission in litigation , including appeals ; issuing advisory opinions ; conducting investigations , and making referrals to other enforcement agencies ; approving enforcement actions and audits ; and issuing and amending forms ( e.g. , those used in the disclosure process ) . members of the congressional leadership or committees of jurisdiction ( the house committee on house administration and senate rules and administration committee ) apparently continue to influence the appointment process . during the loss of the commission's policymaking quorum in 2008 , the two remaining commissioners ( david mason ( r ) and ellen weintraub ( d ) ) met publicly to discuss advisory opinions , but could not vote to issue those opinions . congress originally designed eight positions for the fec: six commissioners and two nonvoting ex officio members ( the clerk of the house and secretary of the senate ) . ravel's term would have expired on april 30 , 2017 . the fec currently retains its policymaking quorum . it is unclear whether any other commissioners currently plan to leave . the current vacancies developed as follows: effective february 28 , 2017 , democratic commissioner ann m. ravel resigned , leaving the agency with five members .
in response , congress and the u.s. department of justice ( doj ) have used both statutory and regulatory mechanisms to establish a process for such inquiries . t he constitution gives no direct role to congress in conducting federal law enforcement . this report first analyzes the use of special prosecutors and independent counsels that were authorized under now - expired provisions of the ethics in government act of 1978 , as well as the use of special counsels that are currently authorized by doj regulations . because of the potential conflicts of interest that may arise when the executive branch investigates itself , however , there have often been calls for prosecutors with independence from the executive branch . these responses have attempted , in different ways , to balance the competing goals of independence and accountability with respect to inquiries of executive branch officials . while congress enjoys the legislative power under article i of the constitution , which includes substantial authority to investigate the executive branch pursuant to its oversight function , criminal investigations and prosecutions are generally considered core executive functions entrusted with the executive branch un der article ii . several bills introduced in the 116 th congress ( including s. 71 and h.r . for instance , the supreme court upheld the constitutionality of the since - expired independent counsel statute in the 1988 case of morrison v. olson , but has not applied the reasoning of morrison in subsequent cases raising related issues . 197 , which merge aspects of two preceding bills introduced in the 115 th congress , s. 1735 and s. 1741 ) statutorily insulate a special counsel from removal , echoing aspects of the independent counsel statute's provisions . the constitutional status of a statutory framework analogous to the independent counsel statute is thus subject to debate . whether such proposals would withstand constitutional challenge today might ultimately turn on the continued vitality of the analysis applied in morrison . a glossary of terms at the beginning of the report briefly defines these italicized terms ( see table 1 ) . the report continues with an examination of various legal questions relevant to these efforts . more broadly , designing a statutory framework for criminal investigations and prosecutions with independence from the executive branch raises questions about how this can be achieved consistent with the requirements of the constitution . as a threshold matter , some have challenged the appointment of a special counsel under the current regulations as unconstitutional under the appointments clause . in part to counter perceptions that executive officials suspected of criminal wrongdoing may be subject to different standards than individuals outside the government , independent investigations have sometimes been used to determine whether officials have violated the law . the court has , however , recognized that congress may in certain situations restrict the president's power of removal over certain discrete offices . the powers of appointment and removal are key to understanding congress's authority to create independent investigative offices and define their contours . the government has used a range of options to conduct these types of inquiries: special prosecutors , independent counsels , and special counsels . congress enacted the ethics in government act of 1978 out of a broad intent "to preserve and promote the integrity of public officials and institutions. .
the length of time a congressional staff member spends employed in congress , or job tenure , is a source of recurring interest among members of congress , congressional staff , those who study staffing in the house and senate , and the public . there may be interest in congressional tenure information from multiple perspectives , including assessment of how a congressional office might oversee human resources issues , how staff might approach a congressional career , and guidance for how frequently staffing changes may occur in various positions . others might be interested in how staff are deployed , and could see staff tenure as an indication of the effectiveness or well - being of congress as an institution . this report provides tenure data for 18 staff position titles that are typically used in senators' offices , and information for using those data for different purposes . other data concerns arise from the variation across offices , lack of other demographic information about staff , and lack of information about where congressional staff work . it is unknown whether , or to what extent , the location of congressional employment might affect the duration of that employment . data in this report are instead based on official senate pay reports , from which tenure information arguably may be most reliably derived , and which afford the opportunity to use complete , consistently collected data . tenure information provided in this report is based on the senate's report of the secretary of the senate , published semiannually , as collated by legistorm , a private entity that provides some congressional data by subscription . all employment pay dates from october 2 , 2000 , to march 24 of each reported year are included in the data . potential differences might exist in the job duties of positions with the same or similar title , and there is wide variation among the job titles used for various positions in congressional offices . since tenure data are not captured before october 2 , 2000 , some individuals , represented as jobholder a , may have an unknown length of service prior to that date that is not captured . for each year , all staff with at least one week's service on march 31 were included . annual data allow for observations about the nature of staff tenure in senators' offices over time . the most recent publicly available senate staff compensation report , which provided some insight into the duration which congressional staff worked in a number of positions , was issued in 2006 , and relied on anonymous , self - reported survey data . utilizing official salary expenditure data from the senate may provide more complete , robust findings than other methods of determining staff tenure , such as surveys ; the data presented here , however , are subject to some challenges that could affect the interpretation of the information presented . no aggregate measure of individual congressional career length is provided in this report . generalizations about staff tenure are limited in at least three potentially significant ways , including: the relatively brief period of time for which reliable , largely inclusive data are available in a readily analyzable form ; how the unique nature of congressional work settings might affect staff tenure ; and the lack of demographic information about staff for which tenure data are available .
the primary federal law governing the manufacture , distribution , and use of prescription and illicit opioids is the controlled substances act ( csa or the act ) , which is administered and enforced by the drug enforcement administration ( dea ) in the u.s. department of justice . t he alarming rise in drug overdose deaths involving opioids over the past two decades has prompted the federal government to examine the causes of the public health crisis , identify possible solutions to counteract the problem , and take actions to address the crisis . the csa provides the legal regime through which the federal government ( 1 ) regulates and facilitates the lawful production , possession , and distribution of controlled substances , including opioids ; ( 2 ) prevents diversion of these substances from legitimate purposes ; and ( 3 ) penalizes unauthorized activities involving controlled substances . 4095 ) would repeal the ensuring patient access and effective drug enforcement act of 2016 ( epaedea ) ( p.l . legislative proposals introduced in the 115 th congress include the following: changes to the dea's authority to deny , revoke , or suspend a registration , and to issue immediate suspension order s . 115-271 ) ( the support for patients and communities act , or the support act ) that president trump signed into law on october 24 , 2018 . after that , the report examines dea actions taken that are specifically targeted at addressing opioid abuse and describes recently enacted laws amending the csa that impact the opioid regulatory system , including the substance use - disorder prevention that promotes opioid recovery and treatment for patients and communities act ( p.l . the regulatory framework under the csa relies primarily on a registration system: the act requires persons who handle controlled substances ( such as drug manufacturers , wholesale distributors , exporters , importers , health care professionals , hospitals , pharmacies , and scientific researchers ) to register with the dea and comply with the terms and conditions of the registration . the dea opioid enforcement restoration act of 2017 ( h.r . these potential additional amendments to the csa may resemble opioid legislation introduced , but not enacted to date , in the 115 th congress . in recent years , congress has also taken action to address perceived deficiencies in the federal regulatory regime governing opioids . such violations may include ( 1 ) "regulatory" offenses committed by registrants who do not adhere to their responsibilities under the csa , thereby increasing the risk of diversion , and ( 2 ) illicit trafficking or possession crimes that occur outside the "closed system" of authorized controlled substance distribution that primarily involve nonregistrants . the csa provides civil and criminal penalties for any unlawful manufacture , distribution , importation , exportation , or possession of controlled substances . the opioid preventing abuse through continuing education ( pace ) act of 2017 ( h.r . to date , the most comprehensive legislative response to the overprescribing and abuse of opioids is the substance use – disorder prevention that promotes opioid recovery and treatment for patients and communities act ( p.l . the 116 th congress may consider legislation to amend the csa beyond the changes made by the support act .
the length of time a congressional staff member spends employed in congress , or job tenure , is a source of recurring interest among members of congress , congressional staff , those who study staffing in the house and senate , and the public . there may be interest in congressional tenure information from multiple perspectives , including assessment of how a congressional office might oversee human resources issues , how staff might approach a congressional career , and guidance for how frequently staffing changes may occur in various positions . others might be interested in how staff are deployed , and could see staff tenure as an indication of the effectiveness or well - being of congress as an institution . this report provides tenure data for 15 staff position titles that are typically used in senate committees , and information for using those data for different purposes . other data concerns arise from the variation across commirrees and lack of other demographic information about staff . potential differences might exist in the job duties of positions with the same or similar title , and there is wide variation among the job titles used for various positions in congressional offices . all employment pay dates from october 2 , 2000 to march 24 of each reported year are included in the data . data in this report are based on official senate pay reports , from which tenure information arguably may be most reliably derived , and which afford the opportunity to use complete , consistently collected data . for each year , all staff with at least one week's service on march 31 were included . tenure information provided in this report is based on the senate's report of the secretary of the senate , published semiannually , as collated by legistorm , a private entity that provides some congressional data by subscription . annual data allow for observations about the nature of staff tenure in senate committees over time . no aggregate measure of individual congressional career length is provided in this report . utilizing official salary expenditure data from the senate may provide more complete , robust findings than other methods of determining staff tenure , such as surveys ; the data presented here , however , are subject to some challenges that could affect the interpretation of the information presented . the data last capture those who were employed in senate committees as of march 31 , 2016 , represented as jobholder d , and some of those individuals likely continued to work in the same roles after that date . some individuals , represented as jobholder a , may have an unknown length of prior service before october 2 , 2000 , when the data begin . generalizations about staff tenure are limited in at least three potentially significant ways , including the following: the relatively brief period of time for which reliable , largely inclusive data are available in a readily analyzable form ; how the unique nature of congressional work settings might affect staff tenure ; and the lack of demographic information about staff for which tenure data are available . given the wide discretion congressional employing authorities have in setting the terms and conditions of employment , there may be differences in the duties of similarly titled staff that could have effects on the interpretation of their time in a particular position .
t he agriculture appropriations bill — formally called the agriculture , rural development , food and drug administration , and related agencies appropriations act — funds all of the u.s. department of agriculture ( usda ) , excluding the u.s. forest service . congress passed the fy2018 consolidated appropriations act on march 23 , 2018 ( p.l . 5961 , s. 2976 ) , with the senate having amended and passed its version as division c of a four - bill minibus ( h.r . the house and senate appropriations committees reported agriculture appropriations bills for fy2019 ( h.r . congress and the president approved continuing resolutions to fund the affected federal agencies through december 21 , 2018 , at the fy2018 level ( p.l . fy2019 began with seven appropriations bills , including usda , unfinished . 115-141 ) . the fy2018 enacted report language column includes references to the house ( h ) and senate ( s ) report language , as well as the enacted ( e ) explanatory statement . table 3 compares some of the policy provisions that have been identified in the farm production and conservation programs ( title ii ) and general provisions ( title vii ) titles of the fy2018 and fy2019 agriculture appropriations bills related to conservation . the fy2019 consolidated appropriations act was signed into law on february 15 , 2019 , funding usda through the end of the fiscal year ( division b , p.l . one of the few exceptions was the natural resources conservation service ( nrcs ) , which was able to operate on mandatory and carryover funds during the majority of the shutdown . the fy2019 enacted report language column includes references to the house ( h ) and senate ( s ) report language , and the enacted ( e ) conference report . after december 21 , 2018 , a partial shutdown of the government , including many agencies within usda , occurred . 6147 ) . this is different from policy - related provisions ( discussed in the " policy - related provisions " section ) , which generally direct how the executive branch should carry out the appropriations and whose effect is typically limited to the current fiscal year . on january 25 , 2019 , an agreement was reached to continue funding for usda and other appropriations that had lapsed through february 15 , at the fy2018 level ( p.l . these provisions may have the force of law if they are included in the text of an appropriations act , but their effect is generally limited to the current fiscal year ( see table 3 ) . for a general analysis of the fy2018 appropriations for agriculture , see crs report r45128 , agriculture and related agencies: fy2018 appropriations , and for fy2019 , see crs report r45230 , agriculture and related agencies: fy2019 appropriations . many of these provisions were also included in past years' appropriations laws . in addition to setting budgetary amounts , the agriculture appropriations bill may also include policy - related provisions that direct how the executive branch should carry out an appropriation . it affected agencies funded by 7 of the 12 appropriations bills , including agriculture appropriations . 115-298 ) . some provisions in report language and bill text address conservation programs not authorized or funded within the annual appropriation ( i.e. , mandatory spending for farm - bill - authorized programs ) .
under the eo , the secretary of homeland security ( secretary ) is directed to designate a jurisdiction as a sanctuary jurisdiction at his discretion , and to the extent consistent with law , for those jurisdictions found to have willfully refused to comply with 8 u.s.c . on january 25 , 2017 , president donald j. trump issued executive order ( eo ) 13768 , "enhancing public safety in the interior of the united states. . among other things , the eo raises questions regarding whether , and to what extent , federal agencies will withhold federal grant funds that would have otherwise been awarded to a designated "sanctuary jurisdiction. . this report discusses several questions that might be raised regarding the implementation of the executive order by federal grant - making agencies ( also known as "federal awarding agencies ) and the impact on federal grant funding for designated sanctuary jurisdictions . 1373 , "communication between government agencies and the immigration and naturalization service. . among other things , the eo raises questions regarding potential restrictions of federal grant funding for sanctuary jurisdictions . legal questions about how the eo can be construed and questions involving what constitutes a sanctuary jurisdiction have been raised and are discussed in other crs products . several questions may arise regarding grant - related implementation of the eo , including what constitutes a federal grant , which federal grant programs are affected , whether and how grant recipients residing in a sanctuary jurisdiction might be affected , how the eo will be implemented through the administration of federal grant programs , and when grant funding might be affected . the impact of the eo on federal grant funding could also be affected by how federal grant awarding agencies utilize discretion in administering the grant programs , including review of eligibility and conditioning federal grant award . one critical element in determining the impact of the eo on federal grant funding to designated sanctuary jurisdictions is how a federal grant is defined . because of the complexity of implementing a centralized policy such as the eo through the decentralized structure of federal grants administration practices , there is uncertainty in determining the impact of the eo on federal grant funding for sanctuary jurisdictions . the office of management and budget ( omb ) defines a federal grant award as , "the federal financial assistance that a non - federal entity receives directly from a federal awarding agency or indirectly from a pass - through entity. . this potential for inconsistency may be attributed to the decentralized structure of federal grant - making laws and correspondingly decentralized ways in which federal agencies administer grant programs . given that federal agencies have yet to award all of the fy2017 appropriated grant funds , the implementation of the eo could include fy2017 appropriations . the eo directs the attorney general and the secretary to ensure that designated sanctuary jurisdictions are not eligible for federal grants , except for those grants deemed necessary for law enforcement purposes by the attorney general or the secretary . federal agencies have broad authority to administer federal grant programs within statutory parameters . pursuant to omb guidance , federal awarding agencies must "manage and administer the federal award in a manner so as to ensure that federal funding is expended and associated programs are implemented in full accordance with u.s. statutory and public policy requirements: including , but not limited to , those protecting public welfare , the environment , and prohibiting discrimination. .
smart meters have run into cost and performance issues and resistance to the technology ( generally from concerns of some customers over potential health impacts of radio wave emissions ) . the electrical grid in the united states comprises all of the power plants generating electricity , together with the transmission and distribution lines and systems that bring power to end - use customers . however , with changes in federal law , regulatory changes , and the aging of the electric power infrastructure as drivers , the grid is changing from a largely patchwork system built to serve the needs of individual electric utility companies to essentially a national interconnected system , accommodating massive transfers of electrical energy among regions of the united states . the "grid" also connects the many publicly and privately owned electric utility and power companies in different states and regions of the united states . technical solutions at the transmission and distribution levels ( such as the increased ability to monitor the system for problems and incorporate intermittent renewable energy sources ) can provide some benefits to both utilities and customers ( through passed through savings ) , and the efficiency benefits associated with real - time pricing and demand response enabled by smart - grid technologies can be significant . present both technical and policy challenges and opportunities for the delivery of energy services . the modernization of the grid to accommodate today's power flows , serve reliability needs , and meet future projected uses is leading to the incorporation of electronic intelligence capabilities for power control purposes and operations monitoring . the bill would have required doe to develop an energy security plan and to report on smart meter security concerns . the u.s. department of energy ( doe ) describes the smart grid as "an intelligent electricity grid — one that uses digital communications technology , information systems , and automation to detect and react to local changes in usage , improve system operating efficiency , and , in turn , reduce operating costs while maintaining high system reliability. . in the 115 th congress , the "distributed energy demonstration act of 2017" ( s. 1874 ) , introduced in september 2017 , would direct the secretary of energy to establish demonstration grant programs related to the smart grid and distributed energy resource technologies that are likely dependent on its deployment . the legislation included provisions to capitalize on the enabling nature of the smart grid for new energy efficient technologies . in the 114 th congress , the "north american energy security and infrastructure act of 2015" ( h.r . the smart grid is viewed as a modernization of the nation's power grid by the edison electric institute ( eei ) , the trade association of the u.s. investor - owned utilities , which serve approximately 68% of u.s. electricity customers . now , with increasing two - directional power flows ( as illustrated in figure 2 ) , the grid is being augmented with new technologies to manage an evolving system with many potential points for electricity generation , demand response , and energy storage . 8 ) was passed by the house in december 2015 . while other potential issues exist , most electric utilities appear to view the intelligence and communications capabilities of smart grid systems positively with regard to the potential benefits of smart grid adoption discussed earlier in this report .
it begins by providing a broad overview of ( 1 ) congress's powers under the constitution and ( 2 ) congress's role in interpreting this document . on january 5 , 2011 , the house of representatives adopted an amendment to house rule xii to require that members of the house state the constitutional basis for congress's power to enact the proposed legislation when introducing a bill or joint resolution .  ( the amendment does not pertain to concurrent or simple resolutions. ) . the report then specifically addresses house rule xii , clause 7 ( c ) , discussing its key requirements and limits , the legal effect of a cas , and the debate over the rule's value . the constitutional authority statement ( cas ) rule , found at house rule xii , clause 7 ( c ) , was subsequently adopted in the 113th , 114th , 115th , and 116th congresses . as the cas rule begins its ninth year , the requirement continues to be a topic of congressional debate and inquiry , as members of the house contemplate how to comply with the rule prior to every submission of a bill or joint resolution . this report aims to aid in understanding the cas requirement . given the powers of congress and the limits on those powers under the constitution , the question remains as to which branch of the federal government may interpret the scope of congress's powers . the report concludes by discussing trends with regard to the house's recent cas practices and by providing considerations for congressional personnel drafting cass . other cass have gone beyond citing to the affirmative powers that the constitution provides congress and have discussed potential restraints the constitution imposes that may prohibit the enactment of the underlying legislation . a house rule xii , clause 7 ( c ) , statement regarding the constitutionality of legislation is required only when a member of the house introduces legislation . to the contrary , the early history of the united states is replete with examples of all three branches of the federal government playing a role in constitutional interpretation , with congress and the executive openly questioning the supreme court's pronouncements on constitutional law , such as the court's rulings on the national bank or slavery . understanding the purpose and logic of the cas rule first requires an understanding of both the powers provided to the congress under the constitution and congress's role in interpreting the constitution . while the customary practice with regard to cass , to date , has been to provide a short citation to the provision in the constitution that affirmatively grants congress the authority to enact the underlying legislation , it is not unprecedented for members to cite sources beyond the text of the constitution , such as supreme court case law , primary source materials on the constitution , or a constitutional law treatise . the court's decision in cooper , coupled with broader institutional factors that may further constrain congress's ability to engage in constitutional interpretation , has provided support for the notion of judicial supremacy in constitutional interpretation within the coordinate branches of government . while only congress may exercise the legislative power , this power , like those belonging to the other branches of the federal government , is cabined by the terms of the constitution .
the impact aid program , administered by the u.s. department of education ( ed ) , was originally established in 1950 by p.l . the impact aid program authorizes several types of payments: federal property ( section 7002 ) , federally connected children: basic support payments ( section 7003 ( b ) ) , payments for children with disabilities ( section 7003 ( d ) ) , construction ( section 7007 ) , and facilities maintenance ( section 7008 ) . the most substantial program changes made through all of these vehicles have been to provisions affecting payments for federal property ( section 7002 ) and basic support payments ( section 7003 ( b ) ) . 81-874 , 15 years prior to the enactment of the elementary and secondary education act ( esea ) . the impact aid provisions discussed in this report reflect changes made to the program by the essa as well as those made through the annual national defense authorization acts ( ndaas ) and annual departments of labor , health and human services , and education , and related agencies ( l - hhs - ed ) appropriations acts that have been enacted through august 2018 . in addition to the impact aid programs administered by ed , a smaller set of programs administered by the department of defense ( dod ) are often referred to as the "dod impact aid" programs . impact aid compensates local educational agencies ( leas ) for a "substantial and continuing financial burden" resulting from federal activities . this is followed by information about recent appropriations for impact aid . changes to the impact aid program made by the essa generally took effect beginning in fy2017 . thus , impact aid is intended to compensate leas , in part , for the resulting loss of tax revenue . in 1994 , the impact aid program was incorporated into title viii of the esea . as part of this process , the essa also reauthorized and revised the impact aid program and moved it into title vii of the esea . these activities include federal ownership of certain lands , as well as the enrollments in leas of children whose parents work or live on federal property and children living on indian lands . the esea was most recently reauthorized in 2015 by the every student succeeds act ( essa ; p.l . appropriations for the impact aid program are made through the annual l - hhs - ed appropriations act . the federal government provides compensation because leas are unable to collect property or other taxes from these individuals ( e.g. , members of the uniformed services living on military bases ) or their employers , even though the leas are obligated to provide free public education to their children . the report concludes with an overview of the "impact aid" programs administered by dod . a second dod impact aid program , for leas serving military dependent children with severe disabilities , has been funded since fy2002 . these two programs include one that provides supplemental aid to leas serving children with a parent on active duty in the uniformed services , and one that provides assistance to leas serving children with severe disabilities with a parent on active duty in the uniformed services .
key issues for congress include the authorization and appropriation of u.s. aid to africa , the authorization and appropriation of funds for u.s. military activities on the continent , and oversight of u.s. programs and policies . the 115 th congress and the trump administration are reviewing existing u.s. policies and programs in sub - saharan africa ( henceforth , "africa" ) as they establish their budgetary and policy priorities toward the region while also responding to emerging crises . growth in many countries has slowed since 2015 , however , and most african countries still face significant development challenges . long - running civil conflicts continue to affect parts of the democratic republic of congo ( drc ) , somalia , and sudan , while newer conflicts have unfolded in recent years in the lake chad basin , the central african republic ( car ) , mali , and south sudan . among the factors that hinder investment and economic growth are poor governance and infrastructure , poverty and low domestic demand , a lack of skilled labor , limited access to inputs and capital , political instability , and insecurity . much of africa experienced rapid economic growth starting in the early 2000s , which spurred middle class expansion . in support of congressional deliberations , this report provides background on select issues related to africa and u.s. policy in the format of frequently asked questions . three african countries — south sudan , nigeria , and somalia — face famine or a credible risk of famine in 2017 ; in each case , security - related restrictions have hindered humanitarian access to the affected populations . in 2012 , the obama administration released a policy document entitled u.s. strategy toward sub - saharan africa , which prioritized as u.s. goals the strengthening of democratic institutions ; the expansion of economic growth , trade , and investment ; the advancement of peace and security ; and the promotion of opportunity and development . these include unmet needs for health , education , and other social services — particularly for large youth populations — as well as climate and environmental shocks . congressional responses to emerging crises , such as famine concerns in three african countries , increasingly intractable conflicts in south sudan and mali ( among others ) , transnational security threats , and the appropriate balance between u.s. diplomacy , development , and defense priorities in africa , may also influence or direct u.s. policy . enhancing democracy , the rule of law , and respect for human rights in the region have long been u.s. policy priorities , often as mandated by congress . in a number of african countries , porous borders , weak state institutions , and corruption have created permissive environments for transnational threats , including terrorism , illicit trafficking , and maritime piracy . armed conflict and instability continue to threaten regional security , impede development , and contribute to widespread human suffering and humanitarian crises . the obama administration pursued several global development initiatives that sought to benefit africa , as well as a number of africa - specific initiatives and major programs . u.s. efforts to promote democracy , human rights , and economic development on the continent have been pursued through the use of diplomacy , foreign aid or restrictions on assistance , preferential tariff treatment , or the sanctioning or prosecution of human rights violators , often under close congressional oversight .
from the ear liest days of commercial radio , the federal communications commission ( fcc ) and its predecessor , the federal radio commission , have encouraged diversity in broadcasting . the fcc's policies seek to encourage four distinct types of diversity in local broadcast media: diversity of viewpoints , as reflected in the availability of media content reflecting a variety of perspectives ; diversity of programming , as indicated by a variety of formats and content , including programming aimed at various minority and ethnic groups ; outlet diversity , to ensure the presence of multiple independently owned media outlets within a geographic market ; and minority and female ownership of broadcast media outlets . in addition to promoting diversity , the fcc aims , with its broadcast media ownership rules , to promote localism and competition by restricting the number of media outlets that a single entity may own or control within a geographic market and , in the case of broadcast television stations , nationwide . localism addresses whether broadcast stations are responsive to the needs and interests of their communities . the fcc has five distinct sets of rules governing ownership of multiple media outlets in a single market: ( 1 ) local television ownership rules ( known as the television duopoly rules ) ; ( 2 ) local radio ownership rules ; ( 3 ) radio / television cross - ownership rules ; ( 4 ) newspaper / broadcast cross - ownership rules ; and ( 5 ) the dual network rule . in 2016 , the fcc adopted a new order ( 2016 diversity order ) containing rules designed to increase broadcast ownership diversity . in evaluating the extent of competition , the fcc considers whether stations have adequate commercial incentives to invest in diverse news and public affairs programming tailored to serve viewers within their communities . the debate over media ownership rules is occurring against the background of sweeping changes in news consumption patterns . as a result of this history , and appeals of previous fcc actions imposing rules to foster diversity of broadcast ownership , the third circuit court of appeals is overseeing the fcc's efforts to foster diversity of broadcast station ownership . the fcc had also used this revenue - based eligible entity standard in its previous 2008 ownership diversity rulemaking ( 2008 diversity order ) . the fcc has a long history of attempts to adopt rules to encourage diverse broadcast station ownership , including ownership by women and members of minority groups . similar to the reinstated definition of eligible entities , these measures are the same as those previously adopted in the fcc's 2008 diversity order . the fcc adopted six measures in the 2016 diversity order that are designed to enable eligible entities to abide by less restrictive media ownership and attribution rules , and more flexible licensing policies , than their counterparts . examples of the fcc's attempts are described within several of its past media ownership reviews , including the adoption of the failed station solicitation rule and the establishment of a class of "eligible entities" that could qualify for relaxed ownership rules , attribution rules , and more flexible licensing policies than their counterparts . the fcc noted that congress would be able to adopt legislation either authorizing or mandating tax certificates and tax credits in the agency's incubator program , either in addition to or in lieu of the fcc local radio ownership rule waiver .
on february 9 , 2018 , president trump signed the bipartisan budget act of 2018 into law ( p.l . the creation of this committee echoed a number of special panels created by congress in the past in order to study and make recommendations on various issues unconstrained by existing committee jurisdictions . subtitle b of title iv provided for the creation of a joint select committee on budget and appropriations process reform . prior examples include committees tasked with studying a wide spectrum of issues , including both budget process — such as the joint committee to study budget control ( created by p.l . 115-123 ) . upon receipt of proposed legislative language , the senate majority leader ( or his designee ) was required to introduce it in the senate ( by request ) on the next day on which the senate was in session . 92-599 ) — and other topics , such as the senate select committee to study governmental operations with respect to intelligence activities ( also known as the church committee after its chairman , senator frank church , created by s.res . april 17: current challenges facing the budget and appropriations process in congress and possibilities for improvement ; may 9: challenges of the current procedural framework , particularly as it relates to the ability of members to work effectively and in a bipartisan manner regardless of political dynamics ; may 24: the role of the budget resolution and possible options to bolster its impact and influence on subsequent budgetary actions ; june 27: testimony heard from 27 members of the house and senate ( and written statements received from 5 others ) , including speaker of the house paul ryan and hou se minority leader , nancy pelosi ; july 17: former members' historical perspective on enacting budgetary legislation in the context of the challenges presented by both the politics and the framework of the budget and appropriations process . these procedures were intended to allow the senate to reach a timely vote on the question of whether or not to consider legislation embodying the recommendations of the joint select committee , but the act did not specify any procedures governing consideration of the bill once the senate agreed to take it up . the act required that the committee be composed of 16 members , with 4 members appointed by each of the speaker of the house , the minority leader of the house , the majority leader of the senate , and the minority leader of the senate . 2 , 94 th congress ) . there were no provisions in the act concerning the consideration of the recommendations of the joint select committee in the house . there were also no provisions concerning resolving any differences between the house and senate or the consideration of a veto message from the president . federal agencies ( including legislative branch agencies ) were tasked with providing technical assistance to the committee if requested in writing by the cochairs , and employees of the legislative branch could be detailed to the committee on a nonreimbursable basis consistent with the rules and regulations of the senate . the act directed the joint select committee to "provide recommendations and legislative language that will significantly reform the budget and appropriations process. .
the coalition has positioned uruguay on the leading edge of lesbian , gay , bisexual , and transgender ( lgbt ) rights in latin america by allowing lgbt individuals to serve openly in the military , legalizing adoption by same - sex couples , allowing individuals to change official documents to reflect their gender identities , and legalizing same - sex marriage . the broad front also has enacted several far - reaching social policy reforms , some of which have been controversial domestically . this policy mix , combined with a boom in international prices for uruguay's agricultural commodity exports , produced several years of strong economic growth and considerable improvements in living standards . additionally , the broad front has legalized abortion in the first trimester of pregnancy and has enacted legislation that legalizes and regulates every aspect of the cannabis market , from production to consumption ( see " security concerns and marijuana legalization ," below ) . the country emerged as an independent state in 1828 following a three - year war between brazil and argentina over control of the disputed territory . since taking power in 2005 , the broad front has maintained market - oriented economic policies while gradually expanding social welfare programs , establishing a more progressive tax system , and implementing union - empowering labor reforms . short - term commercial cooperation may focus on the removal of trade barriers under the tifa ; the conclusion of a bilateral social security agreement to eliminate double taxation and fill gaps in benefit protection for individuals who have worked in both countries ; and uruguay's entry into the visa waiver program , which would allow temporary , visa - free travel by uruguayan and u.s. citizens . the difficult economic situation likely will limit president vázquez's ability to enact far - reaching policy changes and could lead to increased disenchantment among his coalition's base . uruguay has drawn increased congressional attention in recent years as a result of the country's controversial decisions to legalize cannabis and grant refugee status to six men who had been detained at the u.s . president tabaré vázquez of the center - left broad front ( frente amplio ) coalition was inaugurated to a five - year term on march 1 , 2015 . over the past decade , the united states and uruguay have forged closer trade and investment ties and have worked together to promote stability and security in latin america and around the world . the broad front's chances of winning a fourth consecutive election likely will depend on the pace of uruguay's economic recovery and the extent to which opposition political parties and their supporters are willing to unite for the 2019 elections . cooperation on international affairs likely will continue as the countries support international peacekeeping efforts and collaborate on the u.n. security council and in other multilateral institutions . u ruguay is a small nation of 3.4 million people located on the atlantic coast of south america . vázquez's initial election ended 170 years of political domination by the center - right national and colorado parties . president vázquez and former president josé "pepe" mujica ( 2010-2015 ) often have compared the broad front administrations to those of former president josé batlle y ordóñez ( 1903-1907 , 1911-1915 ) , who strongly influenced uruguay's trajectory in the 20 th century by pushing for labor protections , a comprehensive social welfare system , women's rights , and a strict separation between church and state .
during the first session of the 115th congress , congress faced numerous international trade and finance policy issues . also significant are administration initiatives to potentially revise the two largest existing u.s. ftas , through the ongoing renegotiation of the north american free trade agreement ( nafta ) , and modification talks regarding the u.s. - south korea ( korus ) fta . a major focus was examining and responding to the trump administration's evolving trade policy . in engaging on these issues , congress may conduct oversight of the renegotiation of the north american free trade agreement ( nafta ) , and potentially consider implementing legislation for a revised nafta , and oversight of modification of the korus fta ; consider new bilateral trade agreement negotiations , including with the uk or japan ; examine the status of trade negotiations launched under the previous administration , including the potential transatlantic trade and investment partnership ( t - tip ) with the european union ( eu ) , a potential plurilateral trade in services agreement ( tisa ) , and ongoing discussions at the wto , as well as the future implications of the tpp without u.s. participation ; conduct oversight and take possible legislative action concerning a range of other trade issues , including u.s. trade relations with china and other major economies , as well as u.s. export and import policies and programs ; and monitor developments in capital flows and global debt levels , the international financial institutions and u.s. funding levels , the evolution of the aiib , and other countries' exchange rate policies , among other international finance issues . members of congress exert significant influence over the course of u.s. trade policy and its implementation through their legislative , appropriations , and oversight roles . in particular , the administration has displayed a more critical view of u.s. trade agreements , made greater use of various u.s. trade laws with the potential to restrict u.s. imports , and placed increased emphasis on bilateral trade balances as a key metric of the health of u.s. trading relationships . continued focus on the u.s. - china economic relationship , and economic sanctions against iran , cuba , north korea , russia , and other countries also have been of interest to congress . these decisions , in addition to the evolving global landscape on trade agreements , including a recently - concluded , revised tpp ( now called the comprehensive and progressive agreement for trans - pacific partnership ( cptpp ) ) among the 11 parties , without the united states , raise potentially significant legislative and policy issues for congress , including: ( 1 ) potential congressional consideration of legislation to implement a revised nafta , ( 2 ) the economic and strategic rationale for u.s. participation in multi - party and other ftas , ( 3 ) the extent to which past u.s. ftas should be modernized or revised and , if so , in what manner , ( 4 ) how much priority should be placed in u.s. trade policy on new fta and multilateral trade agreements , and ( 5 ) the effect of ftas not including the united states on u.s. economic and broader interests , and the appropriate u.s. response to the proliferation of agreements .
section 212 ( f ) of the ina is arguably the broadest and best known of these provisions , but sections 214 ( a ) ( 1 ) and 215 ( a ) ( 1 ) can also be seen to authorize the executive to restrict aliens' entry or admission to the united states . t he immigration and nationality act ( ina ) provides that individual aliens outside the united states are "inadmissible" — or generally barred from admission to the country — on health , criminal , security , and other grounds set forth in the ina . however , the ina also grants the executive several broad authorities that could be used to exclude certain individual aliens or classes of aliens for reasons that are not specifically set forth in the ina . it begins with and focuses primarily on section 212 ( f ) . legislative history materials from the time of the ina's enactment suggest that these provisions were seen to grant the president broad authority to bar or impose conditions upon the entry of aliens , and presidents over the years have relied upon section 212 ( f ) to suspend or restrict the entry of various groups of aliens , often ( although not always ) in conjunction with the imposition of financial sanctions upon them . the provisions currently in section 212 ( f ) — which have been part of the ina since its enactment in 1952 — state , in relevant part , that whenever the president finds that the entry of any aliens or of any class of aliens into the united states would be detrimental to the interests of the united states , he may by proclamation and for such period as he shall deem necessary , suspend the entry of all aliens or any class of aliens as immigrants or nonimmigrants , or impose on the entry of aliens any restrictions he may deem to be appropriate . beyond section 212 ( f ) , other provisions of the ina can also be seen to authorize the executive to restrict aliens' entry to the united states . this report provides a brief overview of the executive's authority under these provisions of the ina . among those so excluded have been aliens whose actions "threaten the peace , security , or stability of libya" ; officials of the north korean government or the workers' party of north korea ; aliens who have participated in "serious human rights violations" ; and others noted in table 1 below . most notably , section 214 ( a ) ( 1 ) prescribes that the "admission of any alien to the united states as a nonimmigrant shall be for such time and under such conditions as [the executive] may by regulations prescribe. . in the past , the executive has relied upon section 215 ( a ) ( 1 ) , in particular , to exclude certain aliens .  ( nonimmigrants are aliens admitted to the united states for a specific period of time and purpose pursuant to one of the "lettered" visas set forth in section 101 ( a ) ( 15 ) of the ina. ) .
the existing federal - aid highway formula is the vehicle for distributing billions of dollars annually for highway construction and repair and related activities to the 50 states , the district of columbia , and puerto rico ( hereafter called the states , unless otherwise noted ) . it also discusses the major funding objectives implicit in the formula and the implications of alternative formula factors for achieving these objectives . in response to section 1098 of the intermodal surface transportation efficiency act of 1991 and following discussions with your offices , this report discusses the way the formula for distributing federal highway funds works and the relevancy of the data used for the formula . istea authorized funding to sustain and enhance the nation's surface transportation infrastructure . since the mid - 1980s , a number of organizations ( including gao ) have suggested fundamental changes in the formula for apportioning these federal - aid funds because of perceived problems with the formula , such as its reliance , at least in part , on outdated data . previously , the federal - aid highway program had focused on completing and preserving the interstate highway system and on maintaining other federal - aid highways as well as bridges eligible for federal funds . section 1098 of the intermodal surface transportation efficiency act of 1991 ( istea ) tasked gao with reviewing the process for distributing highway funds to the states . we are sending copies of this report to the secretary of transportation ; the administrator , federal highway administration ; the heads of the state departments of transportation ; and other interested parties . section 1098 of istea tasked us with reviewing the process for distributing highway funds to the states . chapter 3 discusses a process by which the congress may reconsider the formula during the next reauthorization of the federal - aid highway program and comments on the advantages and disadvantages of several alternative formula options . istea broadened the overall goals of surface transportation . although similar factors have been applied in other programs , they have not been applied to highway programs in the past . additionally , istea's emphasis is intermodal — providing links in a seamless intermodal network that will enhance economic growth , international competitiveness , and national security . but fhwa did provide a report to the congress in 1994 that addresses measures for assessing how much of their available resources the states or local areas devote to surface transportation . while these goals remain a part of the overall surface transportation program , istea broadened the goals and included new programs , planning processes , and management systems that are intended to help ensure that the states' transportation plans are intermodal ( that is , coordinate various modes of transportation ) , environmentally sound , and energy efficient . for example , the congestion mitigation and air quality improvement program ( cmaq ) directs funds to transportation projects in clean air nonattainment areas — areas that have not achieved federal standards for air quality . istea expanded the use of equity adjustments for the apportionment of federal - aid funds among the states . istea authorized approximately $120 billion for highway construction and repair and related activities over 6 years , emphasized quality - of - life and intermodal objectives , revamped major highway programs , and offered states and localities unprecedented opportunities to use federal highway and mass transit capital funds across modal lines .
it focuses on the quality of small businesses' research proposals for technological innovation , the implementation of a provision for technical assistance by agencies participating in the program , and duplicate funding of similar research by more than one agency . the small business innovation development act of 1982 , which authorized the small business innovation research ( sbir ) program , emphasizes the benefits of technological innovation and the ability of small businesses to transform the results of research and development ( r&d ) into new products . the act designated four major goals for the program: stimulating technological innovation . the five largest , accounting for over 90 percent of all sbir awards , include the department of defense ( dod ) ; the department of energy ( doe ) ; the department of health and human services ( hhs ) and its national institutes of health ( nih ) , in particular ; the national aeronautics and space administration ( nasa ) , and the national science foundation ( nsf ) . at the start of our review , the house committee on small business directed us to focus our work on sba as the main administrative agency for the program and on the five major funding agencies ( dod , hhs , nasa , nsf , and doe ) that accounted for more than 90 percent of the total expenditures for sbir projects . the legislation also required us to address the implementation of the discretionary technical assistance program . none of the five major agencies have implemented the 1992 discretionary technical assistance provision , and future implementation remains uncertain . sba and sbir officials were critical of the provision because ( 1 ) it calls for the use of sbir funds , thereby reducing the number of awards the officials can make , ( 2 ) there is little need for technical assistance when projects are selected primarily for their technical merit , ( 3 ) implementation would impose a significant administrative burden arising from case - by - case considerations of companies' requests for support , and ( 4 ) specific requirements , such as selecting a single vendor of technical assistance for each agency , are unrealistic . concerns about nih's ability to absorb a funding increase have surfaced before . the report contains three recommendations to the small business administration to reduce the risk of duplicate funding of similar research by small businesses . within hhs , our review focused on nih , which accounted for almost all of the sbir program at hhs . this requirement will effectively double the annual funding for the program to about $1 billion . this report was authorized by the small business research and development enhancement act of 1992 . in fact , only the first ( and smallest ) of the three scheduled increases in funding had occurred at the time of our review . to improve interagency coordination and to reduce the risk of duplicate funding of similar research , we recommend that the administrator , sba , take steps to ( 1 ) determine whether the certification form that accompanies sbir proposals needs to be improved and , if so , take the necessary steps to revise it ; ( 2 ) develop substantive definitions and guidelines for agencies and companies regarding “duplicate” research ; and ( 3 ) provide interagency access to current information regarding sbir awards .
as you requested , this report examines the changes in ( 1 ) airfares and ( 2 ) the quantity , quality , and safety of air service since the deregulation of the airline industry in 1978 . specifically , the report compares data on these issues for airports serving small , medium - sized , and large communities . in 1994 , these airports accounted for 4.7 million ( 66 percent ) of the 7.1 million domestic airline departures and 320.6 million ( 67 percent ) of the 481.7 million domestic airline enplanements in the united states . they also estimated that because of the ( 1 ) increased number of flights , ( 2 ) efficiencies of the hub - and - spoke networks in connecting smaller communities to the overall aviation system , and ( 3 ) resulting savings in travel time , passengers save an additional $10.3 billion a year as a result of deregulation . extensive research has also been conducted on the impact of deregulation on air safety . nevertheless , research has been inconclusive to date on whether the increased presence of commuter airlines and turboprops has resulted in more accidents at airports serving small communities . this body of work commonly acknowledges that since deregulation , the rate of accidents has continued its historic decline . before 1978 , the u.s. airline industry was tightly regulated . in addition , expressing concern that deregulation may have adversely affected small and medium - sized communities to the extent that airlines eliminated service or replaced jets with turboprops and noting that opinions differed on this subject , the chairman requested that we compare the changes in the quantity , quality , and safety of air service since deregulation for airports serving small , medium - sized , and large communities . studies by dot and others have differed in their conclusions about deregulation's impact on airline service and safety . the act phased out the government's control of fares and service but did not change the government's role in regulating and overseeing air safety . nevertheless , others have come to different conclusions , holding that deregulation has prevented further gains in safety because the increased competitive pressures brought by deregulation have forced airlines to limit spending on maintenance . concerned that government regulation had made the industry inefficient , inhibited its growth , and caused airfares to be too high in many heavily traveled markets involving the nation's largest communities , the congress passed the airline deregulation act of 1978 . many of these researchers also believe that for smaller communities , air safety has decreased since deregulation because substituting commuter carriers and turboprops , which have higher accident rates , for larger airlines and jet aircraft at these airports has increased those communities' accident risk . while other studies generally agree that fares have decreased since deregulation , they point out that the lower fares may have been achieved at the cost of reduced service quantity and quality for many smaller and medium - sized communities and that therefore the overall net benefits of deregulation are less clear . for example , morrison and winston estimated that the lower fares since deregulation save passengers $12.4 billion annually .
i n 1994 , congress passed and president clinton signed the violent crime control and law enforcement act of 1994 ( p.l . the pell grant program is the single largest source of federal grant aid supporting postsecondary education students . however , concerns about the financial and social costs of an increasing prison population and what prisons are doing to rehabilitate prisoners and prevent recidivism have led some policymakers to consider whether some of the "tough on crime" policies of the 1980s and 1990s need to be changed . of note , under current pell grant program rules , expanding pell grant eligibility to prisoners would not affect the eligibility of non - prisoners or award levels of non - prisoners . in addition , both the obama administration and trump administration recommended expanding pell grants or other targeted federal financial aid to prisoners who are eligible for release after serving a period of incarceration . the violent crime control and law enforcement act of 1994 was passed during a period when federal and state policymakers were adopting increasingly punitive measures―such as establishing new crimes , increasing penalties for certain offenses , requiring convicted offenders to serve a greater proportion of their sentences before being eligible for release , and making convicted offenders ineligible for certain government assistance programs―as a means to combat violent crime . the act , among other things , made federal and state prisoners ineligible to receive pell grants . 103-322 ) . this report provides a discussion of issues policymakers might consider if congress takes up legislation to allow individuals incarcerated in federal and state facilities to receive pell grants . legislation was introduced in the 115 th congress that would have ended the second chance pell experiment , a program begun under the obama administration that evaluates the effects of granting prisoners access to pell grants . opposition to allowing prisoners to receive pell grants stems from the belief that taxpayer money should not be used to finance the education of prisoners , especially if it might compromise assistance to non - prisoners . however , reestablishing prisoners' eligibility for pell grants is not without controversy . policymakers have started to reconsider whether prisoners should be prohibited from utilizing pell grants to participate in postsecondary education programs while they are incarcerated . this is followed by an overview of the history of the prohibition on allowing incarcerated individuals to receive pell grants , and a brief discussion of who is eligible for pell grants . before discussing these issues , the report offers a brief examination of relevant data on the prison population and the educational participation and attainment of incarcerated adults . legislation was introduced in the 115 th and 116 th congresses that would have allowed incarcerated individuals to receive pell grants . as senator lamar alexander noted "most prisoners , sooner or later , are released from prison , and no one is helped when they do not have the skills to find a job . making pell grants available to them in the right circumstances is a good idea. . the recent debate over prisoners' eligibility for pell grants is driven , in part , by concerns that the prohibition on prisoners receiving pell grants is hampering access to postsecondary education that could aid prisoners' rehabilitation , assist their efforts to find employment after being released , and help them become productive and law - abiding members of their communities .
specifically , we obtained the best available information on the ( 1 ) frequency of foodborne illness , ( 2 ) health consequences and economic impacts of foodborne illnesses , and ( 3 ) adequacy of knowledge about foodborne illnesses to develop effective control strategies . over the past decade , a number of widely reported outbreaks of foodborne illnesses caused by microbial contamination — the most commonly identified cause of such outbreaks — have heightened the public's concern about the safety of food . while such outbreaks have brought the issue to the public's attention , public health and food safety officials agree that the largest number of foodborne illnesses occur as isolated cases , not as part of a publicized outbreak . given the scale of the u.s. food production and distribution system and the lack of control over how consumers handle food after they purchase it , there is little likelihood that foodborne illnesses can be completely eliminated . the most that can be hoped for is that all reasonable steps are taken to ensure that the problem is minimized . in this context , we have attempted in this report to provide a factual picture on the extent of foodborne illness in the united states today . the centers for disease control and prevention ( cdc ) is the federal agency primarily responsible for monitoring the incidence of foodborne illness in the united states . some economists attempt to estimate the costs related to medical treatment and lost wages ( the cost - of - illness method ) ; others attempt to estimate the value of reducing the incidence of illness or loss of life ( the willingness - to - pay method ) . cdc coordinates its activities concerning the safety of the food supply with the food and drug administration ( fda ) in the department of health and human services and those concerning the safety of meat , poultry , and eggs with the food safety and inspection service ( fsis ) in the u.s. department of agriculture ( usda ) . to monitor , control , and prevent foodborne illnesses , the centers for disease control and prevention ( cdc ) relies primarily on four types of data from local and state health departments , according to cdc officials . funding was decreased slightly for this project in 1996 , and these officials are concerned about the continuing availability of funding , in this era of budget constraints , to conduct this discretionary effort over the longer term . in collaboration with state and local health departments and other federal agencies , cdc investigates outbreaks of foodborne illnesses and supports disease surveillance , research , prevention efforts , and training related to foodborne illnesses . cdc also investigates a limited number of more severe or unusual outbreaks when state authorities request assistance . fda and fsis , which are the primary federal agencies responsible for overseeing the safety of the food supply , maintain liaison with cdc in atlanta , georgia . in the first , usda's economic research service ( ers ) used the cost - of - illness approach to estimate that the 1993 medical costs and losses in productivity resulting from seven major foodborne pathogens ranged between $5.6 billion and $9.4 billion .
to do this , the report first examines historical trends in federal spending and revenue policy to illustrate both the challenges and trade - offs inherent to making choices between ( 1 ) limiting the provision of defense and domestic public goods , ( 2 ) reducing transfers to persons including entitlements for the elderly and those with low income , ( 3 ) reducing support for state and local governments , and ( 4 ) raising taxes . the growth of the national debt , which is considered unsustainable under current policies , continues to be one of the central issues of domestic federal policymaking . this report examines alternative approaches to reducing annual budget deficits and decisions about how to bring the national debt under control over the long term . using projections of the debt and deficit , the report then addresses how limiting reliance on one source of deficit reduction creates pressure on other sources . therefore , to address the budget shortfalls facing the country over the long run , it is likely that ( 1 ) transfer payments , such as social security , medicare , and medicaid , to or on behalf of individuals ( which already account for half of federal spending and are growing ) must be reduced ; ( 2 ) transfers to state and local governments must be reduced ( which would shift the budget decisions to a different level of government ) ; ( 3 ) taxes must be raised ; or some combination of the three . the federal government incurs a budget deficit when total spending exceeds revenues over the course of a fiscal year . over the past 50 years , the federal government has , on average , run budget deficits of 2.9% of gross domestic product ( gdp ) , though as seen in figure 1 , the amount has fluctuated from a surplus of 2.3% of gdp in 2000 to a deficit of 9.8% of gdp in 2009 . for example , if the debt is 80% of gdp and the economy is growing at 1.6% , a deficit of 1.28% of gdp ( 1.6% of 80% ) will maintain the debt - to - gdp ratio . policy choices , such as the decline in defense spending after the dissolution of the soviet union in 1991 , may change the budget situation due to changes in national priorities . of concern is that the federal budget deficit has resulted in the growth of the federal debt that has regularly exceeded the growth rate of the economy . for example , deficits tend to rise during recessions ( through a combination of decreased revenues and increased spending on programs like unemployment ) , whereas the opposite is generally true during economic expansions . the accumulation of net deficits over time results in the federal debt . outside of the 9% provision for domestic goods , defense spending for goods and services constitutes about 15% of federal spending . reductions in discretionary spending are insufficient to reduce the deficit to a sustainable level ; thus , limiting taxes as a percentage of output or constraining the overall size of the government to current levels would likely require significant cuts in mandatory spending , including entitlement programs such as social security , medicare , and medicaid .
the outbreak of coronavirus disease ( covid - 19 ) , first in the people's republic of china ( prc or china ) , and now globally , including in the united states , is drawing attention to the ways in which the united states and other ec onomies depend on critical manufacturing and global value chains that rely on production based in china . congress is particularly concerned about these dependencies and has passed legislation to better understand and address them . an area of particular concern to congress in the current environment is u.s. shortages of medical suppliesâincluding personal protective equipment ( ppe ) and pharmaceuticalsâas the united states steps up efforts to contain covid - 19 with limited domestic stockpiles and insufficient u.s. industrial capacity . suppressed global demand will likely further complicate efforts to orchestrate a rebound in china's ( or global ) economic activity . because of china's role as a global supplier of ppe , medical devices , antibiotics , and active pharmaceutical ingredients ( api ) , reduced exports from china have led to shortages of critical medical supplies in the united states . companies have sought to meet new government requirements for virus containment and faced worker and supply shortages as interregional logistics have remained constrained . a key factor in the sharp economic slowdown in china was the dramatic downturn of both demand and supply after chinese officials imposed restrictions in the third week of january on movement of people and goods in and out of localities across china . since the covid - 19 outbreak in china has eased , the chinese government's efforts to restart business activities has been slow and uneven across sectors and locations . congress faces current choices that will influence the longer - range u.s. trade trajectory vis - a - vis china . starting in early february 2020 , u.s. health care experts began warning of a likely global spread of covid - 19 , and early reports of u.s. medical supply shortages began to emerge . current demand pressures during the covid - 19 pandemic could increase u.s. reliance on medical supplies from china , at least in the short term ( provided that the chinese government is willing to export these supplies to the united states ) . as china's manufacturing sector recovers while the united states and other countries are grappling with covid - 19 , the chinese government may selectively release some medical supplies for overseas delivery . since the imposition of section 301 tariffs on u.s. imports from china and china's retaliatory tariffs beginning in 2018 , some members have raised questions about the dependence of u.s. supply chains on china for critical products . in sectors where china has extensive capacity ( such as steel ) , some fear china could overwhelm overseas markets , as it ramps up export - led growth to compensate for the sharp economic downturn in the first quarter of 2020 . in response , china shut down a large part of its economy in an effort to contain the outbreak . resumption of bilateral trade will likely be uneven due to bottlenecks in inputs , locations of containers , and logjams in current shipments . at the same time , the chinese government nationalized control of the production and distribution of medical supplies in china , directing all production for domestic use .
enacted annually to cover every defense budget since fy1962 , the ndaa authorizes funding for the department of defense ( dod ) activities at the same level of detail at which budget authority is provided by the corresponding defense , military construction , and other appropriations bills . the bill also incorporates provisions of law governing military compensation , the dod acquisition process , and aspects of dod policy toward other countries , among other subjects . this report provides an overview of the fy2020 national defense authorization act ( h.r . this includes $718.4 billion for dod operations and $23.2 billion for defense - related work by the energy department involving nuclear energy , mostly related to nuclear weapons and nuclear power plants for warships . of the $761.8 billion requested by the trump administration for national defense - related activities in fy2020 , $750.0 billion is discretionary spending , of which approximately $741.9 billion falls within the scope of the annual ndaa . 116-92 ) and serves as a portal to other crs products providing additional context , detail , and analysis concerning particular aspects of that legislation . 2500 , s. 1790 , p.l . other funding for defense - related activities , such as counter - intelligence work of the federal bureau of investigation ( fbi ) , falls mostly under the jurisdiction of other congressional committees . while the ndaa does not provide budget authority , historically it has provided a fairly reliable indicator of congressional sentiment on funding for particular programs . subsequent sections of the report summarize the bill's treatment of major components of the trump administration's fy2020 budget request as well as provisions attached to the final bill that deal with other issues . the following overview reviews the strategic and budgetary context within which congress debated the fy2020 ndaa .  ( see figure 1 . ) . on september 17 , 2019 , the house took up the senate - passed s. 1790 , amended it by eliminating the senate - passed provisions and replacing them with the provisions of the house - passed h.r . the house armed services committee ( hasc ) reported its version ( h.r . the trump administration's december 2017 national security strategy ( nss ) , the 11-page unclassified summary of the january 2018 national defense strategy ( nds ) , and the 2019 national intelligence strategy explicitly reorient u.s. national security strategy ( including defense strategy ) toward a primary focus on great power competition with china and russia and on countering their military capabilities . as enacted , the fy2020 ndaa authorizes a total of $729.9 billion for national defense - related activities , which is $12.0 billion ( 1.6% ) less than the administration requested . 116-120 ) on june 19 , 2019 and the house passed the bill on july 12 , 2019 . 116-48 ) on june 11 , 2019 and the senate passed the bill on june 27 , 2019 . the enacted version of the bill does not challenge the administration's policy . house and senate conferees worked to produce a conference version of s. 1790 . 116-333 ) was agreed to by the house on december 11 , 2019 by a vote of 377-48 and agreed to by the senate on december 17 , 2019 by a vote of 86-8 .
demands on available water supplies have heightened local and regional water - use conflicts throughout the country , particularly in the west and southeast . the 116 th congress may conduct oversight and deliberate on authorizations and appropriations legislation related to water resource development , management , and protection . development pressures , droughts and floods , and concerns about changing hydrology fro m land - use change and climate change engender nonfederal interest in federal financial and technical assistance for water resource science and projects . there is interest in new water resource infrastructure ( e.g. , storm surge gates , water storage ) and new kinds of projects ( e.g. , groundwater recharge projects , nature - based flood risk reduction ) . in addition , there is interest in reinvestment in aging water resource infrastructure and in improved management of available supplies through water science , monitoring , and operational changes . congress principally has directed either the bureau of reclamation ( reclamation ) in the department of the interior ( doi ) or the u.s. army corps of engineers ( usace ) in the department of defense to plan and construct the existing stock of large federal water resource projects . water resource policy questions relevant to the 116 th congress include the following: what will be the federal role in maintaining the performance and safety of existing water resource infrastructure ? . doi's u.s. geological survey ( usgs ) has a prominent role in federal water resource science and observation ( e.g. , streamgages , groundwater information , and other water resource data ) . in addition , congress authorizes and funds selected water resource science and monitoring activities at multiple federal agencies . congress historically has played a role in water resources through authorization of and appropriations for regional and site - specific projects and activities . the report next covers the following crosscutting topics: funding and financing aging and new water resource projects , changing from federal infrastructure projects to federal partnerships , protecting and restoring the environment , flood resilience and natural and nature - based infrastructure , and recharging groundwater . in addition to usace , reclamation , and usgs , other federal agencies have water - related programs and activities ; these other agencies are largely beyond the scope of this report . some of the projects are for facilitating navigation and expanding water supplies for irrigation and other uses . this report also does not address municipal water systems , municipal wastewater infrastructure , or environmental protections , such as water quality and wetlands regulations . other projects are aimed at reducing flood and drought losses and restoring aquatic ecosystems . usace constructs projects nationwide that primarily seek to improve navigation , reduce flood damages , and restore aquatic ecosystems . under what conditions and how should the federal government be involved in planning and constructing water resource projects ? . this report first discusses some broad categories of water resource topics relevant to the 116 th congress — projects and activities of usace , western water and reclamation , indian water rights settlements , international waters shared with canada and mexico , and water resource science at usgs . historically , reclamation constructed projects in the 17 arid states west of the mississippi river ; these projects were designed principally to provide reliable supplies of water for irrigation and some municipal and industrial uses .
the department of energy ( doe ) is responsible for managing the nation's nuclear weapons stockpile , including surveillance of weapons currently in the stockpile to identify reliability and safety problems . doe conducts three types of stockpile surveillance tests — flight tests , nonnuclear systems laboratory tests , and nuclear and nonnuclear component tests — on nine types of nuclear weapons . our objectives in this review were to ( 1 ) provide information on the status of doe's stockpile surveillance program ; ( 2 ) if the program is not on schedule , determine why it is not ; and ( 3 ) provide information on the steps being taken to return the program to the schedule . furthermore , without contingency plans , doe's ability to respond to possible future major disruptions in its testing operations is uncertain . your offices asked us to provide information on the status of the stockpile surveillance program . we recommend that the secretary of energy direct that the assistant secretary for defense programs develop detailed , written plans to restore stockpile surveillance tests to the contingency plans for testing facilities to provide for continued testing operations in the event that a testing facility is shut down for an extended period of time . if the program is not on schedule , you asked us to determine why it is not and provide you with information on the steps being taken to get the program back on schedule . about 1 in 3 actionable findings ( 118 findings ) have resulted in retrofits and major design changes . as a result , the stockpile surveillance program's role in assessing weapons' reliability and ensuring confidence in the reliability takes on increased importance . however , without formal written plans detailing how doe will increase the number of surveillance tests in order to return the program to its schedule , it is difficult to determine if doe's estimates on getting the surveillance testing back on schedule are reasonable and cost - effective . the purpose of doe's stockpile surveillance program is to ensure , primarily through three types of tests , that the safety and reliability of nuclear weapons are maintained . in addition , doe officials stressed that reliability of the nuclear weapons in the stockpile have not been adversely affected by a lack of testing . when a weapon's reliability is lowered because of a finding , the result is reported to the department of defense ( dod ) . doe's confidence in the reliability levels assigned to some nuclear weapons has been diminished because some needed tests have not been carried out . furthermore , we believe that issues and factors such as the availability of test missile launches , expiration of approved safety studies , or cessation of operations at test facilities could have an adverse effect on doe's future ability to remain on schedule . to ensure nuclear weapons' reliability , it is important that doe's stockpile surveillance be maintained on schedule . air force officials confirmed that providing for future intercontinental ballistic missile flight tests may be difficult because of limitations imposed by the start treaties . however , without formal documents detailing testing plans , costs , and schedules , it is difficult — if not impossible — to review the plans and assess their adequacy , determine the cost - effectiveness of the plans , or measure progress the test facilities are making .
specifically , they asked us to ( 1 ) identify fsa's efforts to treat minority farmers in the same way as nonminority farmers in delivering program services ; ( 2 ) examine the representation of minorities in county office staffing and on county committees in the counties with the highest numbers of minority farmers ; and ( 3 ) examine data on the disposition of minority and nonminority farmers' applications for participation in the agricultural conservation program ( acp ) and the direct loan program at the national level and in five county and five district loan offices . for a number of years , minority farmers have expressed concern that u. s. department of agriculture ( usda ) officials do not treat them in the same way as nonminority farmers in the conduct of usda's programs , particularly in decisions made in the department's county offices and district loan offices . because of this concern , the former chairman and ranking minority member requested in april 1996 that we review the efforts of the department's farm service agency ( fsa ) to conduct farm programs in an equitable manner . more specifically , for african americans , fsa took 82 days ; for hispanic americans and native americans , 94 days ; and for asian americans , 97 days . the county and district offices we visited were chosen because they had higher disapproval rates for minority farmers than for nonminority farmers for the acp and the direct loan program or because they were located in counties with high numbers of minority farmers . to carry out its responsibilities , the staff ( 1 ) investigates farmers' complaints of discrimination in program decisions , ( 2 ) conducts management evaluations of fsa's field offices to ensure that procedures designed to protect civil rights are being followed , and ( 3 ) provides equal employment opportunity ( eeo ) and civil rights training to its employees . fsa's management structure is highly decentralized ; the primary decision - making authority for approving loans and applications for a number of agricultural programs rests in its county and district loan offices . nine were disapproved because of poor credit ratings or inadequate cash flow ; five were disapproved because the applicants did not meet eligibility criteria ; and one was disapproved because of insufficient collateral . we did not , however , examine the processes used to investigate complaints of discrimination or the time this office takes to investigate and resolve farmers' complaints . to identify fsa's efforts to achieve equitable treatment of minority farmers in the delivery of program services , we interviewed fsa officials and examined documents concerning the efforts of the civil rights and small business development staff . within usda , fsa has the overall administrative responsibility for implementing agricultural programs . fsa's efforts to achieve equitable treatment for minority farmers are overseen by the agency's civil rights and small business development staff . in addition to these efforts , fsa recently increased its outreach activities to minority farmers to encourage their involvement in the department's programs , including their signing of 7-year production flexibility contracts . fsa is responsible for , among other things , stabilizing farm income , helping farmers conserve environmental resources , and providing credit to new or disadvantaged farmers .
some have called on congress to restrict or even prohibit such content , which raises the question of whether the first amendment would allow such regulation . the report then discusses the overarching first amendment principles that bear on what the government may regulate under the first amendment , including ( 1 )  the distinction between regulating conduct and speech ; ( 2 )  the presumed invalidity of content - based laws ; and ( 3 )  relevant "unprotected" categories of speech that generally can be restricted because of their content . a number of legal scholars have explored these issues , and some have proposed recommendations to congress about how best to address these concerns in accordance with the first amendment . while justices of the court have often disagreed over when free speech rights must yield to the government's interests , when it comes to speech promoting violence , the court has rejected an all - or - nothing approach . but when speech promotes violence , a tension can form between the values of liberty and security . a s the supreme court has observed , while the first amendment protects the "freedom of speech," it "does not protect violence. . in more recent years , some have begun to question whether and how the court's decisions in this area should apply to speech online . many policymakers and commentators , including some members of congress , have expressed concerns about the proliferation of social media content promoting terrorism and violence and the influence such speech can have on other internet users . although governmental efforts to combat online content promoting terrorism or violence could take a number of forms , this report focuses on the first amendment implications of imposing civil or criminal liability on individual internet users ( i.e. , the originators of the content ) rather than the social media companies or internet service providers themselves . over the past 50 years , the court has drawn a line between speech that advocates violence in the abstract and speech that facilitates it in a specific way , with the former receiving more robust constitutional protections . the "vast democratic fora of the internet" have provided ample platforms not only for those seeking to debate issues or express controversial views , but also for individuals and entities planning violent attacks or threatening violence online . it has done so because , in the court's view , upholding the first amendment requires preserving "uninhibited , robust , and wide - open" debate on public issues , even if that means allowing individuals to express ideas that are "deeply offensive to many. . as such , it focuses on the underlying first amendment issues that are likely to be common to both forms of government action , but does not discuss the additional considerations attendant to regulating a social media platform , which are the subject of another crs report . the report begins with some background on the use of the internet by terrorist groups and the reported influence of online content on certain individuals accused of committing violent attacks . in an oft - quoted passage from a dissenting opinion , justice robert jackson argued that the problems this tension creates are not insurmountable but must be confronted with a dose of pragmatism: a government can temper "liberty with order," but to treat free speech as absolute threatens to "convert the constitutional bill of rights into a suicide pact. .
116-93 ) and serves as an access portal to other crs products providing additional context , detail , and analysis relevant to particular aspects of that legislation . this report provides an overview of the fy2020 defense appropriations act ( p.l . subsequent sections of the report summarize the act's treatment of major components of the trump administration's budget request , including selected weapons acquisition programs and other provisions . the following overview tracks the legislative history of the fy2020 defense appropriations act and summarizes the budgetary and strategic context within which it was being debated . this included $718.3 billion ( 95.8% of the total ) for the military activities of the department of defense ( dod ) . for fy2020 , the trump administration requested a total of $750.0 billion in discretionary budget authority for national defense - related activities . the trump administration's december 2017 national security strategy ( nss ) and the 11-page unclassified summary of the january 2018 national defense strategy ( nds ) explicitly reorient u.s. national security strategy ( including defense strategy ) toward a primary focus on great power competition with china and russia and on countering their military capabilities . the act established binding annual limits ( or caps ) to reduce discretionary federal spending through fy2021 by $1.0 trillion . congress repeatedly has enacted legislation to raise the annual spending caps . but the administration's fy2020 request also included $165 billion designated as oco funding ( and thus exempt from the cap ) of which $98 billion was intended for base budget purposes . also not included in the fy2020 defense bill is $7.8 billion in accrual payments to fund the tricare for life program of medical insurance for military retirees , funding for which is appropriated automatically each year , as a matter of permanent law ( 10 u.s.c . some states are also collaborating with non - state proxies ( including , but not limited to , militias , criminal networks , corporations , and hackers ) and deliberately blurring the lines between conventional and irregular conflict and between civilian and military activities . this marks a change from the focus of u.s. national security policy for nearly the past three decades and a renewed emphasis on competition between nuclear - armed powers , which had been the cornerstone of u.s. strategy for more than four decades after the end of world war ii . the balance of the national defense budget request is for defense - related activities of the energy department and other agencies . the caps do not apply to funding designated by congress and the president as emergency spending or spending on oco . the president's fy2020 budget request for dod reflects a shift in strategic emphasis based on the 2018 national defense strategy ( nds ) , which called for "increased and sustained investment" to counter evolving threats from china and russia . to avert a nearly 11% reduction in defense spending , the administration's fy2020 base budget request conformed to the then - binding defense cap . this bill does not include funding for military construction and family housing , which is provided by the appropriations bill that funds those activities , the department of veterans affairs , and certain other agencies .
in the united states , cbd is being marketed in food and beverages , dietary supplements , cosmetics , and tobacco products such as electronic nicotine delivery systems ( ends , the overarching term encompassing electronic cigarettes ) âproducts that are primarily regulated by the food and drug administration ( fda ) under the federal food , drug , and cosmetic act ( ffdca ) . cannabidiol ( cbd ) , a compound in the cannabis sativa plant , has been promoted as a treatment for a range of conditions , including epileptic seizures , post - traumatic stress disorder , anxiety , inflammation , and sleeplessness . cbd is also the active ingredient in epidiolex , an fda - approved pharmaceutical drug used to treat seizures associated with two rare and severe forms of epilepsy . however , limited scientific evidence exists to substantiate or disprove the efficacy of cbd in treating these conditions . cbd is derived from the cannabis sativa plant ( commonly referred to as cannabis ) , which includes both hemp and marijuana ( defined further below ) . cbd and tetrahydrocannabinol ( thc ) are thought to be the most abundant cannabinoids in the cannabis plant and are among the most researched cannabinoids for their potential medical value . as described below , this distinction is relevant for purposes of oversight by the drug enforcement administration ( dea ) , but generally not for fda oversight . fda has not made similar determinations for other fda - regulated product categories ( pharmaceutical drugs , cosmetics , and tobacco products ) . fda has stated that it "treats products containing cannabis or cannabis - derived compounds as it does any other fda - regulated productsâmeaning they're subject to the same authorities and requirements as fda - regulated products containing any other [non - cannabis] substance . thcâa psychoactive compoundâis found at high levels in m arijuana and low levels in hemp ( see figure 1 ) . cbd and cbd - related products that do not meet the statutory definition of hemp ( in 7 u.s.c . the agriculture improvement act of 2018 ( 2018 farm bill ; p.l . this is true regardless of whether the cannabis or cannabis - derived compounds are classified as hemp under [7 u.s.c . cbd , on the other hand , is generally considered to be nonpsychoactive and may be derived from either hemp or marijuana . marijuana and hemp have separate definitions in u.s. law and are subject to different statutory and regulatory requirements . 115-334 ) removed hemp and its derivatives ( including hemp - derived cbd ) from the csa definition of marijuana . as mentioned above , cannabis and cannabis - derived fda - regulated products are subject to the same authorities and requirements as fda - regulated productsâincluding pharmaceutical drugs , food , dietary supplements , and cosmeticsâcontaining any other substance ( whether cannabis - derived or otherwise ) . thus , under the csa , the unauthorized manufacture , distribution , dispensation , and possession of marijuana and its derivatives ( including marijuana - derived cbd ) are prohibited . m arijuana ( as defined in statute ) generally refers to the cultivated plant used as a psychotropic drug , either for medicinal or recreational purposes .
the focus and funding levels of aid programs change along with broader u.s. policy goals . current aid programs reflect the diverse needs of the countries in the region ( see figure 1 for a map of latin america and the caribbean ) . foreign assistance is one of the tools the united states employs to advance u.s. interests in latin america and the caribbean . the administration also is reassessing the objectives of u.s. foreign assistance efforts , including those in latin america and the caribbean . congress authorizes and appropriates foreign assistance to the region and conducts oversight of aid programs and the executive branch agencies charged with managing them . it examines historical and recent trends in aid to the region ; the trump administration's fy2019 budget request for aid administered by the state department , the u.s. agency for international development ( usaid ) , and the inter - american foundation ; and fy2019 foreign aid appropriations legislation . others have made major strides in consolidating democratic governance and improving living conditions ; these countries no longer receive traditional u.s. development assistance but typically receive some u.s. support to address security challenges , such as transnational crime . some countries receive the full range of u.s. assistance as they struggle with political , socioeconomic , and security challenges . however , congress would have to approve any shifts in aid funding levels or priorities . the trump administration has proposed significant reductions in foreign assistance expenditures to shift resources to other budget priorities . it also analyzes how the administration's efforts to scale back assistance could affect u.s. policy in latin america and the caribbean . this report provides an overview of u.s. assistance to latin america and the caribbean . between 1946 and 2017 , the united states provided the region with more than $88 billion ( $181 billion in constant 2017 dollars ) of assistance . these concerns may have influenced congress's decision not to adopt many of the administration's proposed foreign assistance cuts for fy2019 . the united states has long been a major contributor of foreign assistance to countries in latin america and the caribbean . increased funding for counternarcotics and security programs also contributed to the rise in u.s. assistance . in fy2010 , congress and the obama administration split the central american portion of the mérida initiative into a separate central america regional security initiative ( carsi ) and created a similar program for the countries of the caribbean known as the caribbean basin security initiative ( cbsi ) . u.s. assistance to the region spiked in the early 1960s following the introduction of president john f. kennedy's alliance for progress , an anti - poverty initiative that sought to counter soviet and cuban influence in the aftermath of fidel castro's 1959 seizure of power in cuba . they also could result in the department of defense ( dod ) taking on a larger role in u.s. security cooperation with the region . on february 15 , 2019 , nearly four and a half months into the fiscal year , president trump signed into law the consolidated appropriations act , 2019 ( p.l . the establishment of the president's emergency plan for aids relief in 2003 and the millennium challenge corporation in 2004 also provided a number of countries in the region with new sources of u.s. assistance .
66-261 ) , requires that vessels transporting cargo from one u.s. point to another u.s. point be u.s. - built , and owned and crewed by u.s. citizens . the jones act , which refers to section 27 of the merchant marine act of 1920 ( p.l . the jones act has been an issue in recent congresses , coming into prominence amid debates over puerto rico's economic challenges and recovery from hurricane maria in 2017 ; in the investigation into the sinking of the 40-year - old ship el faro with 33 fatalities during a hurricane in 2015 ; and in discussions about domestic transportation of oil and natural gas . the law's effectiveness in achieving national security goals has also been the subject of attention in conjunction with a congressional directive that the administration develop a national maritime strategy , including strategies to increase the use of short sea shipping and enhance u.s. shipbuilding capability . the act provides a significant degree of protection from foreign competition for u.s. shipyards , domestic carriers , and american merchant sailors . it is a subject of debate because some experts point out that it makes domestic ocean shipping relatively expensive , constrains the availability of ships , and contributes to making it much more costly to build merchant vessels in u.s. shipyards than in shipyards abroad . in may 2018 , the office of management and budget requested public comment on federal requirements that could be modified or repealed to increase efficiency and reduce or eliminate unnecessary or unjustified regulatory burdens in the maritime sector . laws favoring a u.s. - flag fleet over a foreign fleet were initiated by the third act of the first congress ( 1 stat . on september 1 of the same year , congress specified that only a u.s. - built vessel owned by u.s. citizens and with a u.s. citizen captain could register as a u.s. vessel ( 1 stat . the jones act of 1920 was not the first law requiring that vessels transporting cargo domestically be u.s. - built , owned , and crewed . congress began debating how to respond to the steep drop - off in the share of u.s. foreign trade carried by u.s. vessels . the early united states had a comparative advantage in shipbuilding due to its ample supplies of large timber . in 1817 , congress enacted a precursor to the jones act by disallowing any vessel wholly or partially foreign - owned from transporting domestic cargo between u.s. ports ( 3 stat . 27 , enacted july 20 , 1789 ) , which assessed lesser duties on vessels built and owned domestically than on those foreign - built and - owned . 113-76 ) , congress directed the department of transportation and the department of defense to develop a national sealift strategy . nonetheless , u.s. shippers continued to use foreign - flag vessels in the alaska trade by moving cargo between the united states and vancouver , canada , by rail . rather , congress tightened the language concerning coastwise transport in response to shippers' attempts to avoid high - cost u.s. vessels . 248 ) to prohibit shippers from routing cargo through a foreign port so as to avoid coastwise laws .
the violence against women act ( vawa ) was originally enacted in 1994 ( p.l . among other things , it allowed for enhanced sentencing of repeat federal sex offenders ; mandated restitution to victims of specified federal sex offenses ; and authorized grants to state , local , and tribal law enforcement entities to investigate and prosecute violent crimes against women . it addressed congressional concerns about violent crime , and violence against women in particular , in several ways . 103-322 ) . the reauthorization also included new provisions to address states' rape kit backlogs . the violence against women reauthorization act of 2019 ( h.r . it includes brief descriptions of earlier vawa reauthorizations and a more - detailed description of the most recent reauthorization in 2013 . it also briefly addresses reauthorization activity in the 116 th congress . most recently , congress passed and president obama signed the violence against women reauthorization act of 2013 ( p.l . this report provides a brief history of vawa and an overview of the crimes addressed through the act . 113-4 gave american indian tribes authority to enforce tribal laws pertaining to domestic violence and related crimes against non - tribal members , and established a nondiscrimination provision for vawa grant programs . the report concludes with a discussion of vawa programs and a five - year history of funding from fy2015 through fy2019 . among other things , it would reauthorize funding for vawa programs and authorize new programs ; amend and add definitions used for vawa programs ; amend federal criminal law relating to firearms , custodial rape , and stalking ; and expand tribal jurisdiction over certain crimes committed on tribal lands . public concern over violence against women prompted the original passage and enactment of vawa . in addition , this vawa reauthorization amended and authorized appropriations for the trafficking victims protection act of 2000 , enhanced measures to combat trafficking in persons , and amended vawa grant purpose areas to include sex trafficking . congress may also consider further changes to vawa programs . vawa programs generally address domestic violence , sexual assault , dating violence , and stalking , although some vawa programs address additional crimes . there are several issues that congress may consider in current reauthorization efforts . these include , but are not limited to , improvements to data collection , assessing tribal jurisdiction over non - tribal members who commit vawa - related crimes on tribal lands , new approaches for law enforcement in assisting victims , and enforcement of the federal prohibition on firearms for those convicted of a misdemeanor crime of domestic violence and those who are subject to a domestic violence protective order . vawa has been reauthorized three times since its original enactment . 1585 ) , as passed by the house , would address some of these issues . the violence against women reauthorization act of 2013 ( p.l . vawa grant programs largely address the criminal justice system and community response to these crimes , but certain programs address prevention as well . 113-4 ) , which reauthorized most of the programs under vawa , among other things . more recently , however , there has been a focus on ensuring that the needs of all victims are met through provisions of vawa programs .
more specifically , this report discusses ( 1 ) the history and purpose of the clauses ; ( 2 ) whether the president is a person holding an "office of profit or trust under [the united states]" for purposes of the foreign emoluments clause ; ( 3 ) the scope of the emoluments clauses , focusing specifically on disputes over the breadth of the term "emolument" ; and ( 4 ) how the clauses may be enforced . for most of their history , the foreign and domestic emoluments clauses ( collectively , the emoluments clauses or the clauses ) were little discussed and largely unexamined by the courts . t he constitution contains three provisions that mention the term "emolument": 1 . recent litigation involving the president , however , has led to multiple federal court decisions more fully addressing the clauses' scope and application . the first two of these clauses are the focus of this report . article i , section 6 , clause 2 provides ( among other things ) that no member of congress shall "be appointed" during his or her term "to any civil office under the authority of the united states , which shall have been created , or the emoluments whereof shall have been encreased during such time[.] . article i , section 9 , clause 8 provides that "no person holding any office of profit or trust under [the united states] , shall , without the consent of congress , accept of any present , emolument , office , or title , of any kind whatever , from any king , prince , or foreign state" ; 2 . article ii , section 1 , clause 7 provides that "[t]he president shall , at stated times , receive for his services , a compensation , which shall neither be encreased nor diminished during the period for which he shall have been elected , and he shall not receive within that period any other emolument from the united states , or any of them" ; and 3 . this report accordingly provides an overview of the emoluments clauses as they relate to the president , focusing on the legal issues that have been central to the recent litigation . the foreign emoluments clause . the domestic emoluments clause . that said , it is unclear whether legislative actions would provide an effective means to enforce the emoluments clauses against the president , given the possibility of veto and potential separation - of - powers objections . the ineligibility clause . for instance , given that the foreign emoluments clause explicitly provides a role for congress in evaluating the propriety of the receipt of foreign emoluments by federal officers , congress may be empowered to create civil or criminal remedies for violations or establish prophylactic reporting requirements through legislation . separate from issues regarding the scope of the emoluments clauses is how the provisions' mandates are enforced , including whether and to what extent the federal courts and congress have a role in addressing violations of the clauses . this question has divided legal scholars and has only recently been addressed by any federal courts .
over the past several decades , manufacturing has been declining in many of the nation's cities . because , in part , of the high cost of assessing the sites to determine the nature and extent of contamination and to clean them up in accordance with federal and state environmental laws , some new businesses have chosen to locate on uncontaminated sites outside of urban areas , known as “greenfields.” these decisions lead to the loss of tax revenue and employment in central city neighborhoods . the senate's proposed legislation to reauthorize superfund , s. 1285 , seeks to encourage local governments to redevelop brownfields by addressing two of the barriers to redevelopment: liability under the superfund legislation and the costs of assessing the sites . when the businesses closed , they left abandoned and idled properties commonly known as “brownfields,” which are sometimes contaminated with chemical wastes from the manufacturing processes . they have often cited the liability provisions in the comprehensive environmental response , compensation , and liability act ( cercla ) , commonly known as superfund , as one of the major disincentives to redeveloping brownfields . it also proposes to assist with the costs of assessing the sites by providing interest - free loans of $100,000 per year , up to a total of $200,000 per site , which local governments could use to cover these costs . to help you evaluate whether these provisions in s. 1285 would encourage redeveloping the brownfields in the nation's cities , you asked us to provide information on ( 1 ) what the universe of potential brownfield sites nationwide is , ( 2 ) what legal barriers superfund presents for redeveloping brownfields , and ( 3 ) whether the proposed loans to local governments are likely to be sufficient for conducting site assessments . lenders and developers are wary of investing in such contaminated property because , under the environmental laws , they could be held liable for cleaning up the contamination . in june 1995 , we reported on the barriers , including liability under cercla , to redeveloping urban industrial property . the bill would protect lenders and property purchasers from superfund liability under certain circumstances . additionally , epa clarified its enforcement policies toward lenders , property purchasers , and certain property owners to alleviate their concerns and facilitate their involvement in the cleanup and redevelopment of brownfields . they also noted a number of policies that epa has issued to help remove some of these liability barriers to brownfield redevelopment . some of the research and advocacy organizations involved in urban issues have developed estimates , and municipalities have also estimated the potential number of brownfield sites , or acreage , within their borders . several legislative proposals that would address brownfield issues , including s. 1285 , have been introduced . while the federal government and the states have not identified and listed brownfield properties , several local governments that received grants under epa's brownfields pilot program have also developed estimates of brownfield acreage within their borders . however , any estimate of the number of brownfields is likely to be imprecise because the cities and others measuring the number of brownfields often use different techniques and definitions .
this report provides data on the movement into and out of government by executive branch personnel in president george w. bush's and president barack obama's administrations . with the advent of the merit system , federal employees found themselves serving longer in government while also being attracted to private - sector jobs related to their federal employment . while congress has passed laws regulating the revolving door phenomenon in the executive branch , there has to date been little data available about the underlying phenomenon . the pendleton act ended the spoils system to ensure that qualified individuals were hired into federal service and to prevent the president from being "hounded by job seekers. . using a dataset of executive branch cabinet department officials compiled by graduate students at the bush school of government and public service at texas a&m university in partnership with crs , this report provides empirical data about the use of the revolving door by a subset of federal officials , with a particular focus on those who were registered lobbyists either before or after their government service . some observers see the revolving door as potentially valuable to both private - sector firms and the government ; other observers believe that employees leaving government to join the industries they were regulating , or leaving the private sector to join a relevant government agency , could provide an unfair representational advantage and create the potential for conflicts of interest . data collected in partnership with the bush school of government and public service at texas a&m university are then presented and analyzed . in 1883 , following the assassination of president james a. garfield by disgruntled job seeker charles guiteau , the pendleton act was signed into law by president chester a. arthur to ensure that "government jobs be awarded on the basis of meritâ¦. . individuals may move because they possess policy and procedural knowledge and have relationships with former colleagues that are useful to prospective employers , either in government or in the private sector . it next examines the potential advantages and disadvantages of the revolving door phenomenon . the movement of employees between the private sector and government is often referred to as the revolving door . this report begins with an overview of existing revolving door laws and regulations that affect executive branch personnel . the first identified conflict - of - interest provision was enacted in 1872 . generally , the revolving door is described as the movement of individuals between the public and private sector , and vice versa . â§207 were enacted as part of a major revision of federal conflict - of - interest laws . whether or not the revolving door on net helps or hinders the functioning of government agencies may depend , however , on the potential benefits of transitioning individuals between government and the private sector versus the potential for conflicts of interest to develop on the part of those individuals . instead of amending existing revolving door provisions , congress could continue to use existing law and regulations to govern the movement of individuals between the federal government and private sector . this could allow for permanent changes to existing ethics and conflict - of - interest provisions .
currently , the united states has active economic sanctions imposed on three major oil - producing and exporting countries: iran , russia , and venezuela . generally , sanctions - related supply losses have been counterbalanced by increased production and exports from the united states , russia , and other countries ; petroleum trade flow adjustments ; indications of slowing global oil demand growth rates ; and design elements of oil - related sanctions . oil - related sanctions are one option that could be used to apply economic pressure on certain countries in order to achieve broader geopolitical and foreign policy objectives . a sustained global petroleum supply imbalance of 1% to 2% could contribute to market conditions that could result in volatile price movements ( both upward and downward ) for crude oil and related petroleum products ( e.g. , gasoline and diesel fuel ) . finally , the administration has continued to strengthen oil - related sanctions on venezuela through the use of e.o.s and administrative actions . these design elements are intended to mitigate sanctions - related market and price impacts and to build into the sanctions regime multilateral coordination and cooperation . venezuela oil production has likely also been affected , although accurately quantifying volumes is challenging due to monthly oil production declines that had been occurring over a period of years prior to u.s. sanctions affecting oil trade in january 2019 . economic sanctions are one foreign policy tool that can be used to potentially influence the behavior and actions of political leadership in other countries . the scope of this report is to assess the possible impact of current u.s. economic sanctions on oil production in and exports from iran , russia , and venezuela . oil sanctions frameworks can include wind - down periods , requirements to consider and certify that global oil supply is adequate to compensate for supply reductions , and engagement with other oil producers before applying certain sanctions . sanctions - related oil supply losses and trade constraints have had an impact on oil markets . combined , these countries produced approximately 17.7 million barrels per day ( bpd ) of oil in 2018âapproximately 18% of total world oil productionâaccording to one estimate . to date , oil supply impacts related to economic sanctions have not generally resulted in significant upward price pressure for benchmark oil prices . sanctions applied to russia's oil sector generally target long - term , high - risk oil production projects . only a portion of these supply volumes might be directly affected by u.s. economic sanctions in the near termâpotentially ranging from 3.3 million to 4.0 million bpd from both iran ( estimated to be 2.8 million bpd ) and venezuela ( estimated to range from 0.5 million to as much as 1.2 million bpd ) . regarding russia , some members of congress have called for additional sanctions , and several bills have been introduced in the 116 th congress with certain provisions that could affect russia's oil sector . venezuela sanctions imposed to date prohibit petroleum trade with the united statesâhistorically one of the primary destinations for venezuela's oil exportsâand have the potential to affect venezuela's petroleum trade with other countries . in some cases , u.s. economic sanctions that target oil sectors in iran , russia , and venezuela have observably affected oil markets in several ways , including reductions in supply , changes in price relationships , and adjustments to trade flows .
through its investigative powers , congress gathers information it considers necessary to oversee the implementation of existing laws or to evaluate whether new laws are necessary . this "power of inquiry" is essential to the legislative function and derives directly , though implicitly , from the constitution's vesting of legislative power in the congress . the information that congress seeks , whether to inform itself for lawmaking purposes or to conduct oversight , often lies in the executive branch's possession . the use or threatened use of these powers in a way that would impose burdens on an agency can encourage compliance with subpoenas ( or make it more likely that requested information will be provided without need to issue a subpoena ) and solidify congress's position when trying to negotiate a compromise during an investigative dispute with the executive branch . congress has only rarely resorted to either criminal contempt or civil enforcement to combat non - compliance with subpoenas . this process of civil enforcement relies on the help of the courts to enforce congressional demands . congress exercises substantial power over the executive branch by controlling agency authority , funding , and , in the case of the senate , confirmation of executive officers . besides leveraging its general legislative powers , congress currently relies on two formal legal mechanisms to enforce subpoenas: criminal contempt of congress and civil enforcement of subpoenas in the federal courts . nor will this report address whether , under the circumstances , it was appropriate for congress to exercise its contempt power . that said , the prevailing enforcement mechanisms of criminal contempt of congress and civil enforcement , both of which rely on the assistance and participation of the other branches of government , have certain drawbacks that arguably limit their effectiveness in ensuring timely compliance with congressional subpoenas by executive branch officials . in three of the four instances , the house also looked to the federal courts for civil enforcement of the outstanding subpoena . rather , this report will examine the legal enforcement of congressional subpoenas in a contemporary and historical context and discuss legal issues associated with alternative subpoena - enforcement frameworks that congress may consider to obtain information from the executive branch . four times since 2008 , the house of representatives has held an executive branch official ( or former official ) in criminal contempt of congress for denying a committee information subpoenaed during an ongoing investigation . the house's decision to resort to criminal contempt of congress and civil enforcement in these cases was not without controversy , as in each instance the executive official asserted that a constitutional privilege limited congress's right to the information sought . congress's ability to issue and enforce its own subpoenas is essential to the legislative function and an "indispensable ingredient of lawmaking. . in most circumstances involving the executive branch , committees can obtain the information they seek through voluntary requests or after issuing ( but not yet seeking enforcement of ) a subpoena . recent controversies could be interpreted to suggest that the existing mechanisms are at times inadequate — at least in the relatively rare instance that enforcement is necessary to respond to a current or former executive branch official who has refused to comply with a subpoena .
congress established the national wild and scenic rivers system ( nwsrs ) in 1968 through the wild and scenic rivers act ( wsra ) . the wsra established a policy of preserving designated free - flowing rivers for the benefit and enjoyment of present and future generations . it also complemented the then - current national policy of constructing dams and other structures that altered flow along many rivers . designated rivers usually are referred to as wild and scenic rivers ( wsrs ) . congress establishes new wsrs within the system , directs the administration to study potential wsrs , and determines the level of agency funding for wsr administration . for individual wsrs , congress has made specific provisions concerning river management , land acquisition and use in river corridors , and other matters . ongoing issues for congress include whether to designate additional wsrs , how to address local and federal roles on nonfederal river segments , and more . the wsra established three classes of wsrs , reflecting the characteristics of a river at the time of designation and affecting the type and amount of development that may be allowed afterward: w ild rivers are free from impoundments ( dams , diversions , and so forth ) and generally inaccessible except by trail . congress plays an ongoing role in shaping the nwsrs through legislation and oversight . at the passage of the wsra in 1968 , congress initially designated 789 miles in eight rivers as part of the nwsrs and began to expand the system in 1972 ; since then , every congress has added rivers . altogether , the system now includes 226 river units comprising over 13,400 miles in 41 states and the commonwealth of puerto rico . recreational rivers are readily accessible by road , with some shoreline development , and may have been subject to some impoundment or diversion in the past . the act states that the studies are to discuss , among other things , the "outstandingly remarkable values" ( orvs ) that make the area worthy or unworthy of addition to the system ; current land ownership and use ; potential future uses of the land and water that could be affected by addition to the system ; the federal agency that would administer the area ; the cost of acquiring the land , if applicable ; and the extent to which management costs would be shared by state and local agencies . the potential use of condemnation authority to acquire lands on partnership wsrs has been particularly contentious . congress and nps have used varying methods to address concerns about local versus federal control of partnership wsrs and about adequate levels of protection for partnership wsrs , either in individual designating legislation or in agency action prior to or after designation . the watersheds are primitive , and the shorelines are essentially undeveloped . scenic rivers are free from impoundments and in generally undeveloped areas but are accessible in places by roads . the secretary of the interior or agriculture , as appropriate , is responsible for conducting authorized studies and reporting to the president on the suitability of a proposed addition . congress may designate rivers as part of the system without first requiring a study .
the united states is currently experiencing the longest economic expansion in its history . although short - term forecasts are predicting continued economic expansion , some economists have expressed uncertainty over how long the expansion will continue . countercyclical fiscal policy refers to short - term tax and spending adjustments to stimulate consumer and business demand in an effort to counteract economic contraction and return the economy to its potential . however , congress has a range of options it could consider when designing a stimulus package should a recession occur and automatic stabilizers are not sufficient to counteract it . if the next slowdown is significant , the economy could enter a recession , which is typically characterized by falling output and rising unemployment . history has shown that economic expansions inevitably give way to economic slowdowns . countercyclical fiscal policy may help to stabilize the economy when it enters a recession . effective fiscal stimulus does not always require contemporaneous legislative action by congress . predicting when the economy may transition from expansion to recession , however , is notoriously difficult , as the ebb and flow of the economy is determined by many different factors , including a number that lie outside the country's borders . the analysis begins by reviewing the features effective countercyclical fiscal policies are commonly thought to have , and then distinguishes between countercyclical and growth - oriented policies . there are certain "automatic stabilizers" that work without congressional action to lower taxes and increase spending as the economy weakens . as a result , an economic slowdown or recession does not necessarily warrant a policy response . this report identifies and summarizes options congress may consider in response to a recession . next , the report summarizes and evaluates potential fiscal policy options that congress could consider . the report concludes with a brief discussion about enacting fiscal stimulus in the context of the country's long - run budget outlook . all of the estimates presented below ( and elsewhere ) are based on models that rely on a set of assumptions about how individuals and businesses may react to policy changes , and on assumptions about how the federal reserve may adjust monetary policy to accommodate or to offset a fiscal policy change . temporary stimulus can help to contain the budgetary impact of tax reductions and spending increases , which , in turn , can increase the effectiveness of the stimulus by mitigating the adverse effect large deficits can have on long - term growth . the options presented are drawn from those policies considered during the great recession for which estimates of their potential economic impact exist . timely implementation of fiscal policy is made inherently difficult by three well - known lags: the lag in recognizing a recession , the lag in negotiating and implementing a policy response , and the lag between policy implementation and when the economy is affected . spending on infrastructure , while believed to have a significant impact on the economy given enough time , can take many months to take effect due to the length of time it takes to plan and complete such projects . effective fiscal policy in response to recessions of average duration and severity is usually considered to have three general features: it is timely , targeted , and temporary .
the interest and debate surrounding cryptocurrencies has led some central banks to examine whether the technology underpinning cryptocurrencies could be leveraged to create digital versions of state - created currencies , which would have legal status in their jurisdiction of issue . since their creation a decade ago , cryptocurrencies have become more prominent in the global economy . some analysts believe that cryptocurrencies could revolutionize the financial and banking industries , increasing the speed and reducing the cost of transactions . cryptocurrencies are digital representations of value that have no status as legal tender and are administer ed using distributed ledger technology , running on a network of independent , peer - to - peer computers . others believe that cryptocurrencies , which do not have status as legal tender , are a scam and a financial bubble that has burst , as evidenced by the approximately 85% drop in value of cryptocurrencies over the course of 2018 . a major policy question is whether state - issued digital currencies could draw on the benefits of cryptocurrencies while minimizing the risks , but there are varying views on the need for or desirability of digital fiat currencies . as congress considers issues related to digital currencies , including whether to regulate further the cryptocurrency industry , the approaches taken by other governments and international bodies may be of interest . bitcoin is the most common and well - known cryptocurrency , but according to one estimate , about 2,100 cryptocurrencies are currently in circulation . it has three functions in the economy: 1 ) a medium of exchange ( an item that buyers give to sellers when they want to purchase goods and services ) ; 2 ) a unit of account ( the yardstick people use to post prices and record debts ) ; and 3 ) a store of value ( an item that people can use to transfer purchasing power from the present to the future ) . they have examined a range of issues , including the utility of digital currencies for improving the international payments systems ; the possible threats digital currencies may or may not pose to international financial stability ; the divergence of national - level cryptocurrency regulations and whether international regulatory coordination is desirable ; how cryptocurrencies should be treated in bank prudential regulation ; and how to adapt international recommendations to combat money laundering and terrorist financing to cryptocurrencies . in november 2018 , the u.s. department of the treasury announced it is developing a report on cryptocurrency regulation , including a legislative framework for the 116 th congress to consider in 2019 . the policy questions posed by digital currencies , as well as variation in government responses , have also become a focus for several international organizations and forums . others still are seeking a middle path , allowing cryptocurrency transactions , but regulating the industry to minimize the risks . digital currency is a broad term that refers to virtual ( nonfiat ) currency and digital fiat currency . the g - 7 and g - 20 finance ministers and central bank governors have discussed cryptocurrency and its implications for global financial stability ; they have expressed a desire to coordinate national - level regulations of cryptocurrencies , similar to their work coordinating financial regulatory policies following the global financial crisis of 2008-2009 .
the rules of the house of representatives have included provisions related to preserving order and decorum in the chamber since the 1 st congress ( 1789-1790 ) . under current house rules , members may violate decorum if they engage in certain behaviors , such as using disorderly language . members may be called to order by colleagues for the use of allegedly disorderly , or unparliamentary , language , which may include a formal demand that their words be taken down . this demand initiates a series of procedures to determine whether the words are , in fact , unparliamentary and to decide whether a member who uses such language should be allowed to proceed in debate . this report covers these procedures , which are provided for in the standing rules of the house as a mechanism to maintain decorum in debate . the sections below present details about how and when a member might invoke the demand that words be taken down , the procedural steps that may follow the demand , and an overview of the rule's history in the house . the report concludes with information about the practice of invoking this rule in the house in recent decades . the standing rules of the house do not state explicitly what language is considered to be disorderly , although clause 1 ( b ) of rule xvii prohibits members from engaging in "personalities" in debate . following the reading of the allegedly unparliamentary remarks , the speaker of the house ( or , if the words are spoken in a committee , the chair of the committee ) will determine whether the words are in order . the standing rules of the house establish a parliamentary mechanismâreferred to as "words taken down"âwhereby a member may call another member to order for the use of disorderly language . the rule took its current form when the house comprehensively recodified its rules in the 106 th congress , although the changes were largely technical .  ( b ) the speaker shall decide the validity of a call to order . it may also be invoked in the standing and select committees of the house . twenty - seven , or more than half , of these rulings took place in the 1990s , with only nine rulings by the speaker since 2000 . although the rules of the house have , since its inception , included provisions related to preserving order and decorum in the chamber , the formal call for a member's words to be taken down was not adopted as part of the standing rules of the house in the 1 st congress ( 1789-1790 ) . according to clause 4 ( b ) of rule xvii , the demand for words to be taken down must be timely: it must generally occur before intervening business or debate . house precedents catalog words and phrases previously deemed to be in order and those that were ruled out of order , or unparliamentary . it is also common for the member whose words were ruled out of order to be allowed to proceed in order , usually by unanimous consent initiated by the speaker . members whose words were ruled out of order were given permission to proceed in 17 of the 25 instances , either by unanimous consent or motion .
the u.s. coast guard is the agency charged by law with overseeing the safety of vessels and maritime operations . for at least four decades , congress has been concerned about the coast guard's ability to maintain an adequate staff of experienced marine safety personnel with technical knowledge of vessel construction and accident investigation . in the hamm alert maritime safety act of 2018 ( p.l . 115-265 , â§210 ) , congress directed the coast guard to brief congressional committees of jurisdiction on its efforts to enhance its marine inspections staff , the staff responsible for ensuring that vessels are meeting safety standards . recent incidents , particularly the 2015 sinking of the u.s. - flag cargo ship el faro with the loss of 33 lives during a hurricane near the bahamas , have revived questions about the coast guard's persistent difficulty with hiring and training a marine safety workforce . the safety inspections of the vessel were found to have been inadequate . in the frank lobiondo coast guard authorization act of 2018 ( p.l . 115-282 , â§501 ) congress requested a report from the coast guard detailing the courses and other training a marine inspector must complete to be considered qualified , including any courses that have been dropped from the training curriculum in recent years . this report examines the staffing challenges the coast guard faces in assuring marine safety at a time when its responsibilities in this area are increasing significantly . adding to the coast guard's safety responsibilities is the construction of several liquefied natural gas ( lng ) export terminals , whose siting , operations , and security are partly or entirely under coast guard jurisdiction , as well as the increasing use of lng as ship fuel . it also considers proposals to realign marine safety functions within the federal government . however , congress has shown reluctance to eliminate any of the coast guard's missions . congress has been increasing the agency's role in fishing vessel safety as well , putting additional demands on the safety workforce . some members of congress , dissatisfied with the army corps of engineers' performance in the provision of navigation channel infrastructure , have proposed transferring that function to the department of transportation . for instance , the federal aviation administration has been criticized for increasing its reliance on private - sector inspectors paid by industry rather than enhancing its in - house inspection workforce . about 60% of the 217 ships in the dry - cargo u.s. - flag commercial fleet and 53% of u.s. - flag offshore supply vessels ( which service oil rigs ) are older than 20 years ; the el faro had been in service for 40 years . the trump administration also has proposed this transfer as part of a larger reorganization plan involving multiple agencies . the coast guard repeatedly has made statements in recent decades laying out its plans to improve the quality of its inspection workforce . the coast guard engages in two distinct activities with respect to marine safety: vessel inspection . similarly , the department of transportation's pipeline and hazardous materials safety administration , which regulates pipeline safety , has found that experienced inspectors are often hired away as safety compliance officers by pipeline companies .
under the constitution , the house alone has the power to formally chargeâthat is , impeachâa federal official . the senate has voted to remove eight of these officials , and all of them were federal judges . the u.s. constitution establishes a two - step process for the house and senate to remove federal officialsâincluding the president , vice president , judges , and other civil officersâfor "treason , bribery , or other high crimes and misdemeanors. . the house has used this process mostly to impeach federal judges , although the house has also impeached two presidents and one cabinet official . two - thirds of senators voting must agree to convict and remove an official from office . the house could also , however , choose to consider the resolution under any of its other regular processes , including suspension of the rules ( requiring a two - thirds vote for passage ) , a rule from the rules committee ( requiring only a majority vote ) , or unanimous consent . the senate alone has the power to try an impeachment and render a verdict regarding whether the individual should be removed from office and possibly barred from holding future office . a house majority can accomplish this by adopting articles of impeachment , which are effectively written accusations ( similar to an indictment in ordinary criminal proceedings ) . the summary of the rules and procedures the house might use to impeach a federal official presented here is drawn from published sources of congressional rules and precedents , as well as the public record of past impeachment proceedings . it relies as well upon in - depth research conducted by betsy palmer and susan navarro smelcer , formerly of crs , on the practice in both chambers with respect to the impeachment of federal judges . consultation with the parliamentarian of the house is always advised regarding the possible application of rules and precedents . for more information on impeachment , including a discussion of which federal officers are subject to impeachment and possible grounds for impeachment , see crs report r44260 , impeachment and removal , by jared p. cole and todd garvey . this report provides an overview of the procedures and should not be treated or cited as an authority on congressional proceedings . first , an impeachment inquiry is authorized , and this is most often accomplished through the adoption of a simple resolution ( h.res.___ ) directing the judiciary committee to investigate an official . the procedures the house has developed for accomplishing this constitutional responsibility are described below . the senate could also separately decide to disqualify an officer from holding future federal office . 93-774 ) mandating an investigation to determine whether the house should impeach president nixon and continuing the availability of funds . in the three previous instances of judicial impeachments , however , the house did not approve a resolution explicitly authorizing an impeachment inquiry . disqualification requires only a majority vote . the impeachment process may be initiated as the result of various actions and events , including the receipt and referral of information from an outside source , investigations by congressional committees under their general authority , or the introduction of articles of impeachment in the form of a house resolution .
congress's decisions on these issues could affect future u.s. military capabilities and funding requirements . in fy2021 , the department of defense ( dod ) requested approximately $4.1 billion for more than 41,337 weapons in 15 munitions programs . potential issues for congress include planned procurement quantities and stockpile assessments , defense industrial base production capacity , development timelines , supply chain security , affordability and cost - effectiveness , and emerging factors that may affect pgm programs . congress , through the defense authorization and appropriations bills , has historically exercised its role in the decision to approve , reject , or modify dod's proposals for pgms . over the years , the u.s. military has relied on pgms to execute ground , air , and naval military operations . pgms have become ubiquitous in u.s. military operations ; funding for these weapons has increased dramatically from fy1998 to the present as depicted in . this report focuses on selected precision - guided munitions ( pgms ) fielded by the air force , army , navy , and marine corps . in addition , these programs pose a number of potential oversight issues for congress . dod projects requesting approximately $3.3 billion for 20,456 weapons in fy2022 , $3.9 billion for 23,306 weapons in fy2023 , $3.9 billion for 18,376 weapons in fy2024 , and $3.6 billion for 16,325 weapons in fy2025 . the main disadvantage of these weapons is cost ; particularly long range missiles . a related issue is whether dod has adequately assessed the sufficiency of existing and planned pgm stockpiles , particularly in light of recent use rates for such weapons . affordability and cost - effectiveness . one potential issue for congress is whether dod's desired quantities of standoff munitions are appropriate . in addition to these virtues , pgms also offer other advantages over unguided weapons , namely range and the reduction in numbers of combat sorties required to deliver the desired effects on the battle field . china and russia have developed sophisticated systems over the past 10 years , while dod has developed relatively few systems . some analysts argue that u.s. forces would substantially increase their operational risk at ranges in excess of 500 nautical miles ( nm ) . another potential issue for congress is how dod's programs for developing and procuring pgms might be affected by emerging factors such as the u.s. withdrawal from the intermediate nuclear force ( inf ) treaty ; new u.s. military operational concepts for countering chinese a2 / ad forces in the indo - pacific region , such as the army's new multi - domain operations ( mdo ) operational concept and the marine corps' new expeditionary advanced base operations ( eabo ) concept , both of which possibly feature the potential use of such weapons from island locations in the pacific as a way of countering china's a2 / ad forces ; and emerging technologies such as hypersonics and artificial intelligence ( ai ) . counter - islamic state ( is ) operations in iraq and syria have used numerous weapons: in 2015 , coalition air forces used more than 28,000 weapons ; in 2016 , the campaign used an additional 30,700 weapons ; and in 2017 ( the height of operations ) , the campaign used 39,500 weapons ( see figure 2 for a graphical representation of operational usage compared to dod procurement ) .
the united states and most european union ( eu ) member states recognize kosovo . the republic of kosovo declared independence from serbia in 2008 , nearly a decade after the end of a brief but lethal conflict between serbian forces and a kosovo albanian insurgency led by the kosovo liberation army ( kla ) . current key issues in kosovo's domestic situation include the march 2020 collapse of the government ; responding to the coronavirus disease 2019 ( covid - 19 ) pandemic ; managing relations with the country's ethnic serb minority , particularly in northern kosovo ; and economic growth . since 2008 , kosovo has been recognized by more than 100 countries . the united states has strongly supported kosovo's state - building and development efforts , as well as its ongoing dialogue with serbia to normalize their relations . the united states enjoys broad popularity in kosovo due to its support during the miloå¡eviä era , its leadership of nato's 1999 intervention in the kosovo war , its backing of kosovo's independence in 2008 , and its subsequent diplomatic support . serbia , russia , china , and various other countries ( including some eu member states ) do not . given kosovo's geography , history , and current challenges , the country also factors into wider u.s. foreign policy issues in which congress remains engaged . some observers and several members of congress have expressed concern over recent u.s. policies toward kosovo's government , such as pausing implementation of a $49 million millennium challenge corporation ( mcc ) threshold program and delaying the development of its proposed compact program , until kosovo rescinds the tariffs . kosovo regards the united states as a security guarantor and key ally . the eu and nato have played key roles in kosovo ; these institutional relationships continue to evolve alongside kosovo's state - building processes . many members were active in debates over the u.s. - and nato - led military intervention in the conflict . such issues include transitional justice , corruption and the rule of law , combatting human trafficking and organized crime , u.s. foreign assistance , security in europe , and eu and nato enlargement . congress has maintained interest in kosovo for many decadesâfrom concerns over serbia's treatment of ethnic albanians in the former yugoslavia to the armed conflict in kosovo in 1998-1999 after the yugoslav federation disintegrated . looking ahead , members may consider how the united states can support the kosovo - serbia dialogue , kosovo's euro - atlantic ambitions , transitional justice processes , the ongoing political crisis arising from the march 2020 government collapse , and regional security . kosovo regards the united states as a security guarantor and critical ally , and many believe the united states retains influence in domestic policymaking and politics . the united states supports kosovo's euro - atlantic ambitions . additional assistance is provided through a $49 million millennium challenge corporation ( mcc ) threshold program that launched in 2017 , with focus on governance and energy efficiency and reliability . u.s. efforts currently center on bringing the two parties back to negotiations . some analysts , while welcoming greater u.s. involvement , assert that the united states is more effective in engaging the western balkans when its actions and positions are aligned with those of its european allies ; they contend that recent gaps between the united states and allies such as germany on the kosovo - serbia dialogue , as well as on the march 2020 no - confidence session , have undercut overall engagement efforts .
this report describes ( 1 ) the history of federal teacher recruitment and retention policy , ( 2 ) current policies in this area , and ( 3 ) related issues that may arise as congress considers reauthorizing the hea . the higher education act ( hea ) is the main federal law containing policies designed to address these issues . congressional consideration of potentially reauthorizing the hea is ongoing , with the introduction of numerous bills to amend current law and address teacher recruitment and retention . the k - 12 teacher workforce is relatively largeâeach year , nearly 4 million teachers are employed in u.s. elementary and secondary schools . title ii of the hea authorizes grant support for schools that prepare new teachers . the problem of teacher turnover raises a number of recruitment and retention issues of interest to policymakers . turnover in these schools is high relative to earlier periodsâabout 1 in 10 teachers left his or her job in 2018 . title iv of the hea authorizes financial support to encourage people to stay in the teaching profession in the form of loan forgiveness and other benefits . the hea was last comprehensively amended in 2008 by the higher education opportunity act ( heoa , p.l . teacher recruitment and retention have been the focus of federal policy since the hea was first enacted in 1965 . although the authorities have expired , the associated programs continue to receive appropriations . thus far , numerous bills have been introduced to amend current law and address teacher recruitment and retention . this figure follows federal statistical trends that show a steady growth in teacher attrition since the 1980s . 110-315 ) . the 116 th congress is expected to consider reauthorizing the hea . changes that have been suggested to alleviate these issues include providing grant recipients additional time to complete the service requirement , the option to pay back part of their grant if they are unable to complete the service requirement in full , and a better process by which to appeal the conversion of their grant to a loan . the policy issues discussed here are based on existing and prior legislative proposals and are intended to provide some context for their consideration . this section discusses issues that may arise as the potential reauthorization process unfolds . the teach grant program has reportedly encountered significant administrative challenges and has been the subject of increasing congressional scrutiny . title ii of the hea authorizes grants for improving teacher education programs , strengthening teacher recruitment efforts , and providing training for prospective teachers . these issues include modifying the title ii grant partnership structure , targeting support to specific teacher shortage areas or non - instructional staff , expanding teacher preparation program accountability requirements , reforming administration of the teach grant program , and expanding or consolidating teacher loan forgiveness programs . the hea , as amended by the heoa , addresses current k - 12 teacher issues through programs supporting the improvement of teacher preparation and recruitment . title iv of the hea authorizes teacher education assistance for college and higher education ( teach ) grants to encourage more students to prepare for a career in teaching and student loan forgiveness for individuals teaching in certain high - need subjects .
t he september 11 th victim compensation fund ( vcf ) provides cash benefits to certain persons whose health may have been affected by the aftermath of the september 11 , 2001 terrorist attacks on the pentagon , the world trade center , and the terrorist - related aircraft crash at shanksville , pa . on september 22 , 2001 , the air transportation safety and system stabilization act ( atssa ; p.l . the vcf was most recently reauthorized on july 29 , 2019 , with the enactment of the never forget the heroes: james zadroga , ray pfeifer , and luis alvarez permanent authorization of the september 11 th victim compensation fund act ( p.l . the vcf was reauthorized in december 2015 and july 2019 and is currently authorized through the end of fy2092 with an october 1 , 2090 deadline for vcf claims . this report provides an overview of the vcf , including its history , current law , and appropriations . the vcf originally closed in 2003 but was reopened and expanded in 2011 to provide compensation to the 2001 terrorist attacks' responders and others , such as certain new york city residents , who may have suffered health effects in the aftermath of the attacks . thus , funding for the vcf will not require annual appropriations or be subject to the annual appropriations process . 107-42 ) was enacted into law . there is no cap on total benefits that may be paid . quickly passed by congress in the wake of the september 11 , 2001 terrorist attacks , this legislation provided various forms of relief to the american airline industry and affirmed congress's commitment to improving airline safety . title iv of the atssa also established the vcf to compensate persons injured or the representatives of persons killed in the attacks or their immediate aftermath . the 2019 vcf reauthorization appropriates "such sums as may be necessary" for fy2019 and each fiscal year through fy2092 for the payment of vcf awards , with all funds to remain available until expended . 116-34 ) . all vcf claims must be filed by october 1 , 2090 . it also provides an appendix of current vcf program statistics .
in addition , congress has adopted a number of authorizations for the use of military force , the most recent being the joint resolution enacted on october 16 , 2002 , authorizing the use of military force against iraq . it ( 1 ) provides historical background on each of the declarations of war and on several major authorizations for the use of force that have been enacted ; ( 2 ) analyzes the implications of declarations of war and authorizations for the use of force under both international law and domestic law ; ( 3 ) lists and summarizes the more than 250 standby statutory authorities that can come into effect pursuant to a declaration of war , the existence of a state of war , and / or a declaration of national emergency ; ( 4 ) describes the procedures in congress governing the consideration of declarations of war and authorizations for the use of force , including the procedures under the war powers resolution ; and ( 5 ) sets forth in two appendices the texts of all of the declarations of war and the major authorizations for the use of force that have been enacted . the report does not address the issue of the constitutionality of presidential uses of military force absent a declaration of war or authorization for the use of force . to buttress the nation's ability to prosecute a war or armed conflict , congress has also enacted numerous statutes which confer standby authority on the president or the executive branch and are activated by the enactment of a declaration of war , the existence of a state of war , or the promulgation of a declaration of national emergency . pursuant to that power , congress has enacted 11 declarations of war during the course of american history relating to five different wars , the most recent being those that were adopted during world war ii . this report examines a number of topics related to declarations of war and authorizations for the use of military force by the united states . article i , section 8 , of the constitution vests in congress the power "to declare war. . the report will be updated as circumstances warrant . these reasons have included armed attacks on united states territory or its citizens , and attacks on or direct threats to united states rights or interests as a sovereign nation . from the washington administration to the present , there have been 11 separate formal declarations of war against foreign nations enacted by congress and the president , encompassing five different wars — the war of 1812 with great britain , the war with mexico in 1846 , the war with spain in 1898 , the first world war , and the second world war . from the administration of president john adams to the present , there have been various instances when legislation has been enacted authorizing the use of military force by the president instead of formally declaring war . in each case the enactment of a formal declaration of war has been preceded by a presidential request to congress for such an action , either in writing or in person before a joint session of congress . more recently , due to an expansive interpretation of the president's constitutional authority as commander - in - chief of the armed forces and of his inherent powers to use force without congressional authorization , the president has welcomed support from the congress in the form of legislation authorizing him to utilize u.s. military forces in a foreign conflict or engagement in support of u.s. interests , but has not taken the view that he is required to obtain such authorization .
this report discusses various issues concerning the role of certain power marketing administrations ( pma ) and other federal agencies in restructuring electricity markets . we examined whether the government operates them and the related electric power assets in a businesslike manner and identified options that the congress and other policymakers can pursue to address concerns about the pmas' role in restructuring markets and about their management . the electricity industry has been predominantly monopolistic and noncompetitive . although markets for wholesale transactions are becoming competitive , retail markets are still uncompetitive . these options can be grouped in several different ways , including ( 1 ) improving the planning , budgeting , and funding for capital repairs of the federal hydropower assets ; ( 2 ) changing the pmas' power rates and repayment methodologies ; ( 3 ) organizationally restructuring the federal hydropower program to improve its operating efficiency ; and ( 4 ) eliminating the application of selected legal and administrative requirements to the federal program . electricity markets are not yet fully competitive but are moving in that direction . many options exist for improving the operations of the hydropower program while continuing federal ownership . supporters of restructuring argue that markets will not be truly competitive until both wholesale and retail markets are transformed . the direct debt , totaling over $53 billion , is owed directly to the federal government — for example , rus' borrowers owe about $32 billion . the indirect debt , over $31 billion , is owed by the federal agencies to nonfederal parties — for example , tva owed about $24 billion to nonfederal bondholders . federal power suppliers have also taken actions to become more competitive . they face an uncertain future as electricity markets become increasingly competitive . first , electrifying rural areas was an important goal of the federal power program ; however , this goal has been largely satisfied . divest the federal hydropower assets . those concerns could be satisfied only if the hydropower assets were fully divested ; however , improving their operations under federal ownership would better safeguard the federal investment while continuing to balance the existing multiple purposes of the projects . in addition , other issues that need to be resolved include deciding ( 1 ) how stranded costs are to be recovered , ( 2 ) how electricity is to be transmitted in competitive markets , ( 3 ) how electricity is priced in these markets , and ( 4 ) how consumers at the retail level are to be offered a choice of power suppliers . the nation's electricity markets are undergoing significant changes , as the previous chapters have shown . because it was too expensive for ious to serve rural areas , federal power agencies provided power to those areas . three broad options exist for addressing the federal hydropower program's operations: preserve the status quo of federal ownership . the federal government has played a significant role in the development of electricity markets . federal laws and regulations generally require that the pmas recover the full costs of producing and marketing federal hydropower . after years of virtually no mergers , many mergers have been completed or proposed since the energy policy act was enacted in october 1992 .
the mfn term , however , has remained universally in use in international trade relations,including trade agreements to which the united states is party . in international trade , the expression "most - favored - nation," usually abbreviated "mfn,"status ( or treatment ) has a specific meaning quite different from what it appears to mean . the understandable misinterpretation of the most - favored - nation term in its literal meaning,particularly in the context of u.s. trade policy of the mid - 1990s toward china , gave rise tolegislation ( 1 ) to replace theoften misleading term "most - favored - nation" treatment in the seven instances in the existing and inall future u.s. legislation with the term "normal trade relations" ( ntr ) or another appropriateexpression . defined in a more specific detail in article i of thegeneral agreements on tariffs and trade ( gatt ) 1994 , an integral part of the world tradeorganization agreement , the term denotes the reciprocal extension of any concessions , privileges,or immunities granted , or yet to be granted , by a country in a trade agreement ( or in some other way ) to one country which is , or would be , the "most favored" in this respect to all countries to which itaccords mfn treatment . whilesuggesting special and exclusive privileges granted to one country , it means in reality equal treatmentof all countries granted the mfn treatment . because of this fact and for reasonsof historical continuity both terms ( mfn and ntr ) are used in this report with the identical meaningand also interchangeably with the term "nondiscriminatory," a term also often used in u.s. tradelegislation . in this report , the mfn ( ntr ) treatment is discussed in the specific context of tariffs,because of the origins and historical development of the concept in the u.s. law and practice,particularly the denial or restoration of such treatment to nonmarket economy countrie . thus , theextension of mfn treatment to a country can often mean a significantly lower cost and , hence,greater competitiveness of its products in the extending country's markets than would otherwise bethe case . as a consequence , all countries to which a country extends mfn treatmentare , or would be , treated by the extending country equally or in a "nondiscriminatory" fashion . in practice , the principal benefit a country gains from being accorded mfn status by anothercountry is that the latter's imports from the former are dutied at concessional rates ( often referred toas "mfn" rates , and listed in the u.s. tariff schedules as "general" ) rather than full rates . all countries other than those to whichmfn treatment is specifically denied by law ( as listed in general note 3 ( b ) of the harmonized tariffschedule of the united states ) have mfn status . there are three basic , often overlapping , ways in which the united states accords generalmfn treatment to its trading partners . the continuation in force of an nme country's temporary mfn status is contingent on ( 1 ) automatic triennial extensions of the underlying trade agreement and ( 2 ) periodic renewal of theauthority of the jackson - vanik amendment .
on june 30 , 1999 , u.s. and canadian officials signed a new comprehensive agreement to resolve long - standing disputes and to ensure implementation of the conservation and harvest - sharing principles of the 1985 pacific salmon treaty ( pst ) . after years of failed negotiations , a combination of resource management studies , joint - fishery restrictions to protect wild salmon stocks , and the involvement of high - level government negotiators helped ease tensions between the united states and canada over the shared harvest of pacific salmon . the 1999 agreement ( 1 ) established abundance - based fishing regimes for the pacific salmon fisheries under the jurisdiction of the pst ; ( 2 ) created two bilaterally managed regional restoration and enhancement endowment funds to promote cooperation , improve fishery management , and aid stock and habitat enhancement efforts ; and ( 3 ) included provisions to enhance bilateral cooperation , improve the scientific basis for salmon management , and apply institutional changes to the pacific salmon commission ( psc ) . moreover , the two nations recognized that failure to reach a long - term conservation and harvest - sharing agreement was in no one's best interest . pacific salmon have long been a matter of common concern to the united states and canada . the provisions in this agreement's annex iv outline , in detail , the fishery regimes to be followed by canada and the united states in cooperatively managing the five species of pacific salmon . most chapters of annex iv expired at the end of 2008 , and discussions began in 2005 on its renegotiation . since their inception , salmon fisheries have experienced strong fluctuations in catch and stock abundance . this report provides historical background about the pst , discusses issues that created difficulties in the regime , summarizes the 1999 salmon accord , and outlines issues relevant to the renegotiation of annex iv . in the 1800s , with the advent of canning technologies , extensive commercial salmon fisheries developed in both countries . the united states and canada recognized that some form of cooperation would be necessary for the sake of the resource . the goal of the pst is coordinated management of pacific salmon throughout their range to ensure sustainable fisheries and maximize long - term benefits to the parties . by the 20 th century , it had become obvious that the combined effects of fishing and natural variability in abundance could lead to overharvest . however , because of the diversity in salmon fisheries and recurring disagreements over how best to address the interception problem , these agreements proved inadequate . in addition , washington state and canada agreed to restrict several of their fisheries to help protect wild salmon stocks . interceptions strained diplomatic relations between the united states and canada , and the parties fundamentally disagreed on how to achieve the conservation and harvest - sharing goals established by the pst . however , failure to reach a long - term conservation and harvest - sharing agreement harmed several salmon stocks and hampered the ability of washington , alaska , and british columbia fishermen to plan fishing seasons and budget expenses because , without a harvest - sharing agreement , year - to - year salmon allocations were unpredictable .
the environmental protection agency ( epa ) has a primary mission to protect human health by safeguarding the natural environment — air , water , and land . this report responds to your request that we ( 1 ) identify epa's efforts to close out inactive grants and contracts ; ( 2 ) identify the progress that epa has made in reducing the number of inactive grants and contracts , identify the number of remaining inactive grants and contracts , and identify the dates by which they are expected to be closed out ; and ( 3 ) determine the amount of unliquidated obligations for inactive grants and contracts . epa carries out a large part of its mission by awarding grants and contracts to states , public and private entities , and other federal agencies . more than 70 percent of epa's budget is used to award grants and contracts . the agency's untimely grant closeout activities and insufficient oversight of nonconstruction grants were identified as material weaknesses in the agency's fiscal year 1997 integrity act report to the president and congress . epa has developed several initiatives to reduce the number , or backlog , of inactive grants and contracts requiring closeout . the timely closeout of inactive grants and contracts — those completed grants and contracts whose required time period for closeout has expired — is a long - standing management problem for epa . once a grant or contract is completed or terminated and once the applicable budget or project period has expired , the agency must determine if the required work was completed and then close out the project , which includes making any final payments due the recipient . the unliquidated funds from completed grants and contracts represent millions of dollars that potentially could be recovered , deobligated , and used to provide epa with additional resources needed to fund other environmental programs . the timely closeout of grants and contracts is also an important financial management practice to ensure that the terms of the contracts and grants are accomplished . one of the primary purposes of closing out grants and contracts is to ensure that any unliquidated obligated funds are recovered and used for environmental programs , as permitted by statute . also identified as a separate material weakness was the untimely closeout of construction grants for wastewater treatment facilities . government entities were provided with these grants to improve water quality . in 1994 , epa's office of inspector general reported that a significant number of inactive contracts needed to be closed out . epa has concentrated its efforts on superfund contracts and grants . for other contracts and grants , headquarters policies encouraging regional and contracting offices to identify funds available for deobligation were not effective in the past until the agency made special efforts to reduce the backlogs . we also analyzed epa's automated data files to identify the amount of unliquidated obligations for inactive grants and contracts . to respond to these objectives , we reviewed documents , interviewed epa officials , and reviewed a random sample of grant and contract files . during the past 6 years , epa has implemented several initiatives to address these backlogs and avert future ones . while epa has devoted considerable effort and resources to these initiatives , the closeout requirements and strategies that it developed have not been consistently implemented .
the house appropriations committee approveditsversion of the bill on june 14 , 2000 ( h.r . the senate appropriations committee reported its version of the bill on july 18 , 2000 ( s.rept 106-404 ) . on october 27 , 2000 , congress approved total funding of $40.0 billion , which was about $400 million above both thepresident's request and the total enacted for fy2000 . on february 7 , 2000 , president clinton submitted the fy2001 budget request for appropriations for thedepartments ofcommerce , justice , and state , the judiciary and related agencies . the president signed the measure into law on december 21,2000 ( h.r . the bill was passed by the house on june26 , 2000 . 106-680 ) . 4942 ; p.l . 106-553 ) . 5548 as contained in the conference report on h.r . 4690 , h.rept .  ( 2 ) it approvedthe same overall funding total recommended by the appropriations committee . on july 18 , 2000 , the senate appropriations committee approved its version of the bill . committee on appropriation ; u.s. senate .  ( 1 ) on june 19 , 2000 , the houseappropriations committee approved its version of the cjs appropriations bill ( h.r . the house approved the bill on june 26 by a vote of 214-195 , with 1 voting present .  ( the senate , however , did not vote on its version of the bill . with the expiration of fiscal year 2000 appropriations on september 30 , 2000,congress enacted a continuing funding resolution ( h.j.res . on october 27 , 2000 , congress approved total funding of $40.0 billion , which was about $400 million above bothpresident's request and the total enacted for fy2000 . the finally enacted legislation ( h.r . this report tracks legislative action by the second session of the 106th congress on fy2001 appropriations forthedepartments of commerce , justice , and state , the judiciary , and other related agencies ( often referred to as cjsappropriations ) . the house , however , did makea fewrecommended funding changes ( that differed from the committee's recommendations ) for certain individualagenciescovered by the bill .  ( 4 ) continuing funding resolutions . it approved total funding of $36.7billion which is about $700 million below the house version and about $2.9 billion below both the president'srequest andthe actual fy2000 appropriation ( s.rept . major issues or concerns included: building more prisons ; extending the 1994 crime act fundingauthorizationbeyond september 30 , 2000 ; increasing funding for drug - related efforts among the department of justice ( doj ) agencies ; increasing funding for community law enforcement ; combating cybercrime ; funding of doj's legal action againstthetobacco industry ; changing the focus and levels of appropriations for doj's office of juvenile justice anddelinquencyprevention ; providing funding for programs that would reduce gun and youth violence ; reducing pending caseloadsinimmigration - related claims , particularly green card and naturalization applications ; meeting the statutory mandatethat theborder patrol be increased by 1,000 agents in fy2001 , and accounting for the shortfall in hiring in fy1999 ; determiningthe level of detention capacity necessary to comply with the statutory mandate that certain criminal aliens bedetained untildeported ; and restructuring ins internally as proposed by the administration or dismantling or restructuring theagency bylegislation ; the downsizing of commerce department programs , processing and releasing the 2000 decennial censusresults , the use of federal funds to support industrial technology , implementing the modernization of the nationalweatherservice , and the monitoring of foreign compliance with trade agreements and u.s. trade laws ; improving embassysecuritythrough a doubling of funding as well as a request for an advance appropriation to cover the period fy2002 tofy2005 ; whether to lift a statutory ban on judges receiving honoraria ; whether to increase funding to compensatecourt - appointeddefense attorneys in federal criminal cases ; how to contain the growing costs of the judiciary's defender servicesaccount ; and the merits of providing a cost - of - living pay increase for federal judges .
the department of energy ( doe ) contracts with private companies and educational institutions to manage and operate 18 of its 22 laboratories . these are cost reimbursement contracts under which doe pays all of its contractors' allowable costs . responding to criticism that its historical contracting practices were costly and inefficient , doe switched to performance - based contracts in 1994 as part of its contract reform program . concerned about the progress made to implement performance - based contracting at the national laboratories , you asked us to assess the status of performance - based contracting in doe's national laboratory contracts , and identify efforts being made to determine the impact of performance - based contracting . an important feature of performance - based contracting is providing incentives , including fees , to the contractor's achievement of objectives as a means of encouraging superior performance and lowering costs . use of these contracts allows doe to structure each contract to provide a clear statement of what needs to be accomplished — rather than providing broad statements of work — and to rely on performance measures to evaluate a contractor's progress toward meeting its objectives . doe can also provide a fee , or profit , to a contractor for managing a laboratory . the report noted that the use of incentives has been effective in directing contractors' attention to performance outcomes and has improved communications concerning performance expectations . doe did not implement our recommendation and has no plans to measure the overall costs and benefits of performance - based contracting for its laboratories . although doe has not assessed the impact of performance - based contracting , limited reviews have found both progress and problems , as these examples show: since 1997 , doe's office of inspector general has issued three reports on problems the department had in implementing performance - based incentives at three facilities ( one of which was a laboratory ) . we noted that although doe maintained that its performance - based incentives have been effective in achieving the desired end results , it had not been clear whether these successes were due to performance - based incentives or to an increased emphasis on program management . the need for this type of evaluation is consistent with the principles of the government performance and results act of 1993 that require agencies to measure outcomes against their goals . doe relies on field units to negotiate its contracts , including whether to use performance - based fees , and how performance objectives and measures will be accomplished . because doe does not know whether performance - based contracting is improving performance at lower cost at its national laboratories and because our previous recommendation to develop criteria for measuring the costs and benefits of paying fees to contractors for incurring increased financial risk was not implemented , we recommend that the secretary of energy evaluate the costs and benefits from using performance - based contracting at the national laboratories . as a result , early attempts led to large numbers of performance measures . doe's laboratories were not the focus of this review , however . doe is responsible for ensuring that the laboratory system — with 22 laboratories in 14 states , a combined budget of over $10 billion a year , and a staff of about 60,000 — is managed in an effective , efficient , and economical manner .
in fiscal year 1997 , the department of the interior's minerals management service ( mms ) collected about $4.1 billion in royalties from approximately 22,000 oil and gas leases on federal lands . interested in the increased revenues that would result from the proposed regulations , as well as the oil industry's opposition to them , you asked us to address the following: ( 1 ) the information used by mms to justify the need for revising its oil valuation regulations ; ( 2 ) how mms has addressed concerns expressed by the oil industry and states in developing these regulations ; and ( 3 ) the feasibility of the federal government's taking its oil and gas royalties in kind , as indicated by existing studies and programs . by law , the states in which these leases are located receive a share of the royalties collected , which are calculated as a percentage of the value of the oil or gas that is produced . legislation mandating that mms accept federal oil and gas royalties in kind has been introduced in both the u.s. senate and the house of representatives . the value of much of the oil from federal leases has been based on posted prices — offers by purchasers to buy oil from a specific area . on the basis of this evidence , in 1995 mms began revising its regulations for valuing oil from federal leases and in february 1998 issued its most recent revision . however , recent evidence indicates that oil is now often sold for more than the posted prices , suggesting that the value of the oil from federal leases and the amount of federal royalties should both be higher . as an alternative , the oil industry has suggested that mms instead be required to accept , as the federal government's royalties , a percentage of the actual oil and gas produced from federal leases ( known as royalties in kind ) , rather than cash royalties based on the value of that oil and gas . by requiring that higher prices be used to value much of the oil from federal leases , the proposed regulations would increase federal royalties by as much as $66 million annually , according to mms . the proposed regulations would reduce the use of posted prices to value much of the oil from federal leases and would instead generally require that other , and oftentimes higher , prices be used . mms would then sell this oil and gas to generate revenues . although states that receive distributions of these royalties generally support the proposed regulations , oil industry representatives generally oppose them , believing that oil companies should not pay royalties on higher prices and that they would suffer increased administrative requirements . to determine federal royalties , the proposed regulations define the price of oil not sold in arm's - length transactions differently in each of three domestic oil markets: ( 1 ) alaska and california ( including leases off the shore of california ) ; ( 2 ) the six rocky mountain states of colorado , montana , north dakota , south dakota , utah , and wyoming ; and ( 3 ) the rest of the country , including the gulf of mexico .
these tools can include statistical models , mathematical algorithms , and machine learning methods ( algorithms that improve their performance automatically through experience , such as neural networks or decision trees ) . data mining involves the use of sophisticated data analysis tools to discover previously unknown , valid patterns and relationships in large data sets . these include concerns about the quality of the data being analyzed , the interoperability of the databases and software between agencies , and potential infringements on privacy . however , the proliferation of data mining has raised some implementation and oversight issues as well . consequently , data mining consists of more than collecting and managing data , it also includes analysis and prediction . also , there are some concerns that the limitations of data mining are being overlooked as agencies work to emphasize their homeland security initiatives . reflecting this conceptualization of data mining , some observers consider data mining to be just one step in a larger process known as knowledge discovery in databases ( kdd ) . some of these changes include the growth of computer networks , which can be used to connect databases ; the development of enhanced search - related techniques such as neural networks and advanced algorithms ; the spread of the client / server computing model , allowing users to access centralized data resources from the desktop ; and an increased ability to combine data from disparate sources into a single searchable source . as a result of its complex capabilities , two precursors are important for a successful data mining exercise ; a clear formulation of the problem to be solved , and access to the relevant data . data mining has become increasingly common in both the public and private sectors . a number of advances in technology and business processes have contributed to a growing interest in data mining in both the public and private sectors . in addition to these improved data management tools , the increased availability of information and the decreasing costs of storing it have also played a role . data mining can be performed on data represented in quantitative , textual , or multimedia forms . organizations use data mining as a tool to survey customer information , reduce fraud and waste , and assist in medical research . similarly , computing power has continued to double every 18-24 months , while the relative cost of computing power has continued to decrease . other steps in the kdd process , in progressive order , include data cleaning , data integration , data selection , data transformation , ( data mining ) , pattern evaluation , and knowledge presentation . over the past several years there has been a rapid increase in the volume of information collected and stored , with some observers suggesting that the quantity of the world's data approximately doubles every year . data mining applications can use a variety of parameters to examine the data . they include association ( patterns where one event is connected to another event , such as purchasing a pen and purchasing paper ) , sequence or path analysis ( patterns where one event leads to another event , such as the birth of a child and purchasing diapers ) , classification ( identification of new patterns , such as coincidences between duct tape purchases and plastic sheeting purchases ) , clustering ( finding and visually documenting groups of previously unknown facts , such as geographic location and brand preferences ) , and forecasting ( discovering patterns from which one can make reasonable predictions regarding future activities , such as the prediction that people who join an athletic club may take exercise classes ) .
107-117 , the fy2002 dod appropriations act ( h.r . 107-38 ) funding among all federal agencies to combat terrorism andprovide aid and recovery to the victims of the attacks . the dod authorization act ( s. 1438 ) was passed on december 13 and also provided the amount requested by the administration . the debate on the fy2002 dod appropriations act centered on the allocation of the $20 billion in funding to combat terrorism . in addition to providing the fundingrequested by the administration for dod , the act allocates $20 billion in emergency terrorismresponse supplemental ( p.l . the conferees resolved the significant differences betweenthe house and senate versions by shifting $4.3 billion in funding requested by the administrationfor dod to non - defense agencies to combat terrorism and provide aid to new york city . on december 20 , 2001 , the house and the senate passed h.r . efforts inboth houses to increase funding for antiterrorism beyond the $20 billion already enacted in theemergency supplemental failed after president bush threatened to veto any bill that exceeded thatamount . the final version of the bill provides $317.2 billion to the department of defense in regularappropriations . on january 10 , 2002 , the president signed p.l . along with funds for military construction and other defense - related programs , the $317.2 billion for dodin the final version of h.r . 3338 by 408 to 6 and 94 to 2 , respectively . the authorizers resolved the chief item ofcontention - base closures - by delaying the date to 2005 . 3338 ) . because of the recession that began last spring , along withaccommodating the full defense request , emergency spending to combat terrorism , and lower taxrevenues because of the tax act , funding government expenditures in fy2002 will require not onlyusing all of the social security surplus but also returning to deficit spending . there was little controversy about the total amount of regular appropriations for dod . 3338 provides $343.3 billion , about the same amount intotal as requested by the administration . 83 ) in early may - the house approved a conferenceagreement on the resolution on may 9 , and the senate on may 10 - before theadministration had determined its defense spending plans . the annual defense appropriations bill provides funds for military activities of the department of defense ( dod ) , including pay and benefits of military personnel , operation and maintenance ofweapons and facilities , weapons procurement , and research and development , as well as for otherpurposes . congress provides funding for national defense programs in several annual appropriationsmeasures , the largest of which is the defense appropriations bill . congress also acts every year ona national defense authorization bill , which authorizes programs funded in all of the regularappropriations measures . the authorization bill addresses defense programs in almost precisely thesame level of detail as the defense - related appropriations , and congressional debate about majordefense policy and funding issues usually occurs mainly in action on the authorization . most of the funding in the bill is for programs administered by the department of defense , though the bill also provides ( 1 ) relatively small , unclassified amounts for the central intelligenceagency retirement fund and intelligence community management , ( 2 ) classified amounts for nationalforeign intelligence activities administered by the cia and by other agencies as well as by dod , and ( 3 ) very small amounts for some other agencies .
the north american free trade agreement ( nafta ) provided for , among other things , the u.s. - mexican border to be opened on december 18 , 1995 , for increased commercial truck traffic within the border states — four in the united states ( arizona , california , new mexico , and texas ) and six in mexico . however , on december 18 , 1995 , the u.s. secretary of transportation announced that mexican trucks would continue to have access only to commercial zones until u.s. safety and security concerns were addressed . this follow - on report describes ( 1 ) the results of federal and state inspections of mexican trucks entering the united states in 1996 , ( 2 ) actions by the federal government and border states to increase truck safety enforcement at the border , and ( 3 ) the federal enforcement strategy to ensure that trucks from mexico comply with safety standards when entering the united states . before that date , trucks making the 12,000 daily border crossings were limited to commercial zones ( designated areas several miles deep ) along the border . this delay of access is still in effect . nafta also provides for commercial trucks from mexico to travel throughout the united states as of the year 2000 . in february 1996 , we reported that many trucks from mexico operating in u.s. commercial zones in mid 1995 were not meeting u.s. safety standards and that the four u.s. border states' readiness for enforcement varied significantly . as the year 2000 approaches , the united states needs to be assured that trucks entering the country from mexico will be safe and operated safely . we also recommend that the secretary work actively with gsa , as part of gsa's existing planning process , to ensure that truck safety inspection facilities are included , where practicable , when border installations are planned , constructed , or refurbished . dot has , among other things , ( 1 ) issued minimum safety standards for trucks and commercial drivers , ( 2 ) provided grants to states to develop and implement programs that would lead to the enforcement of these safety standards , and ( 3 ) conducted reviews of about one - third of all domestic interstate trucking companies in order to determine overall compliance with safety regulations . first , to measure progress by mexican commercial truck carriers in meeting u.s. safety regulations , we recommend that the secretary encourage the border states to develop and implement measurable results - oriented goals for the inspection of commercial trucks entering the united states from mexico and assist them in doing so . as widespread concerns exist over whether trucks from mexico comply with u.s. safety regulations , we believe that border - specific performance measures are needed . nafta's timetable calls for all limits on cross - border access ( i.e. , truck travel within the three countries ) to be phased out by january 2000 . through the motor carrier safety assistance program ( mcsap ) , dot works in partnership with states to enforce federal truck regulations . from january 1996 ( the first full month of detailed records of inspections ) through december 1996 ( the most recent month for which data were available as of march 1997 ) , federal and state safety inspectors conducted over 25,000 safety inspections of about 3 million mexican trucks crossing into the united states .
china , as any other developing country , has needed foreign technology for its economicdevelopment . for the first two post - revolution decades , china remained suspicious of foreigncapital and hoped that by importing foreign capital goods and using reverse engineering it could meetits technological needs .  ( 14 ) the surge in fdi into china coincided with a similar trends worldwide . between 1972 and 1978 , china imported equipment and a number of newplants from the industrialized west but found only limited success in developing indigenoustechnology through the reverse engineering route . such a policy had limited success even after the opening of china followingpresident nixon's visit to beijing in 1972 and the gradual of normalization relations with the unitedstates and other nations .  ( 12 ) in its designated priorityareas , the government also gives preferential treatment to foreign investors . during the first stage ( 1979-83 ) , foreign investment was restricted to four special economic zones ( shenzhen , zhuhai , and shantou inguangdong province and xiamen in fujian province ) . in 2001 , fdi inflows to china accounted for 6% of the world totaland 22% of inflows into developing economies . in spite of the incentives provided , the inflowof fdi remained low - an average of only $360 million annually over the five - year period . under deng xiaoping's economic reforms,attitudes toward foreign capital began to change . the second half of 1990s saw an unprecedented increase in the world outflow of foreign capital - a more than six - foldincrease from an annual average of $225 billion during 1990-95 to $1,492 billion in 2000 . these fdi flows have beenincreasing in recent years despite global recessionary conditions that caused total world fdi flowsto drop nearly by half in 2001 . china's entry into the world trade organization in december 2001 also stimulated fdi flows intothe country . these included five commitment areas related to the rule of lawreforms and implementation: ( 1 ) the consistent application of laws , regulations , and practices ; ( 2 ) protection of intellectual property rights ; ( 3 ) enforcement of contracts and judgement settlement ofdisputes ; ( 4 ) independence of judicial bodies ; and ( 5 ) equal treatment between chinese and foreignentities . first , many governments liberalized capital flows into their national economies . second,increasing costs of production and various technological developments induced enterprises to spreadtheir operations and risks internationally . the process was further accelerated by theprivatization of government - owned enterprises in both developed and developing countries . as shown in figure 2 , after averaging around $2 billion per year during1984-88 , fdi flows intochina rose dramatically in the 1990s to $46.9 billion in 2001 and further to $52.7 billion in 2002 ( according to chinese statistics ) . they arealso expected to commit more first - time investments to china than to any other country . according to the world investment report ( wir ) , there were three forces at work - all related toglobalization . it eased export performance and domestic content requirements,attempted to make the legal framework more transparent , and ensured thatforeign - investment - related enterprises would not be nationalized except under special circumstances .
specifically , you asked us to determine ( 1 ) how much and for what purposes federal funding was provided for the restoration of the south florida ecosystem from fiscal year 1993 through fiscal year 1999 and ( 2 ) how well the restoration effort is being coordinated and managed . one of this administration's most significant environmental initiatives is the restoration of the south florida ecosystem . the water resources development act of 1996 formalized the task force and expanded its membership to include state , local , and tribal representatives and charged it with coordinating and facilitating the efforts to restore the ecosystem . responding to growing signs of the deterioration of this ecosystem , federal agencies established the south florida ecosystem restoration task force in 1993 to coordinate ongoing federal restoration activities in this area , such as modifying the effects of engineering projects that have diverted water from the everglades and reducing agricultural pollutants in the water entering wildlife refuges and the everglades . because of the large number of federal , state , tribal , and local stakeholders involved in the south florida ecosystem restoration task force and the complexity and potential cost of the south florida ecosystem restoration initiative , you asked us to review the status of the restoration effort . our analysis of the federal funding provided to the south florida ecosystem restoration initiative covers the period from fiscal year 1993 through fiscal year 1999 . although we included data on the agencies' appropriations through fiscal year 1999 , we included data on obligations and expenditures through fiscal year 1998 because complete data are available only through fiscal year 1998 . in addition , because this study represents an initial look at this major initiative , you asked us to identify any other issues that might impede the progress of this effort in the future . these include ( 1 ) outlining how the restoration will occur , ( 2 ) identifying the resources needed to achieve the restoration , ( 3 ) assigning accountability for accomplishing actions , and ( 4 ) linking the strategic goals established by the task force to outcome - oriented annual goals . as stated in the report , without some means to resolve these disagreements in a timely manner , problems such as those encountered in implementing the two projects could continue to hinder the initiative . while the task force has published several documents and is in the process of developing other strategies and plans to address specific restoration issues , it has not yet developed an overall strategic plan to guide the restoration effort . such a plan for the south florida ecosystem restoration initiative has not yet been developed . without some means to resolve agencies' disagreements and conflicts in a timely manner , problems such as those encountered in implementing the projects we reviewed could continue to hinder the initiative . the agencies also strongly disagreed with our conclusion that additional delays and cost overruns are likely to occur in the future and that the ability to accomplish the initiative's overall goals is at risk . success in the making also describes the strategies — adaptive management and innovative management — that the task force and its partners have adopted to achieve these long - term goals .
the program was reauthorized in 1992 by the small business research and development enhancement act to ( 1 ) expand and improve the sbir program , ( 2 ) emphasize the program's goal of increasing the private sector's commercialization of technologies , ( 3 ) increase small businesses' participation in federal r&d , and ( 4 ) improve the federal government's dissemination of information concerning the program , particularly with regard to participation in the program by women - owned small business concerns and by socially and economically disadvantaged small business concerns . as a nation competing in a global economy , the united states depends heavily on innovation through research and development ( r&d ) . because small business is a principal source of significant innovation , the congress established the small business innovation research ( sbir ) program in 1982 . the program's funding in fiscal year 1997 totaled approximately $1 billion . the act also mandated that we prepare two reports: an interim report by march 30 , 1995 , and this final report . the number of multiple - award recipients and the extent of their project - related activity after receiving sbir funding . the extent of companies' project activity after receiving sbir funding and agencies' techniques to foster commercialization . agencies' audits of extramural ( external ) r&d budgets . as agreed with your offices and in accordance with the 1992 act , this report discusses the following aspects of the sbir program: agencies' adherence to statutory funding requirements . the effect of the application review process and funding cycles on award recipients . we also relied on a database of sbir award recipients maintained by the small business administration ( sba ) , as well as the results of our 1991 survey of award recipients from the first 4 years of the program — 1984 through 1987 — and the results of a 1996 department of defense ( dod ) survey of dod's award recipients , which closely followed our 1991 survey format . the occurrence of funding for single - proposal awards . to address these issues , we interviewed agency officials from five of the sbir participating agencies , which accounted for over 95 percent of the program's overall budget in fiscal year 1996 . the extent to which foreign firms benefit from the results of sbir . the geographical distribution of sbir awards . participation by women - owned businesses and socially and economically disadvantaged businesses . sba currently has a survey under way of all non - dod sbir award recipients , which is being conducted by the same contractor that performed the dod survey and which also closely follows our earlier format . sbir's promotion of the critical technologies . i for the requirements for the final report. ) .  ( see app . public law 102-564 , dated october 28 , 1992 , mandated that the comptroller general of the united states provide the congress with a report on the small business innovation research program that containing the following: ( 1 ) a review of the progress made by federal agencies in meeting the requirements of section 9 ( f ) of the small business act ( as amended by this act ) , including increases in expenditures required by that subsection ; ( 2 ) an analysis of participation by small business concerns in the third phase of sbir programs , including a systematic evaluation of the techniques adopted by federal agencies to foster commercialization ; ( 3 ) an analysis of the extent to which awards under sbir programs are made pursuant to section 9 ( l ) of the small business act ( as amended by section 103 ( h ) ) in cases in which a program solicitation receives only one proposal ; ( 4 ) an analysis of the extent to which awards in the first phase of the sbir program are made to small business concerns that have received more than 15 second phase awards under the sbir program in the preceding 5 fiscal years , considering ( a ) the extent to which such concerns were able to secure federal or private sector follow - on funding ; ( b ) the extent to which the research developed under such awards was commercialized ; ( c ) the amount of commercialization of research developed under such awards , as compared to the amount of commercialization of sbir research for the entire sbir program ; ( 5 ) the results of periodic random audits of the extramural budget of each such federal agency ; ( 6 ) a review of the extent to which the purposes of this title and the small business innovation development act of 1982 have been met with regard to fostering and encouraging the participation of women - owned small business concerns and socially and economically disadvantaged small business concerns ( as defined in the small business act ) in technological innovation , in general , and the sbir program , in particular ; ( 7 ) an analysis of the effectiveness of the sbir program in promoting the development of the critical technologies identified by the secretary of defense and the national critical technologies panel ( or its successor ) , as described in subparagraph 9 ( j ) ( 2 ) ( e ) of the small business act ; ( 8 ) an analysis of the impact of agency application review periods and funding cycles on sbir program awardees' financial status and ability to commercialize ; and ( 9 ) recommendations to the congress for tracking the extent to which foreign firms , or united states firms with substantial foreign ownership interests , benefit from technology or products developed as a direct result of sbir research or research and development .
106-479 ) , which included interior appropriations , was enacted into law onnovember 29 , 1999 ( p.l . previously , a series of sevencontinuing resolutions had been enacted to provide continuing funding for fy2000for interior and other appropriations measures which had not been enacted . also , the interior appropriation portion of this consolidated measure wasintroduced as a separate bill on november 17 , 1999 ( h.r . it provided a total of $14.928 billion in interiorappropriations for fy2000 compared to the fy1999 enacted level of $14.298billion - - an increase of $630.6 million . the "consolidated appropriations act for fy2000" ( h.r . 3423 ) , whichthe consolidated measure enacted by cross reference . these fy2000 amounts , and othersin this report , do not reflect the government - wide cut of 0.38% in discretionaryappropriations for fy2000 that is required by the consolidated appropriationsmeasure . after scorekeeping adjustments , the fy2000interior appropriations total is $14.959 billion . 106-113 ) . 3194 , h.rept . 106-99 ) on june 28 , 1999 , and the house appropriations committeereported its version of the bill ( h.r . fish and wildlife service $840.2 million ( + $11.3 million ) , the office of surface mining $292.4 million ( +$10.6 million ) , departmental offices at the interior department $313.0 million ( + 16 million ) ,energy conservation $693.8 million ( + $36 million ) , and indian health service $2.398 billion ( +$73.1 million ) . the onlysignificant decreases include: the department of energy ( - $146.7 million ) and the mineralsmanagement service ( - $7.8 million ) . the annual interior and related agencies appropriations bill includes fundingfor agencies and programs in four separate federal departments , as well as numeroussmaller agencies and diverse programs . the bill includes funding for the interiordepartment except the bureau of reclamation , but only segments of the funding ofthe other three departments , agriculture , energy , and health and human services.the president's fy2000 budget request for interior and related agencies totals$15.27 billion compared to the $14.30 billion enacted by congress for fy1999 . title ii of the bill includes the forest service of the department ofagriculture ; research and development programs of the department of energy , thenaval petroleum and oil shale reserves , and the strategic petroleum reserve ; andthe indian health services in the department of health and human services . thecommittee - approved funding levels were $14.058 billion in the senate and $14.105 billion in thehouse , a difference of $46.7 million . for example , a manager's amendment by houseappropriations committee chairman bill young reduced the bill funding by $140 million byimposing an across - the - board cut of 0.48% ( $69 million ) , increasing the clean coal technologydeferral by $66 million , and reducing bureau of land management land acquisition by $5 million . significant senate increases above the house bill are included in parenthesis: bureau of indian affairs $1.811 billion ( + $23 million ) , forest service $2.672 billion ( + $68.3 million ) , and fossilenergy , research , and development $367.0 million ( +$31.7 million ) .
under current tax law , firms may expense ( or deduct as a current rather than a capital expense ) up to $1 million of the total cost of new and used qualified assets they purchase and place in service in tax years beginning in 2018 under section 179 of the federal tax code . it has the potential to stimulate business investment by reducing the cost of capital for favored investments and by increasing the cash flow of firms undertaking such investments . many of the assets that qualify for the section 179 expensing allowance are also eligible for the section 168 ( k ) expensing allowance ( which is also known as bonus depreciation ) . 115-97 ( known informally as the tax cuts and jobs act of 2017 ) made several notable changes in both tax provisions . they also have the option under section 168 ( k ) of expensing the entire cost of qualified assets they acquire and place in service between september 28 , 2017 , and december 31 , 2022 . this report examines the current status , legislative history , and main economic effects ( including their efficacy as a tool for economic stimulus ) of the section 179 and bonus depreciation allowances . 115-97 also increased the section 168 ( k ) bonus depreciation allowance to 100% of the cost of eligible assets acquired and placed in service from september 28 , 2017 , through the end of 2022 and made certain changes in the property eligible for the allowance . as a result , economists view the two allowances as significant investment tax subsidies , especially since firms are allowed to take advantage of both allowances in the same tax year . specifically , the new tax law permanently increased the annual dollar limitation for expensing under section 179 to $1 million , raised the phaseout threshold to $2.5 million , indexed both amounts for inflation , and expanded the range of assets eligible for the allowance . expensing is the most accelerated form of depreciation . p.l . specifically , they maintain that the allowances have the potential to promote an inefficient allocation of capital among domestic industries and investment opportunities , and to lessen the federal tax burden on upper - income business owners , who account substantial shares of noncorporate business profits and corporate stock ownership and dividends . p.l . in their view , the disadvantages of the allowances may outweigh the advantages . these effects correspond to three traditional criteria used by economists to evaluate actual or proposed tax policies: efficiency , equity , and simplicity . the user cost ( or rental price ) of capital is one of the key influences on business investment decisions . many lawmakers view the section 179 expensing and bonus depreciation allowances as effective policy tools for promoting the growth of small firms and stimulating the economy during periods of slow or negative growth . or the company may have to rely on retained earnings since it has limited access to debt and equity markets . the contribution of cash flow to business investment ( especially small business investment ) remains unclear . at the same time , many economists acknowledge that expensing can reduce the cost of tax compliance , especially for smaller firms .
motor vehicles are responsible for up to half of the emissions of volatile organic compounds ( voc ) that affect ozone levels and up to 90 percent of the carbon monoxide emissions found in urban areas . specifically , we examined ( 1 ) the progress made by the 23 states that are required to implement enhanced i&m programs , including the difficulties that the states have encountered , and ( 2 ) the impact that delays in implementing enhanced i&m programs may have on the states' ability to comply with the national air quality standard for ozone . although the united states has significantly improved its air quality since the 1970s , air pollution problems , such as ozone and carbon monoxide , continue to threaten the health of millions of americans . 101-549 , nov. 15 , 1990 ) requires the states with the most serious ozone and carbon monoxide problems — 23 states have been identified — to implement enhanced inspection and maintenance ( i&m ) programs to reduce the emissions from motor vehicles . however , in november 1992 , despite this requirement , the environmental protection agency ( epa ) issued a regulation that postponed the required implementation date until january 1995 . because of concerns about the implementation of the enhanced i&m programs , you asked us to determine the status of the states' programs . title i of the clean air act amendments of 1990 ( p.l . under the amendments , these states were required to have their programs implemented by november 1992 . in view of the pivotal role that enhanced i&m programs play in reducing voc emissions and the delays experienced to date in implementing these programs , as well as the possibility of future delays , we recommend that the administrator of epa compile information on the more successful practices , such as public relations campaigns , used by the states that have implemented their enhanced i&m programs and share the information with those states that are in the early stages of developing and implementing their programs . in order to address these issues , we used a mail survey to obtain information from the 23 states . i&m programs test vehicles' emissions to ensure that the vehicles are adequately maintained and working properly . if the vehicles pass these tests , they are assumed not to be emitting excessive amounts of vocs and carbon monoxide . we also met with officials from epa's program and regional offices , as well as with officials from two states , to discuss the implementation of the enhanced i&m programs .  ( app . however , obtaining the required reductions from other sources will be difficult because many of them , especially stationary sources , have already made major reductions in their voc emissions , and any further reductions may be costly and take some time to achieve . while enhanced i&m programs are an integral part of the effort to significantly reduce emissions from motor vehicles , states' efforts to implement their programs have been slow and troubled by numerous delays . eight of the 23 states took advantage of the flexibility allowed by the revised regulation by implementing less stringent enhanced programs .
this investigation was undertaken by epa , the u.s. department of agriculture's food safety and inspection service ( fsis ) , and the department of health and human services' food and drug administration ( fda ) — each of which has jurisdiction over some aspect of the food safety system . in may 1997 , the environmental protection agency ( epa ) discovered elevated levels of dioxin in poultry samples analyzed as a part of its reassessment of the health risks of dioxin . concerned about the performance of the federal agencies in handling this incident , you asked us to determine the ( 1 ) basis for the federal agencies' decisions to require producers to demonstrate that their food products did not contain levels of dioxin above one part per trillion ; ( 2 ) federal agencies' effectiveness in working together to make decisions to address the problem of dioxin - contaminated feed and in communicating their decisions to the affected state agencies , producers , and processors ; and ( 3 ) impact of the food safety system on the handling of this dioxin incident . this discovery triggered a joint investigation to determine the source of the contamination . by mid - june , the agencies had traced the contamination to feed distributed to poultry , fish , hog , and cattle producers in several southern and southwestern states . however , between july and september , large and small producers and state health officials questioned whether the levels at which dioxin was found in the food products warranted the actions taken . at this point , fda used its regulatory authority to halt the distribution of the contaminated feed and requested that the feed be disposed of by those holding it . producers and state officials also reported that the agencies sometimes issued multiple and unclear directives , resulting in confusion over the actions producers were to take . by mid - september 1997 , fda and fsis had determined that all the food products derived from the animals that had consumed the contaminated feed had only background levels of dioxin and approved them for commercial distribution . because these elevated levels equated to the concentration levels in the animals , it was expected that the animals' growth would reduce the concentration levels over time . subsequently , fda and fsis required that the affected food products be tested to demonstrate that they did not contain elevated dioxin levels — defined by the agencies as levels above one part per trillion of 2,3,7,8 tcdd , one of the more potent forms of dioxin — before these products could be distributed . however , researchers from the centers for disease control and prevention ( cdc ) told us that science has not yet determined the level of exposure to dioxin that may present a danger to human health . as we have reported on numerous occasions , this fragmented food safety system necessitates extensive coordination efforts to minimize wasteful duplication of effort , prevent gaps in regulatory coverage , and avoid conflicting actions . three days later , fda suspended its testing requirements for fish because of industry's and state officials' concerns with the implementation of its sampling and testing protocol . these delays increased producers' costs .
while the programmatic assumptions ( i.e. , the specific mix of revenue and spending policies that are assumed within the budget levels ) are not binding , the totals and committee spending allocations may be enforced through points of order and through the budget reconciliation process ( explained below ) . instead , when adopted by congress , the budget resolution serves as an agreement between the house and senate on a congressional budget plan . as such , it provides the framework for subsequent legislative action on the annual appropriations bills , revenue measures , reconciliation legislation , and any other budgetary legislation . it provides a list of the budget resolutions adopted and rejected by congress since implementation of the budget act , including the u.s. statutes - at - large citations and committee report numbers , and describes their formulation and content . 93-344 , as amended ; 2 u.s.c . 601-688 ; hereafter referred to as the "budget act" ) provides for the annual adoption of a concurrent resolution on the budget each year . the congressional budget act of 1974 ( titles i - ix of p.l . as a concurrent resolution , it is not presented to the president for his signature and thus does not become law . it also provides information on the consideration and adoption of budget resolutions , including an identification of the house special rules that provided for consideration of budget resolutions , the amendments in the nature of a substitute to the budget resolution considered in the house , the number and disposition of house and senate amendments to budget resolutions , and dates of house and senate action on budget resolutions . the congressional budget resolution represents a budget plan for the upcoming fiscal year and at least the following four fiscal years . congress also adopted a second budget resolution in seven of the 41 years . the second budget resolution , adopted in the fall ( about two weeks before the beginning of the fiscal year ) , was intended to provide congress , after considering and possibly completing action on specific budgetary legislation , the opportunity to either reaffirm or revise the budget levels in the first budget resolution . congress has modified the congressional budget process several times since it was first established in 1974 . during the 41 years under the budget act ( 1975 to the present ) , congress has completed action on 40 budget resolutions , including in some years multiple budget resolutions for a single fiscal year . this report provides current and historical information on the budget resolution .  ( although concurrent resolutions such as budget resolutions have no statutory authority , they are compiled in a special section of the u.s. statutes - at - large . ) . 1038-1101 ; hereafter referred to as the "deficit control act" ) eliminated the requirement for a second budget resolution beginning in 1986 ( for the fy1987 budget resolution ) . as originally enacted , the budget act provided for the annual adoption of two budget resolutions for each year . in 32 of the 41 years , congress adopted at least one budget resolution for the fiscal year . table 1 lists all budget resolutions adopted by congress , with the house and senate votes on initial passage and adoption of the conference report .
accordingly , you asked us to ( 1 ) determine the quality of the air inside the niehs building when it was first occupied in 1981 , ( 2 ) identify the health effects associated with exposure to formaldehyde , and ( 3 ) describe the current management practices at niehs for air handling and air monitoring . the national institute of environmental health sciences ( niehs ) , the component of the national institutes of health that does research on environment - related diseases , moved into a new facility at research triangle park , north carolina , in april 1981 . even though considerable time has passed , some employees continue to believe that the quality of the air — specifically , the level of formaldehyde emissions — in the building in 1981 has caused them to have continuing health problems . in response to your inquiries , niehs and the inspector general ( ig ) of the department of health and human services issued two letter reports in 1997 addressing some aspects of the employees' complaints ; other questions , however , remained unanswered . soon after the agency occupied the facility , some employees began complaining about the quality of the air , primarily in one of the facility's five modules . our review included interviews with niehs officials , current and former niehs employees , and scientists and experts knowledgeable about modeling , air handling , air monitoring , and the exposure to and the effects of formaldehyde . the ig's letter report , dated august 15 , 1997 , addresses niehs' ( 1 ) grievance procedures and treatment of employees , ( 2 ) compliance with appropriate policies and procedures regarding employee complaints , and ( 3 ) venting and other practices to ensure proper ventilation before the facility was occupied . the agencies and their classifications of the effects of formaldehyde on humans are as follows: international agency for research on cancer: probably carcinogenic to humans ; national toxicology program: reasonably anticipated to be a carcinogen ; epa: probable human carcinogen . even though it has not been unequivocally proven that long - term exposure to formaldehyde has the same effect on humans , the results of the tests on animals have raised concerns that it may affect humans . studies of long - term exposure have also shown that the occurrence of cancer increases as the concentration of formaldehyde increases . while many studies have found no or uncertain correlation between formaldehyde and cancer , others have found that the incidence of some cancers increases from exposure to formaldehyde . when the air quality problem occurred at niehs in 1981 , far less was known about indoor air pollution than is known today , and there was a strong emphasis on energy conservation . as a result of the emphasis on energy conservation at that time , building engineers at facilities across the country had reduced the air exchange rate of air handling systems and initiated other conservation measures . niehs' report , dated march 31 , 1997 , addresses the events and health effects that may have been caused by exposure to formaldehyde when the new facility was first occupied in april 1981 . for example , factors such as the type of materials in the building did not change significantly , and the air exchange rate in september should have been higher than in april .
three days after north korea's armed forces launched a full - scale invasion of south korea in june 1950 , the united states invoked a total embargo on exports to north korea . the department of commerce imposed the most restrictive export controls available against north korea . because of what has been found to be a demonstrated threat to u.s. national security , support of international terrorism , maintenance of a communist , nonmarket economy , engagement in the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction , and illicit use of currencies , u.s. law authorizes the president to restrict trade , aid , arms sales and arms transfers to north korea , and that country's access to assets held under u.s. jurisdiction . the president currently has authority to ease export restrictions imposed against north korea . 6 ( j ) list not only results in the constriction of trade possibilities ; placement also may trigger denial of beneficial trade designation ( ntr or gsp ) , unfavorable tax status for investors , new limits on diplomatic relations , opposition in international financial institutions , and stricter licensing requirements for trade with the united states in food and medicine . in 1995 , as part of the united states' engagement of north korea under the 1994 agreed framework , and again in september 1999 , in response to north korea's willingness to cease missile testing , president clinton announced the lifting of most export restrictions applied to that country . regulations issued in june 2000 amended the ears to reflect north korea's new relatively unfettered status . over the years , export controls were restated as the export administration regulations , or ears . today , the remaining export restrictions against north korea include a range of terms related largely to that country's place on the state department's list of state supporters of international terrorism . other crs products relating to north korea overview crs report rl33567 , korea - u.s. relations: issues for congress , by [author name scrubbed] . north korea's access to u.s. foreign assistance is also limited in annual foreign operations appropriations measures . north korea remains on the united states' sec . many items that previously had required a license were now eligible for export without a license ; certain items on the commerce control list ( ccl ) moved from a policy of denial status to case - by - case review . north korea — economic sanctions currently imposed in furtherance of u.s. foreign policy or national security objectives appendix c. north korean entities cited for proliferation activities under u.s. la . departments issuing the new regulations , however , stated that "[t]his easing of sanctions does not affect u.s. anti - terrorism or nonproliferation export controls on north korea , including end - user and end - use controls maintained under the enhanced proliferation control initiative. . at the president's discretion , north korea would also be subject to the economic sanctions provided in three provisions of law addressing human rights conditions: the foreign assistance act of 1961 , under which north korea is annually castigated for its human rights record ; the international religious freedom act of 1998 , under which the administration has identified north korea as a "country of particular concern" since 2001 ; and the trafficking victims protection act of 2000 , under which the administration has , since 2003 , classified north korea as a tier 3 ( most severe ) offender of standards pertaining to the trafficking of persons for slavery or sex trade .
federal employees participate in one of two retirement systems . to coordinate federal pension benefits with social security , congress directed the development of a new retirement system for federal employees hired after 1983 . the civil service retirement system ( csrs ) was established in 1920 and covers only employees hired before 1984 . because the social security trust funds needed additional cash contributions to remain solvent , the social security amendments of 1983 ( p.l . the result was the federal employees' retirement system ( fers ) act of 1986 ( p.l . authority the thrift board has the authority to appoint the executive director of the thrift plan ; remove the executive director for cause ( requires four votes ) ; establish investment policies for the thrift plan ; instruct the director to take whatever actions the board deems appropriate to carry out the policies it establishes ; and submit to congress legislative proposals relating to its responsibilities under federal law . 98-21 ) required federal employees hired after 1983 to participate in social security . of 2,751,000 federal civilian and postal service employees enrolled in these federal retirement plans as of september 30 , 2013 , 2,477,000 ( 90% ) were participating in the fers and 274,000 ( 10% ) were under the csrs . participants in the csrs do not pay social security payroll taxes and they do not earn social security benefits . for a worker retiring after 30 years of federal service , a csrs annuity will be equal to 56.25% of the average of his or her highest three consecutive years of basic pay . communication and education the thrift board communicates with plan participants to help them better understand the investment choices , benefits , and administration of the tsp . 111-31 : provides for newly hired federal employees to be enrolled automatically in the thrift savings plan ( tsp ) at a default contribution rate of 3% of pay ; requires the federal retirement thrift investment board to establish within the tsp a qualified roth contribution program that provides for after - tax contributions and tax - free distributions ; gives the federal retirement thrift investment board authority to allow tsp participants to invest in mutual funds in addition to the five investment funds now included in the tsp ; requires the thrift board to submit to congress an annual report that includes demographic information about tsp participants and fund managers ; requires participants to sign an acknowledgement of risk if they invest contributions in any investment option other than government securities ; grants the executive director of the tsp authority to issue subpoenas under certain circumstances ; allows funds held in an individual's tsp account to be subject to court orders with respect to payment of restitution to victims of certain crimes ; requires the secretary of defense to report to congress the estimated cost of an agency match on contributions to the tsp by members of the uniformed services ; and allows the surviving spouse of a deceased tsp participant to maintain the decedent's account with the tsp . the replacement rate is shown for employees who make no contribution to the tsp , and thus receive only the agency automatic 1% contribution ; for workers who contribute 5% of pay , and therefore receive a 5% contribution from their employing agencies ; and for workers who contribute 10% of pay , which results in the same 5% agency contribution as would a 5% employee contribution .
many colleges and universities have implemented affirmative action policies not only to remedy past discrimination , but also to achieve a racially and ethnically diverse student body or faculty . almost four decades after the supreme court ruling in regents of the university of california v. bakke , the diversity rationale for affirmative action in public education remains a topic of political and legal controversy . in subsequent years , however , federal courts began to question the powell rationale , unsettling expectations about whether diversity - based affirmative action in educational admissions and faculty hiring decisions is constitutional under the equal protection clause of the fourteenth amendment . in striking down the admissions process at the university of texas school of law , the u.s. court of appeals for the fifth circuit in hopwood v. texas concluded that any use of race in the admissions process was forbidden by the constitution . justice powell , in his opinion for the bakke court , stated that the attainment of a diverse student body is "a constitutionally permissible goal for an institution of higher education," noting that "[t]he atmosphere of 'speculation , experiment , and creation' so essential to the quality of higher education is widely believed to be promoted by a diverse student body. . smith v. university of washington was the first federal appeals court to rely on justice powell's decision as binding precedent on the issue . reverberations of the 1996 hopwood opinion are apparent in several subsequent cases , which voided race - conscious policies maintained by institutions of higher education , as well as public elementary and secondary schools . restoring a degree of clarity to the law , the supreme court concluded its 2002 term with rulings in the michigan cases . some judges avoided resolving the precedential effect of justice powell's opinion by deciding the case on other grounds not dependent on the constitutional status of student diversity as a compelling state interest . a circuit court conflict was created when the u.s. court of appeals for the ninth circuit relied on bakke to uphold an affirmative action admissions policy to the university of washington law school that made extensive use of race - based factors . meanwhile , in 2014's schuette v. coalition to defend affirmative action , the court upheld michigan's proposal 2 , which prohibits the use of racial preferences in higher education . the report then reviews major rulings involving challenges to the use of race - conscious admissions , and concludes with a discussion of the implications for the future of affirmative action law . the judicial divide over bakke 's legacy was vividly underscored by a pair of separate trial court decisions , one upholding for diversity reasons the race - based undergraduate admissions policy of the university of michigan , the other voiding a special minority law school admissions program at the same institution . but , in johnson v. board of regents , the eleventh circuit court of appeals sided with hopwood by rejecting diversity as constitutional justification for a numerical "racial bonus" awarded minority freshman applicants to the university of georgia . to resolve this question , the court agreed to review two cases that involved the use of race to maintain racially diverse public schools .
the act is broadlyscoped , ( 1 ) and some of itsprovisions may affect use of the internet , computer security , and critical infrastructure protection . 3162 , passed the house ( under suspension ) on october 24 and the senate ( 98-1 ) on october 25 . the september 11 , 2001 terrorist attacks prompted congressional action on many fronts,including passage of the uniting and strengthening america by providing appropriate toolsrequired to intercept and obstruct terrorism ( usa patriot ) act . the legislation initially passed the senate ( 96-1 ) as s. 1510 on october 11,2001 . the president signed it into law on october 26 ( p.l . 2975 ( 337-79 ) on october 12 . in the house , for example , the version of h.r . in light of this history , it appears that oversight of the act's implementation will be ofconsiderable interest to congress and a broad range of interest groups . the house passed h.r . 2975 as reportedfrom the judiciary committee on october 11 ( h.rept . during debate , some representatives raised concerns about the process used to bringthe bills to the floor .  ( 2 ) h.r . 107-56 ) . the implementation of the act will be carefully scrutinized . a compromise bill , h.r . 3801 was an extension of the sunsetperiod on several of the electronic surveillance provisions from 2 years to 5 years . while law enforcement officialsheralded the passage of what they regard as necessary provisions for counteracting terrorists andother criminals , civil liberties groups urged caution in passing a new law in an emotionally chargedenvironment . 107-236 , part 1 ) was replaced by the text ofa new bill , h.r . this report summarizes the potential effect of the act on electronic privacy , security,commerce , and government , and identifies issues that are arising . 3801 wasvery similar , but not identical , to s. 1510 as it had passed the senate hours earlier . among the changes in h.r . 3801 , for the purposes of debate . hence , some representatives felt they had insufficient time to review the legislation they were beingasked to vote on . some membershad argued for a short sunset period , maintaining that the changes in the law were being madehurriedly . some of these initiatives may contribute to thegrowing effort to implement e - government projects by both congress and the bush administrationthrough enhanced data sharing and greater confidence in the security and reliability of the networks .  ( 48 ) the ftc oversees howbusinesses , including isps , adhere to their privacy policies .  ( 36 ) the practices of law enforcement agencies in monitoring theactivities of individuals as they use the internet for electronic mail ( e - mail ) or visiting web sites wasan important , but less visible , issue .  ( 47 ) federal trade commission ( ftc ) commissioner orson swindle has suggested that isps relook attheir privacy policy statements in the wake of passage of the act , particularly with regard to isps'new authority under section 212 to voluntarily disclose information .  ( 37 ) with a court order , the fbi could install carnivore on theequipment of an internet service provider ( isp ) to monitor a suspect's internet activity , which raisedconcern about whether the software was sufficiently precise to avoid monitoring the activity of otherisp customers and hence impinging on their privacy .
some observers argue that a fully - developed policy should take into account issues such as international competitiveness , the communications needs of public safety agencies and the military , the role of wireless technology in economic growth , and the encouragement of new technologies that make spectrum use more efficient and more beneficial to society as a whole . for the immediate future , congress may choose to debate and act on questions such as reforming spectrum management and allocation mechanisms . over time , developments in technology may significantly increase the amount of useable spectrum and consequently the ease with which a policy of equitable allocation and use can be crafted . the federal communications commission ( fcc ) is responsible for overseeing licensed and unlicensed spectrum used for commercial purposes and by state and local agencies , including first responders , as well as most other radio frequencies not assigned for federal use . among the subsequent laws that deal with spectrum policy and auctions are the balanced budget act of 1997 , the auction reform act of 2002 , the commercial spectrum enhancement act of 2004 , and the deficit reduction act of 2005 . on january 27 , 2003 the supreme court ruled in favor of nextwave , agreeing with the earlier court of appeals decision that the fcc did not have the authority to recover the licenses . however , many have questioned whether auction policy should be supplemented more aggressively with other market - driven solutions , and whether the existing auction process and administration can be improved . the fcc has concluded that auctioning of spectrum licenses has contributed to the rapid deployment of new wireless technologies , increased competition in the marketplace , and encouraged participation by small businesses . radio frequency spectrum is managed primarily by regulations that set rules , for example , for permissible uses , certification of devices , requirements for public safety , and the acquisition of licenses . given the number of objectives in the allocation and use of spectrum , and the differing solutions for achieving them , choices made for 700 mhz could be far - reaching in setting the direction for future policy decisions . 103-66 ) added section 309 ( j ) to the communications act , authorizing the fcc to organize auctions to award spectrum licenses for certain wireless communications services . the omnibus budget reconciliation act amended the communications act of 1934 with a number of important provisions affecting the availability of spectrum licenses and authorized the fcc to organize auctions to award spectrum licenses for certain wireless communications services . aws - 1 was completed on september 18 , 2006 , with nearly $13.9 billion in completed bids . the main category of services for which licenses may be auctioned are called commercial mobile radio services ( cmrs ) , which include advanced wireless services ( aws ) , personal communications service ( pcs ) , cellular , and most specialized mobile radio services ( smr ) with some exceptions , cmrs providers are regulated as common carriers to ensure regulatory parity among similar services that will compete against one another for subscribers . although congress has a legislative role in spectrum management , the fcc routinely takes on the responsibility of making decisions about the assignment of spectrum for different uses and sets the rules for auctions of spectrum licenses .
the majority leader in the contemporary house is second - in - command behind the speaker of the majority party . typically , the majority leader functions as the speaker's chief lieutenant or "field commander" for day - to - day management of the floor . such information is derived in part from the floor leader's contacts with his party's members serving on house committees , and with the members of the party's whip organization . from an institutional perspective , the majority leader is principally responsible for exercising overall supervision of the order of business on the floor , especially as it affects the party's program . or as one speaker put it , the majority leader's "job is to run the floor and keep monitoring committees and legislation. . from a partisan perspective , the majority leader's paramount assignment is to employ his or her talents , energy , and knowledge of procedural rules and political circumstances to insure that the party maintains majority control of the house . each of these major responsibilities gives rise to a wide range of leadership activities . two fundamental and often interlocking responsibilities orient the work of the majority leader: institutional and party . as lewis deschler , the late house parliamentarian ( 1928-1974 ) , wrote: a party's floor leader , in conjunction with other party leaders , plays an influential role in the formulation of party policy and programs . when richard gephardt , d - mo , became majority leader in june 1989 , he had been in the house for more than a decade , had served as chairman of the democratic caucus for four years , and had been a 1988 presidential candidate . for example , representative richard armey of texas became the gop's first majority leader in 40 years when republicans won control of the 104 th house in the november 1994 elections . he is instrumental in devising and implementing his party's strategy on the floor with respect to promoting or opposing legislation . he is instrumental in guiding legislation favored by his party through the house , or in resisting those programs of the other party that are considered undesirable by his own party . armey began his house service in 1985 , became gop conference chairman during the 103 rd congress , and was one of the principal authors of the republican "contract with america. . he is kept constantly informed as to the status of legislative business and as to the sentiment of his party respecting particular legislation under consideration . before discussing the primary duties of the majority leader , it is worth highlighting the historical origins of this party position . elected every two years by secret ballot of the party caucus or conference , the majority leader is usually an experienced legislator . in 1911 , with democrats in charge of the house , oscar underwood of alabama became the first elected ( by the party caucus ) majority leader in the house's history . usually , but not always , these informal party leaders were the chairs of either the committee on ways and means ( established in 1795 ) or the committee on appropriations ( following its creation in 1865 ) .
in its place , congress instituted a system of supervised release , which applies to all federal crimes committed after november 1 , 1987 . supervised release is the successor to parole in the federal criminal justice system . in 1984 , congress eliminated parole to create a more determinate federal sentencing structure . 2332b ( g ) ( 5 ) ( b ) , the courts must impose a term of supervised release of any term of years or life . parole ordinarily stands in lieu of a portion of the original term of imprisonment , while supervised release begins only after full service of the original term ( less any "good time" credits ) . both parole and supervised release call for a period of supervision following release from prison and for reincarceration upon a failure to observe designated conditions . it authorizes a term of supervised release of not more than five years , when the defendant is convicted of a class a or b felony ( e.g. , bank fraud ) ; not more than three years , when the defendant is convicted of a class c or d felony ( e.g. , bank robbery ) ; and not more than one year , when the defendant is convicted of a class e felony or a misdemeanor ( crimes with a maximum penalty of imprisonment of three years or less ) . however , the sentencing guidelines , promulgated by the united states sentencing commission , recommend that sentencing courts impose a term of supervised release in most felony cases . the constitution vests the judicial power of the united states in the supreme court and such inferior courts as congress shall ordain and establish . there is a split among the circuits , however , over when the term of supervised release begins for a defendant whose release from federal custody is stayed pending a civil commitment determination . section 3583 ( b ) sets the authorized duration for a term of supervised release , subject to exceptions for certain drug , terrorism , and sex offenses . the sex offender conditions have generated a number of first amendment challenges , primarily in two areas: overbreadth and freedom of association . except in specified drug and domestic violence cases , courts may technically exercise discretion to decline to impose supervised release altogether for a particular defendant . both challenges are often resolved by recourse to section 3583 ( d ) 's "reasonably related" and "no unnecessary deprivation of liberty" requirements , which can provide the narrow tailoring that the first amendment demands . conversely , a court may extend a defendant's term of supervised release , unless the term has already run or unless the court initially imposed the maximum permissible term . sentencing courts are said to have broad discretion when imposing the conditions for supervised release , although such discretion must be understood within the confines established for mandatory conditions , the scope of permissible standard discretionary conditions and special conditions , and the deference that must be afforded the sentencing guidelines . a term of supervised release begins when a prisoner is actually released , regardless of when he should have been released . sentencing courts determine the terms and conditions of supervised release at the same time that they determine other components of a defendant's sentence , and "[t]he duration , as well as the conditions of supervised release are components of a sentence. .
the federal aviation administration ( faa ) budgetincreases roughly 6% to $13.295 billion ; the federal transit administration ( fta ) budget increases8% to $6.747 billion ; and the coast guard budget receives an increase of 12% to $5.031 billion . 107-87 ) appropriating a total of$59.588 billion ( a 2.5% increase above the fy2001 enacted level ) . on december 18 , 2001 , president bush signed the fy2002 department of transportation andrelated agencies conference agreement ( h.rept . at $32.895 billion,the federal highway administration ( fhwa ) receives slightly less than in fy 2001 . the federalrailroad administration ( fra ) is funded at $734 million , $21 million less than enacted in fy2001 . the enacted bill provides $507million more than in the house bill and $391 million less than the senate bill . the september 11 , 2001 , simultaneous hijacking of four airliners from three different airports and the enormous loss of life that resulted from the terrorists' suicide - bomber tactics had a quickimpact on transportation appropriations . as of this writing , roughly $1.9billion has been approved for transfer to the department of transportation ( dot ) . congress responded to the terrorist attacks by passingthe 2001 emergency supplemental appropriations act for recovery from and response to terroristattacks on the united states ( p.l . 107-308 ; p.l . the funds may be transferredto any authorized federal activity to meet the purposes of the act . the bill provides $40 billion to pay the costs of a varietyof responses including "providing increased transportation security. . the other major agencies all get increases . 107-38 ) . the length ofavailability of these funds varies depending on the purpose of the spending . in fy2002 trust funds accounted for well over two - thirds of total federal transportation spending . the transportation trust funds include: the highwaytrust fund , the transit account of the highway trust fund , the airport and airway trust fund , and theinland waterways trust fund . funding for the dot budget is derived from a number of sources.the majority of funding comes from dedicated transportation trust funds . that is , the authority tospend for the largest programs under their control already exists , and the mechanism to obligatefunds for these programs also is in place . prior to the fy1999 dot appropriations act , changes in spending in the annual transportation budget component had been achieved in the appropriations process by combining changes inbudget / contract authority and by placing limitations on obligations . where most federal programs require new budget authority as part of the annual appropriations process , transportation appropriators are faced with the opposite situation . most highway and the majority of transit programs are funded with contract authorityderived by the link to the highway trust fund . the remainder of dotfunding is from federal treasury general funds . airport and airway trust fund issues in the106th congress ,by [author name scrubbed] . it is also consideredpart of the discretionary budget . the coordinated border infrastructure program: issues for congress , by [author name scrubbed] . transportation equity act for the 21st century ( p.l .
during the final year of the clinton administration , proposals by the national park service to enforce long - standing policies that regulated the use of snowmobiles in national parks raised a number of questions regarding the potential regulation of such vehicles . these questions continue to be debated , as the national park service ( nps ) explores optional winter use plans for yellowstone and other units of the national park system , and as various parties challenge the actions of the nps in court . national park system units account for only about 3% of the land mass of the united states and possess few trails and roads suitable for snowmobiles , compared to areas available on other federal lands ; but — for both proponents and opponents — the question of snowmobile access to the parks has taken on a far greater importance . to the snowmobile industry and to many in communities neighboring national parks , "snowmobiling is an important part of the economic engine that supports northern communities , winter tourism. . the fy2008 interior appropriations bill ( s. 1696 , §116 ) , as reported by the senate appropriations committee ( s.rept . the clean air act gives epa authority to regulate emissions from mobile sources of pollution , including off - road sources such as snowmobiles ; but until 2006 , snowmobiles ( with the exception of those entering the yellowstone area national parks ) were not subject to any federal or state emission regulations . underlying the debate are broader questions concerning regulation of emissions and noise from the vehicles and the degree to which restrictions may serve as a precedent or stigma affecting snowmobile and motorized recreation use more generally . of these , 348 ( 89% ) have not been open to snowmobiles . to environmental groups , snowmobiling "is one of the most environmentally devastating recreational activities permitted by the park service .... resulting in adverse impacts to park wildlife , air and water quality , vegetation , park ecology , and park users. . continued action is also likely in the courts , as the national park service responds to the latest court decision . congress and the nps have provided a temporary resolution of the yellowstone access issue since 2004 , but the issue is now returning to the limelight , as a federal district court has vacated final regulations for yellowstone access for a third time . whether snowmobile access to these parks will be allowed to continue has generated substantial public interest . changes in access policy ( described later in this report ) as well as drought and low snow pack in recent years contributed to the decline . 110-91 ) , would have continued this temporary solution , stipulating that yellowstone's interim winter management rule remain in effect during the 2007-2008 winter season , but the final consolidated appropriations act ( p.l . while numerous park units allowed such access , recreational use of snowmobiles has not been widespread in the park system as a whole . at least five hearings have been held on these issues since the 106 th congress , and congress has on three occasions approved language in appropriations bills to require that nps temporary winter use rules permitting snowmobiles in yellowstone and grand teton national parks and on the rockefeller memorial parkway remain in effect for the year covered by the appropriations bill .
these include ( 1 ) the part d low - income subsidies ; ( 2 ) the part d catastrophic subsidy ; and ( 3 ) qualified individual ( qi ) premiums . medicare is a federal insurance program that pays for covered health services for most persons 65 years of age and older and for most permanently disabled individuals under the age of 65 . part c ( also known as medicare advantage , or ma ) provides private plan options , such as managed care , for beneficiaries who are enrolled in both parts a and b . though the aca payment changes to medicare providers and plans is expected to slow the growth in medicare spending and extend the solvency of the hospital insurance ( part a ) trust fund , some have suggested that such a policy may not be sustainable in the long run , "without unprecedented improvements in health care provider productivity. . it is to submit its first set of recommendations to the president and to congress , if required , by january 15 , 2014 . 111-148 as amended , aca ) , is estimated to achieve substantial program savings through , permanent reductions in the maximum amount paid to ma plans , and reductions in the annual updates to medicare's fee - for - service ( ffs ) providers ( other than physicians' services ) , among other provisions . provisions in the budget control act of 2011 ( p.l . this report is updated to reflect the most recent legislative changes to the program and payment updates available through january 2013 . the bca established a joint select committee on deficit reduction and tasked it with providing to congress by november 23 , 2011 recommendations on ways to reduce the deficit over the subsequent 10 years . outlays for certain medicare administrative expenditures ( non - benefit spending ) are not subject to the 2% limit . because of its rapid growth , both in terms of aggregate dollars and as a share of the federal budget , the medicare program has been a major focus of legislative attention , as outlined below . 112-25 , bca ) impact medicare payments in 2013 . once the impact of the provider payment changes from the aca is known , congress may wish to revisit the issue of the productivity adjustments to determine whether rates are much higher or much lower than originally estimated . congress can alter the board's proposals , within limitations , or discontinue the automatic implementation of proposals . however , even when payments are frozen ( as has been the case in some years with payments to acute care hospitals , inpatient rehabilitation facilities , long term care hospitals , and with the physician fee schedule ) , medicare spending continues to increase each year as the number of beneficiaries increases , and the number and complexity of services becomes greater . as in the case of physician payment updates , it is unclear whether congress will allow providers to be paid less than in a previous year under this new provision . when the committee did not provide the recommendations , this triggered a government - wide sequestration process to reduce federal spending beginning in 2013 .
the state of vietnam's worker rights conditions has become part of the debate over whether congress should approve the vietnam - u.s. bta , which does not contain provisions that explicitly deal with labor rights . by the mid - 1980s , disastrous economic conditions led the country to adopt a more pragmatic line , enshrined in the doi moi ( renovation ) economic reforms of 1986 . ever since communist north vietnamese forces defeated u.s. - backed south vietnam in 1975 , reunified vietnam has been struggling with how to maintain a balance between two often contradictory goals — maintaining ideological purity and promoting economic development . the linkage between labor rights and the bta would have become even more contentious if the bush administration had followed up on its proposal to bundle the bta into a broad - based trade bill that would also include a u.s. - jordan free trade agreement and new negotiating authority ( also known as "fast track" or "trade promotion authority" ) for the president to negotiate new multilateral trade agreements . they are also likely to loom large in the debate over the merits of a bilateral textile agreement , which the u.s. and vietnam are likely to negotiate in the next year . many proponents of linking labor rights and trade agreements have argued that congress should not pass the bta until vietnam's labor conditions improve further . for the first decade after reunification , the emphasis was on the former . under doi moi , the government gave farmers greater control over what they produce , abandoned central state planning , cut subsidies to state enterprises , reformed the price system , and opened the country to foreign direct investment . workers' rights — along with environmental conditions — will likely be prominent in the debates over both the jordan agreement and trade promotion authority . that agreement , which was signed in january 1999 , is designed to reward improvements in labor rights with increased access to the u.s. textile and apparel market . they are mainly found in the following two publications: 1 ) foreign investment laws of vietnam ( loose - leaf ) , compiled by the vietnamese ministry of planning and investment and translated by phillips fox , an australian law firm ( hereafter foreign investment laws of vietnam ) . some labor rights advocates contend that globalization occasionally has weakened vietnam's labor rights regime in the textile and apparel industries ; at times , textile multinationals and industrialized governments have pushed the vietnamese government — against the wishes of the vgcl — to relax its enforcement of certain provisions of the labor code . for instance , they point out that the bta requires vietnam to publicize in advance most business - related laws and regulations , a move that should enhance the transparency of the country's legal regime . other labor rights advocates argue that while congress should pass the vietnam - u.s. bta , it should do so only after the signing of a textile and apparel agreement that includes conditions on labor rights along the lines of the provisions of the cambodia - u.s. textile agreement . finally , supporters of unconditional passage of the bta argue that the agreement will improve labor rights by promoting the rule of law in vietnam .
in the united states , data are collected on visa issuance and alien admission , both of which have strengths and shortcomings . while the number of visas issued shows the potential number of foreign nationals who may seek admission to the united states , admissions depict the actual entries of foreign nationals into the united states . thus , the level of net migration of nonimmigrants ( or the exact number of nonimmigrants in the united states at a given time ) is unknown . the lack of an exit registration system in the united states makes an actual count of out - migration impossible . the law and regulations set terms for nonimmigrant lengths of stay in the united states , typically have foreign residency requirements , and often limit what the aliens are permitted to do in the united states ( e.g. , gain employment or enroll in school ) . the latest estimates of the number of nonimmigrants who have established a residence in the united states are also presented . table 1 indicates whether the ina or regulations set any limits or requirements on how long nonimmigrants may stay in the united states and whether they must maintain a residence in their home country for each of the 87 visa classifications . the following sections present both admissions and issuance data for analysis of nonimmigrants by category and by geographic region . table 2 details whether there are any labor market tests or any limits on the numbers of aliens who can enter the united states according to each of the 87 visa classifications . the two tables that follow , among other things , illustrate the complexity and diversity of policy on temporary admissions and the challenge for policy makers who may seek to revise it . when a cell in the table is blank , it means the law and regulations are silent on the subject . the admissions data , however , simply enumerate port of entry inspections , thus counting frequent travelers multiple times . table 2 also presents dos data on the number of nonimmigrant visas issued in fy2009 .
the indian health service ( ihs ) , part of the public health service ( phs ) of the department of health and human services ( hhs ) , funds health services to about 1.8 million indians , members of the nation's 562 federally recognized american indian and alaska native ( ai / an ) tribes in ihs service delivery areas . it also shows ihs appropriations for recent years and discusses its current statutory authorities and legislative issues , including the reauthorization of appropriations in the indian health care improvement act ( ihcia ) and several other policy issues . the federal government considers its provision of these health services to be based on its trust responsibility for indian tribes , a responsibility derived from federal statutes , treaties , court decisions , executive actions , and the constitution ( which assigns authority over indian relations to congress ) . health services are available to eligible residents of reservations , of non - reservation areas of those counties that overlap or abut reservations , and of some urban areas with a significant ai / an population . eligible indians receive free ihs health services regardless of their ability to pay ( except in certain urban programs , or when a tribe chooses to charge for services ) . the supreme court has rejected the idea ( absent congressional statement to the contrary ) that ihs is under an obligation to provide any specific health program to indians . this report provides an overview of the indian health service and how it provides for the health care problems and needs of ai / an . congress , however , has only a moral obligation , not a legal one , to provide indian health care . foremost is the reauthorization of the ihcia ( and related amendments to the social security act ( ssa ) ) . no ihcia reauthorization bill has been introduced in the 111 th congress as of the date of this report , although medicaid - related provisions concerning cost - sharing , property exclusions , and consultation have been included in current draft economic - stimulus legislation . the federal government's delivery of health services to indians , and funding of tribal and urban indian health programs , has developed over more than a century . congress has continued to appropriate funds for its programs . they would expand the roles of tribes , tribal organizations ( tos ) , and urban indian organizations ( uios ) in management and decision - making ; organize behavioral health services ( alcohol and substance abuse , social services , and mental health programs ) into a "comprehensive continuum" of prevention and treatment programs ; create a construction priority system for ihs - funded health facilities ; authorize long - term and hospice care ; exempt indians from medicaid and schip premiums and copayments ; allow urban indian health programs ( uihps ) to get reimbursements from medicare and other third parties ; and establish a commission on how to improve indian health care delivery . negotiations among indian health proponents , hhs agencies , other departments , the administration , and congressional committees and offices have led to numerous changes in the bills from one congress to the next .
on july 27 , 2009 , the government of sweden asked for an explanation from venezuela of how the revolutionary armed forces of colombia ( farc ) obtained swedish - made anti - tank rocket launchers that had been sold to venezuela in the 1980s . on july 20 , 2009 , the u.s. government accountability office issued a report on the status of drug trafficking through venezuela and the status of u.s. - venezuelan counternarcotics cooperation . the report concluded that the lack of venezuelan counternarcotics cooperation is a significant impediment to the u.s. capacity to interdict drugs en route to the united states . according to the report , u.s. and colombian officials assert that venezuela has extended a lifeline to illegally armed colombian groups by providing significant support and safe haven along the border . on february 15 , 2009 , venezuelans voted in a national referendum to approve a constitutional amendment abolishing term limits for elected local , state , and national officials , including for the president . on september 12 , 2008 , the u.s. treasury department froze the assets of two senior venezuelan intelligence officials and the former interior minister for allegedly helping the revolutionary armed forces of colombia ( farc ) with weapons and drug trafficking . on september 16 , 2008 , for the fourth year in a row , president bush determined that venezuela had failed demonstrably to adhere to its obligations under international narcotics control agreements , but waived sanctions to allow the continuation of u.s. foreign assistance to support civil society programs and community development programs . the amendment was approved with almost 55% voting for it and 45% voting against it . on september 18 , 2008 , human rights watch issued an extensive report examining setbacks in human rights protections and practices under the chávez government . venezuelan officials denied any venezuelan government involvement with the farc . the decrees covered such areas as tourism , railways , social security , and financial institutions as well as controversial provisions that would allow the president to appoint regional leaders with broad budgetary powers , set up a civilian militia as a branch of the military , and allow the government to expropriate goods from private businesses and increase state control over food distribution . on june 25 , 2009 , the state department announced that the united states and venezuela agreed to return respective ambassadors . the government won also won over 80% of the more than 300 mayoral races , but the opposition won the country's largest cities of caracas and maracaibo . of 22 governorships , government supporters won 17 , although of the 5 states won by the opposition , 3 were country's most the populous states of zulia , miranda , and carabobo . on november 23 , 2008 , venezuela held state and municipal elections across the country . on august 4 , 2008 , the venezuelan government made public 26 presidential decrees that had been enacted on july 31 at the end of an 18-month period in which president chávez had been given decree authority by the national assembly . the state department also declared venezuela's u.s . this led to u.s . chávez opponents maintain that the action against baduel was intended to intimidate the opposition before the state and municipal elections scheduled for november 23 .
one manifestation of this struggle occurs when congressional committees engage in oversight of the administrative bureaucracy ; another when members of congress attempt to intervene in administrative proceedings on behalf of private constituents or other private entities with interests affecting the member's constituency . the inevitable tension between congress and the executive created by our constitutionally mandated system of separated but shared powers has been the source of continual interbranch conflict . both such interventions involve varying degrees of intrusion into agency decisionmaking processes . it concludes that the courts , in balancing congress's performance of its constitutional and statutory obligations to oversee the actions of agency officials against the rights of parties before agencies , have shown a decided predilection for protecting the congressional prerogatives . on relatively rare occasions these interventions have resulted in court actions challenging the congressional intercession as exertions of undue political influence on agency decisionmakers which violate the due process rights of participants in the proceedings in question and impugn the integrity of the agency decisional processes ; or in disciplinary proceedings before ethics committees of either house alleging that such member actions violated institutional rules or other ethical standards . past high profile incidents raising questions regarding the legal and ethical propriety of congressional exertions of influence on administrative decisionmaking have surprisingly produced only a paucity of authoritative commentary on and analysis of the guiding principles and standards applicable to the constitutional bases of the roles members play when they act as part of the committee oversight process or in their individual representative capacities . it notes that since congressional intervention and expressions of interest in administrative matters from a member's office are recognized as legitimate , official representational and oversight functions and duties of members of congress , the primary focus of these ethical and statutory conduct restraints is limited to ( 1 ) any improper enrichment or financial benefit accruing to the member in return for or because of his or her official actions and influences , including the receipt of gifts or payments , or existing financial interests in , or relating to the matter under consideration ; and ( 2 ) any overt coercion or threats of reprisals , or promises of favoritism or reward to administrators from the member's office which could indicate an arguable abuse of a member's official representational or oversight role . such challenges have arisen in the context of congressional intercessions into rulemakings , ratemakings , informal decisionmaking , adjudications , and agency investigations that arguably would lead to an adjudicatory proceeding . toward that end , part ii reviews the judicial development and application of standards for determining whether congressional pressure or influence will be deemed to have tainted an agency proceeding . thus where informal rulemaking or other forms of informal decisionmaking are involved , the courts will look to the nature and impact of the political pressure on the agency decisionmaker and will intervene only where that pressure has had the actual effect of forcing the consideration of factors congress did not intend to make relevant . this report is designed to provide a contemporary overview of applicable guidelines and considerations in the judicial and congressional forums . while campaign contributions from private individuals to members have a facial legitimacy and necessity in our government and electoral system which other forms of monetary transfers to legislators ( such as gifts ) do not , and may be treated differently , both houses of congress advise members and staff to avoid any appearance of a "linkage" between campaign contributions and interventions .
imbalances in agricultural markets develop because consumers do not respond to price changes by buying proportionally smaller or larger quantities ( demand is price - inelastic ) and , similarly , farmers do not respond to price changes by proportionally reducing or increasing production ( supply is price inelastic ) . the economic argument for federal support of farms , in contrast to nonfarm businesses , is that markets do not efficiently balance commodity supply with demand . the imbalances are further exacerbated by the long time lag between crop planting ( or livestock breeding ) and harvest , during which economic and yield conditions may dramatically change . as congress moves increasingly closer to the 2007 expiration of current farm support programs, policymakers face design of a new law that ( 1 ) meets the nation's domestic needs , ( 2 )  satisfies this country's international trade obligations under the world trade organization , and  ( 3 ) fits within budgetary constraints . the objectives of federal commodity programs are to stabilize and support farm incomes by shifting some of the risks of short term market price instability and longer - term capacity adjustments to the federal government . however , they argue that ( 1 ) current programs are highly distorting of world production and trade , ( 2 ) the levels of subsidies are high and have become capitalized into land prices and rents that raise the cost of production and make the united states less competitive in global markets , and ( 3 ) the benefits are concentrated among a comparatively small number of commodities produced on a small number of large farms . the goals are to maintain the economic health of the farm sector so that it can utilize the nation's comparative advantages in natural , infrastructure , and technology resources to be globally competitive . the imbalances then often result in inadequate or exaggerated resource adjustments by farmers . the law mandates federal support for a specific list of commodities . landowners are concerned about a loss of rents and wealth if land prices drop in response to a reduction in the subsidies . secretary of agriculture johanns has repeatedly stated that his objective is for commodity assistance to be equitable across commodities , predictable in terms of design regularity , and beyond challenge within the framework of the world trade organization ( wto ) . while initially intended to be a temporary effort , the commodity support programs survived , but have been modified away from supply control and commodity stocks management to direct income support payments . supporters of commodity subsidy programs may not contradict the critics , but do point out that other nations have distorting subsidy programs and / or trade barriers that should be eliminated if the united states is to make reforms . for most of these commodities , support began during 1930s depression era efforts to generally raise farm household income when commodity prices were low because of prolonged weak consumer demand . similarly , rural communities are concerned about any large decline in the real estate tax base that supports local schools , roads , and other community services . critics of commodity programs agree on the underlying fundamental economic conditions that make stability more difficult to achieve for agriculture than for some other sectors .
the cooperative threat reduction ( ctr ) programs , funded by the department of defense ( dod ) , are the most visible of these programs . it describes potential recipients of such funding ( those states with wmd programs and terrorism problems ) ; the kinds of assistance that may be possible ; potential legal , political , and technical constraints on assistance ; and potential costs and benefits to the united states of providing such assistance . within a decade , however , ctr took on the goal of reducing the threat of terrorist access to weapons of mass destruction ( wmd ) . begun in 1991 , ctr initially aimed to help russia meet its start obligations to reduce strategic nuclear weapons . nonproliferation assistance programs are a relatively new tool in combating the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction . 1308 ) , congress authorized the bush administration to spend $50 million of unobligated funds from the cooperative threat reduction program in states outside the former soviet union . experts realized that russia needed to protect its cold war overhang of wmd materials , scientists , and equipment from those who might exploit insider opportunities and who had incentives ( particularly financial ) to sell wmd technology to anyone . as of september 2006 , the administration had spent $38.5 million in albania for the purpose of eliminating chemical weapons stockpiles . in the fy2004 national defense authorization act ( p.l . the report of the 9 / 11 commission called for continued support for threat reduction assistance to keep wmd away from terrorist groups . the report begins with a brief review of why ctr programs might be considered applicable to the threat of wmd terrorism and then takes a more detailed look at the threat of wmd terrorism . the bush administration stated in early 2003 that it had "expanded the strategic focus of the ctr program" to support the war on terrorism . this report surveys options for applying ctr programs to states that pose a wmd and terrorism threat . now , however , many analysts support expanding cooperative threat reduction programs beyond russia to other geographic areas . the report also looks at constraints involved in providing assistance and broader implications of such assistance . it reviews how certain kinds of ctr assistance might help defuse the threat and presents some options tailored for specific countries . the threat of terrorist access to wmd is a relatively new concern for nonproliferation experts . on the other hand , the perception of an increased threat of terrorist use of wmd has grown since the september 2001 attacks on the united states . the cia has reported a growing concern that traditional state recipients of wmd technology "may follow north korea's practice of supplying specific wmd - related technology and expertise to other countries or non - state actors. . there is evidence that al qaeda assigned a high priority to acquiring a wmd capability and some observers believe that chemical and biological weapons ( cbw ) capabilities are increasingly available . technical hurdles are clearly secondary constraints , but they can lead to questions about the effectiveness of verifying threat reduction programs . 108-136 , sec . 5122 ) does not include provisions to repeal restrictions .
an effective grant proposal has to make a compelling case . things to be considered include the following: all of the requirements of the funding source must be met: prescribed format , necessary inclusions , deadlines , etc . the proposal should have a clear , descriptive title . each time it has been critiqued , it may be necessary to rethink the project and its presentation . the proposal should be a cohesive whole , building logically , with one section leading to another ; this is an especially important consideration when several people have been involved in its preparation . not only must the idea be a good one , but so must the presentation . language should be clear and concise , devoid of jargon ; explanations should be offered for acronyms and terms which may be unfamiliar to someone outside the field . while such revision is necessary to clarify the proposal , one of the dangers is that the original excitement of those making the proposal sometimes gets written out . at various stages in the proposal writing process , the proposal should be reviewed by a number of interested and disinterested parties . each of the parts of the proposal should provide as brief but informative a narrative as possible , with supporting data relegated to an appendix . somehow , this must be conveyed in the final proposal . nature of the problem ( provide as much hard evidence as possible ) . remaining alternatives available when funding has been exhausted . this section should provide the following: a brief history of the organization , its past and present operations , its goals and mission , its significant accomplishments , any success stories . one of the pitfalls to be avoided is defining the problem as a lack of program or facility ( i.e. , giving one of the possible solutions to a problem as the problem itself ) . restraint is important in determining inflationary cost projections ( avoid padding budget line items ) , but the applicant may attempt to anticipate possible future increases . applicants are advised: make it interesting ! . indicate whether funds for other parts of the project are being sought elsewhere ; such evidence will strengthen the proposal , demonstrating to the reviewing officer that all avenues of support have been thoroughly explored . qualifications of its professional staff , and a list of its board of directors . the applicant may discuss maintenance and future program funding if program funds are for construction activity ; and may account for other needed expenditures if the program includes purchase of equipment . most federal agencies now require some form of program evaluation among grantees . for federal grants , it is also important to become familiar with grants management requirements . the consequences of the project as a result of funding should be highlighted , for example , statistical projections of how many people might benefit from the project's accomplishments . the evaluation component is two - fold: ( 1 ) product evaluation and ( 2 ) process evaluation . review the resources needed , considering how they will be used and to what end . reference should be made to grants , endorsements , and press coverage the organization has already received ( with supporting documentation included in the appendix ) .
although the aids epidemic in the broader latin america and caribbean region is not as pervasive as in africa , over 1.8 million people were estimated to be living with hiv in the region in 2007 , including 230,000 in the caribbean and 1.6 million in latin america . in terms of sheer numbers , brazil accounts for about one - third of those living with hiv in latin america , but its prevalence rate of 0.5% ( 2005 ) is low compared to many countries in central america and the caribbean . moreover , the adult prevalence rate in several countries in the caribbean and central america are among the highest outside of sub - saharan africa . furthermore , brazil's active prevention efforts have lowered prevalence among the high risk groups — intravenous drug users and homosexuals — and the government's extensive antiretroviral ( arv ) treatment program has lowered death rates . the caribbean countries with the highest prevalence or infection rates in 2006 were haiti , the bahamas , belize , guyana , and trinidad and tobago , with rates between 2% and 4% ; and barbados , the dominican republic , jamaica , and suriname , with rates between 1% and 2% . in haiti , there are been declining infection levels in port - au - prince and other cites , and the declines appear to be associated with some protective behavioral changes ( an increase in condom use and a drop in the number of sexual partners ) although aids mortality has also been a factor . the u.s. agency for international development ( usaid ) notes that haiti's poverty , conflict , and unstable governance have contributed to the rapid spread of aids over the years . haiti and the dominican republic account for three - quarters of the region's infected population . in contrast , the mode of transmission in several caribbean and central american countries has been primarily through unprotected heterosexual contact , which has made it more difficult to contain the epidemic because it affects the general population . in central america , honduras has the highest prevalence rate of 1.5% ( with aids related diseases the second leading cause of death in the country ) , while el salvador , guatemala , and panama have rates just under 1% . in the dominican republic , where there has been a large increase in the use of condoms by commercial sex workers , the epidemic appears to have stabilized . however , workers on sugar cane plantations ( bateyes ) continue to have high prevalence rates , with rates up to 12% found among males aged 40-44 . in honduras , the garifuna community ( descendants of freed black slaves and indigenous caribs from the caribbean island of st. vincent ) concentrated in northern coastal communities has been especially hard hit by the epidemic , with over 8% and 14% of the population infected . the epidemic in central america is concentrated in large urban areas , although some rural areas have been hard hit . nevertheless , trends in both countries suggest the need to protect against a resurgence of the epidemic . high prevalence rates have also been found among female sex workers in el salvador , honduras , and guatemala .
the house approved the billby a vote of 298-121 on october 31 , and the senate approved it by voice vote on november 3 . 3289 , a bill providing supplemental appropriations for militaryoperations and for reconstruction assistance in iraq and afghanistan . the conference agreement rejecteda senate proposal to provide about half of the iraq reconstruction assistance as loans . on october 29 , house and senate appropriators announced a conference agreement , h.rept.108-337 , on h.r . the following discussion ( 1 ) briefly reviews the basic elements of the request ; ( 2 ) discusses the debate about long - term costs ; ( 3 ) discusses congressional action on key legislative proposals ; ( 4 ) provides an overview of funding for ongoing military operations in iraq , afghanistan , and elsewhere ; and ( 5 ) provides an overview of funding for reconstruction and security in iraq , for reconstructionin afghanistan , and for other foreign policy initiatives . thepresident signed the bill into law , p.l . the major issue in congress was whether to provide iraq reconstruction funds as grants , as the administration proposed , or as loans .  ( 1 ) onseptember 17 , the white house submitted a formalrequest for the funds to congress .  ( 2 ) onseptember 23 , the coalition provisional authority thatis administering iraq provided information on the details of its request for reconstruction aid . a large part of the debate in congress about the administration's $87 billion request focused on cost issues , including the impact of the new funding on the overall federal budget ; whether the administration was adequately forthcoming in its previousstatements about costs ; how accurate and complete the current cost projections are ; and how great costs will be in future years . during congressional debate , a wide range of legislative proposals addressing costs , burdensharing , and other issues were considered , including measures to require the administration to provide reports on iraq policy , giving details of plans to establish security and restore basic services ; roll back reductions in the top income tax rate from 2005 through 2010 enoughto offset costs ; encourage greater allied contributions of troops and reconstruction aid ; transfer control of iraq reconstruction from the defense department to the statedepartment ; and require fair and open competition on contracts in iraq . for a review of conference action on key issues , see the section entitled "key issues in conference," below . in a nationwide address on september 7 , 2003 , the president announced that he would requestan additional $87 billion for reconstruction assistance to iraq and afghanistan and for ongoingmilitary operations there and elsewhere .  ( 3 ) of the $21.4 billion for foreign policy programs,$20.3 billion was for security and reconstruction in iraq , about $800 million for afghanistan , andabout $200 million for other global war on terrorism foreign policy initiatives . 108-106 , on november 6 . of the $65.6 billion for defense , $51.5 billion was for ongoingmilitary operations in iraq , $10.5 billion for u.s. forces in afghanistan , and the remaining $3.6billion for homeland defense and support to allies .
2 ) that has passed the senate . currently there is no large - scale commercial production in the united states , and the u.s. market depends on imports . congress made significant changes to federal policies regarding hemp in the 2014 farm bill ( agricultural act of 2014 , p.l . many of the provisions in these bills are included in the senate version of the 2018 farm bill legislation ( h.r . an expanded version of this bill was introduced in the 115 th congress in both the house and senate ( h.r . similar provisions are not part of the house - passed 2018 farm bill ( h.r . in addition , in subsequent omnibus appropriations , congress has blocked the u.s. drug enforcement administration ( dea ) and federal law enforcement authorities from interfering with state agencies , hemp growers , and agricultural research . other provisions in these bills would further facilitate hemp production in the united states . in the united states , however , production is strictly controlled under existing drug enforcement laws . 5485 ; s. 2667 ) . f or centuries , industrial hemp ( plant species cannabis sativa ) has been a source of fiber and oilseed used worldwide to produce a variety of industrial and consumer products . currently , more than 30 nations grow industrial hemp as an agricultural commodity , which is sold on the world market . myriad other bills introduced in both the house and the senate would further amend the csa and other federal laws to address industrial hemp . appropriators have also blocked the u.s. department of agriculture ( usda ) from prohibiting the transportation , processing , sale , or use of industrial hemp that is grown or cultivated in accordance with the 2014 farm bill provision . despite these efforts , industrial hemp continues to be subject to u.s. drug laws , and growing industrial hemp is restricted . congress has sought to further distinguish between industrial hemp and marijuana . 2 ) . among the bills addressing industrial hemp , the industrial hemp farming act would amend the csa to specify that the term marijuana does not include industrial hemp , thus excluding hemp from the csa as a controlled substance subject to dea regulation . under current u.s. drug policy , all cannabis varieties — including industrial hemp — are considered schedule i controlled substances under the controlled substances act ( csa ) , and dea continues to control and regulate cannabis production . although hemp production is now allowed in accordance with the requirements under the 2014 farm bill provision , other aspects of hemp production are still subject to dea oversight , including the importation of viable seeds . other introduced legislation would amend the csa "to exclude cannabidiol and cannabidiol - rich plants from the definition of marihuana" intended to promote the possible medical applications of industrial hemp . the 2014 farm bill provided that certain research institutions and state departments of agriculture may grow hemp under an agricultural pilot program . this bill was reintroduced and expanded from bills introduced in previous congresses dating back to the 109 th congress . 113-79 ) . to date , nearly 40 states or territories have enacted or introduced legislation favorable to hemp cultivation ( figure 6 ) .
the various systems that collect , process , and disseminate intelligence are encompassed inthe budget category known as intelligence , surveillance , and reconnaissance ( isr ( 1 ) ) . the bulk of funding is forresearch and development ( r&d ) and procurement ; personnel costs are comparatively low .  ( 2 ) isr acquisition has in recent years come under strong criticism . the isrprograms considered in this report are managed by the central intelligence agency ( cia ) and by thelarge intelligence agencies and components of the department of defense ( dod ) . somesystems are used only by military units ; others are national systems operated by washington - leveldefense agencies . isr covers a multitude ofprograms ranging from billion - dollar satellites to hand - held cameras . reportedly , there aretechnical problems with the new generation of reconnaissance satellites , along with billion dollarcost - overruns ; only a small number of the planned high - altitude uavs are actually deployed ; andthere have been difficulties in ensuring that the troops who need intelligence acquire it in a timelymanner . appendix a provides a case studyof the trade - offs between satellites and unmanned aerial vehicles ( uavs ) . it is difficult to ensure efficient acquisition in theseparate programs which are often based on innovative technologies . it is even more challengingto envision a seamless and comprehensive system of systems and to ensure the acquisition of anoptimal mix of specific systems . most are surrounded in secrecy , but total spending on isr , while difficult toestimate with unclassified information , undoubtedly runs into the tens of billions of dollars . some observers point to the possibility that satellites and uavs potentiallyundertake the same or similar missions , but that the current system gives little opportunity for costcomparisons or trade - offs to be made in the acquisition process . understanding the procedures for acquiring isr systems is , however , complicated by the factthat different isr systems are acquired in entirely different ways , by different intelligence agenciesor military services , and are designed for different users . there is a widespread awareness that isr spending , much greater than in past years , couldeasily absorb even larger portions of defense and intelligence budgets , making the need for tradeoffseven more important .  ( 3 ) some believed that giving the dci greater management responsibilities would improve themanagement of isr programs , including those in the department of defense ( dod ) . in addition , the acquisition processes areoverseen by different congressional committees .  ( 6 ) in may 2000 , the senate intelligence committee reported that , "the budget practices of the[central intelligence agency ( cia ) ] and the intelligence community as a whole are simplyinadequate to address current requirements .  ( 7 ) the next year the committee again argued that the intelligence community "is handicappedby the lack of comprehensive strategic and performance plans that can be used to articulate programgoals , measure program performance , improve program efficiency and aid in resource planning. . in 1995 , the senate selectcommittee on intelligence ( ssci ) expressed its misgivings about existing cooperation amongagencies and recommended a joint review by the director of central intelligence ( dci ) and thedeputy secretary of defense to ensure that "both intelligence community and defense departmentequities are served in the planning , programming , and management of all intelligence activities andprograms. .
concerns about the long - term effects of economic hardship and the increasing age of soviet - era systemscontinue to prompt questions about the security of russia's nuclear weapons andmaterials . the united states has offered , through efforts such as the nunn - lugarcooperative threat reduction program , to enhance safety and security at nuclear facilities inrussia . many of these weapons were located outside russia , but have since beenreturned to storage areas in russia . after the 1991 demise of the soviet union , many analysts grew concerned that nuclear weaponsmight be lost or stolen , or that some might be launched by accident or without authorization byresponsible officials . it includes a brief listing of the cooperative programs and assistance theunited states has provided to russia and the other former soviet states in an effort to addressconcerns about the safety and security of nuclear weapons and materials . this report provides background information on the location of nuclear weapons at the time of the demise of the soviet union and their subsequent relocation to storage and deployment areas inrussia .  ( 1 ) . it also provides a description of the safety , security , and control issues raised in 1991 andin more recent years . the program's new objectives are to dismantleweapons of mass destruction and their associated infrastructure in the former soviet union ; consolidate and secure weapons of mass destruction and related technologies and materials ; increasetransparency and encourage higher standards of conduct , and support defense and militarycooperation with the objective of preventing proliferation . the program has also provided funding to help russia build afacility to dispose of its chemical weapons ; this project has proven far more controversial incongress than projects aimed at the elimination of strategic offensive nuclear weapons . the bush administration conducted a wide - ranging review of u.s. threat reduction and nonproliferation programs in russia during its first year in office . the united states provides nearly $1 billion per year inassistance , through programs in the state department , energy department , and defense department,to help the former soviet states secure and eliminate nuclear , chemical , and biological weapons , tohelp secure and eliminate the materials used in these weapons , and to help provide alternativeemployment for the scientists and engineers who had been a part of the soviet union's weaponscomplex . past legislation had stated that the ctr program should providerussia , ukraine , belarus , and kazakhstan assistance in the transportation , storage , safeguarding anddestruction of nuclear , chemical and biological weapons and the dismantlement of missiles andlaunchers , the prevention of the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction ; and the prevention ofdiversion of weapons - related scientific expertise . the funds were to provide russia,ukraine , belarus , and kazakhstan assistance in 1 ) the transportation , storage , safeguarding anddestruction of nuclear , chemical and biological weapons and the dismantlement of missiles andlaunchers ; 2 ) the prevention of the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction ; and , 3 ) theprevention of diversion of weapons - related scientific expertise . it has also helped improve the safety and security of nuclearwarheads in transit and in storage . the united states and the former soviet states have cooperated in many ways over the yearsto address the concerns described above .
historically , electricity service has been defined as a natural monopoly , meaning that theindustry has ( 1 ) an inherent tendency toward declining long - term costs , ( 2 ) high thresholdinvestment , and ( 3 ) technological conditions that limit the number of potential entrants . the public utility holding company act ( puhca ) ( 1 ) and the federal power act ( fpa ) of 1935 ( title i and title ii of the public utility act ) ( 2 ) established a regime ofregulating electric utilities that gave specific and separate powers to the states and the federalgovernment . in addition,many regulators have considered unified control of generation , transmission , and distribution as themost efficient means of providing service . the central issues in such cases are the total amount of money the utility will bepermitted to collect and how the burden of the revenue requirement will be distributed among thevarious customer classes ( residential , commercial , and industrial ) . at the least , a state public utility commission will have authority over retail rates , and oftenover investment and debt . the oil embargoes of the 1970s created concerns about the security of the nation's electricitysupply and led to enactment of the public utility regulatory policies act of 1978 ( purpa ) . as a result , most people ( about 75% ) are currently servedby a vertically integrated , investor - owned utility . federal regulation followed state regulation and ispremised on the need to fill the regulatory vacuum resulting from the constitutional inability of statesto regulate interstate commerce . despite this diversity , the essential mission of the state regulator in states that have notrestructured is the establishment of retail electric prices . the federal energy regulatory commission ( ferc ) has the principal functions at the federal level for the economic regulation of the electricityutility industry , including financial transactions , wholesale rate regulation , transactions involvingtransmission of unbundled retail electricity , interconnection and wheeling of wholesale electricity,and ensuring adequate and reliable service . as the electric utility industry has evolved , however , there has been a growing belief that thehistoric classification of electric utilities as natural monopolies has been overtaken by events and thatmarket forces can and should replace some of the traditional economic regulatory structure . state regulatory commissions address intrastate utility activities , including wholesaleand retail rate - making . under the fpa , federal economic regulation addresses wholesale transactions and rates forelectric power flowing in interstate commerce .  ( 6 ) currently , 24 states and thedistrict of columbia have either enacted legislation or issued regulatory orders to implement retailaccess . the electric utility industry has been in the process of transformation .  ) , the securities andexchange commission ( sec ) regulates utilities' corporate structure and business ventures underpuhca . the mandatorypurchase requirement under the public utility regulatory policies act ( purpa ) is repealed . moreover , recent changes in electric utilityregulation and improved technologies have allowed additional generating capacity to be providedby independent firms rather than utilities . forexample , the existence of utilities that do not own all of their generating facilities , primarilycooperatives and publicly owned utilities , has provided evidence that vertical integration has notbeen necessary for providing efficient electric service .
distributional effects are often central policy issues in debates over tax legislation . although economic analysis can be used to estimate the distribution of the tax system , or a tax change ( a positive or descriptive analysis ) , it cannot be used to provide a normative or prescriptive analysis . even in the case of distribution issues , however , economic analysis can be used to facilitate the understanding of desirable distributions , measure them correctly , and determine the implications of different assumptions about social welfare for the optimal distribution of the tax burden . in particular , it addresses the question of the justifications for a progressive tax system ( one where the share of income collected as a tax rises as income rises ) . descriptive analyses indicate the expected effects of policies , but normative analyses indicate the optimal policy . some of the private researchers involved in this work include the urban institute and brookings institution tax policy center ( tpc ) and the institute on taxation and economic policy ( itep ) of citizens for tax justice ( ctj ) . the first section of this report , which is normative in nature , therefore discusses different philosophies about how the tax burden should be distributed , and what those philosophies imply for the shape of the tax system . the third section of the report discusses the measures that can be used to characterize the distributional effects of tax changes . most normative analysis in economics is focused on efficiency . this section is presented for the interested reader , but is not a necessary preliminary to examining the analysis in the second section , which presents estimates of the distribution of the federal and total u.s. tax burden . some of the measures that have been presented include ( 1 ) the share of taxpayers benefitted that fall below an income level ; ( 2 ) the percentage reduction in taxes paid ; ( 3 ) the tax cut as a percentage of income ( both pre - tax and disposable ) ; ( 4 ) the distribution of the tax cut by income class ; and ( 5 ) the average tax cut . the governmental entities include the treasury department , the congressional budget office ( cbo ) , and joint committee on taxation ( jct ) . one of them is how to pay for the goods that the government provides ( such as national defense , or highways ) . the second issue is whether the tax system should be used for direct income redistribution ; in that case the optimal tax burden depends on the degree to which redistribution is deemed desirable . their analyses vary in several ways , including how they define income , the definition and ordering of tax units , and the taxes included . indeed , it is difficult even to determine the degree of progressivity or regressivity of a system so that the old and new tax systems can be compared based on their degree of progressivity . when effective tax rates rise with income a tax system is progressive , it is proportional when effective tax rates are relatively constant , or regressive , if effective tax rates fall as income increases .
in response to a persistent rate of uninsurance , the federal government in 2010 passed the patient protection and affordable care act ( aca ; p.l . the federal government enacted the health insurance portability and accountability act of 1996 ( hipaa ) to provide certain protections to workers that switched or lost jobs . as health insurance coverage has evolved from an uncommon benefit to a routine one , government's role in subsidizing and regulating that coverage also has changed . the federal government's involvement in health coverage expanded dramatically over the past several decades: a long - standing rule issued by the internal revenue service ( irs ) in 1954 stated that an employer's contributions to employer - sponsored health insurance are not to be included in an employee's gross income for tax purposes ( internal revenue code , section 106 ) . while most insured americans obtain health coverage through the private sector , public entities play an increasingly significant role . 111-148 , as amended ) , which instituted a large set of reforms to the private insurance market and expanded publicly funded coverage . given the frequent introduction of legislation aimed at modifying or building on the current health insurance system , understanding the potential impact of such proposals requires a working knowledge of how health insurance is provided , purchased , and regulated . this led to government efforts to assist health care consumers in paying for medical services through the 1965 medicare and medicaid social insurance programs . this ruling helped spur the growth of employer - sponsored health benefits . advances in medicine led to increased costs of treatment , which was especially problematic for certain groups of consumers who lacked health coverage . more and more employees began to work for more than one employer over their lifetimes . public programs ( medicare , medicaid / chip , or health care services for military servicemembers and veterans ) provided coverage to 34.3% of americans . in contrast , hmos are relatively unpopular , with hmo plans declining from about 6% of self - only plans in 2004 to about 2% in 2009 . this report discusses health insurance coverage in three categories: ( 1 ) insured through private sources , ( 2 ) coverage under public programs , or ( 3 ) uninsured . starting with the passage of federal legislation in the 1970s which supported the growth of managed care ( specifically in the form of health maintenance organizations ( hmos ) ) , the number of mcos grew quickly . among those techniques are restricting enrollee access to certain providers ( in - network providers ) ; requiring primary - care - physician approval for access to specialty care ( gatekeeping ) ; coordinating care for persons with certain conditions ( disease management or case management ) ; and requiring prior authorization for routine hospital inpatient care ( pre - certification ) . the popularity of some of these mechanisms has also changed over time . those arrangements vary due to numerous factors such as how health care is financed , how much access to providers and services is controlled , and how much flexibility the enrollees have to use the services covered under her / his health plan .
 ( 1 ) to fund these programs , the authorizing statutes ( and orders ) require that an assessment be collected based on the amount of product that a covered party sells,produces , or imports . the supreme court's first two attempts at addressing first amendment challenges tocheck - off programs - - california fruits and mushrooms , respectively - - resulted in contrastingopinions and some confusion for lower courts . some producers have opposed the use of , or message in , genericadvertisements and have brought first amendment challenges in court , three of which the supremecourt has decided . in may 2005 , the supreme court issued its third opinion in eight years regarding theconstitutionality of a check - off program ( beef ) . a number of farm products are promoted through the use of congressionally authorizedgeneric promotion programs . the decision may also serve to inform and encourage future legislation creating oramending such programs . subsequent circuit court decisions for the beef , pork,and dairy check - off programs , for example , have all seemed to struggle with determining theapplicable level of scrutiny to apply to the programs . in johanns v. livestock marketing association , ( 2 ) the supreme court upheld thecheck - off program on "government speech" grounds - - a legal theory not addressed by the supremecourt in the earlier check - off cases . nonetheless , in each case the appellate courtsrejected the government's argument that the check - off programs were "government speech" immunefrom first amendment scrutiny and found the programs to unconstitutionally compel speech ( orcompel the subsidy for the support of some type of speech ) . this ruling is likely to have far - reaching effects for check - offprograms . for example , it has already been used to vacate the circuit court decisions mentionedabove and will undoubtedly be used to defend other check - off programs from first amendmentchallenges . this report begins with a brief introduction on check - off programs and then describes theapplicable first amendment principles argued in many of the check - off cases . this report concludes with a discussion of johanns v.livestock marketing association and its possible implications for check - off programs .  ( 11 ) the central hudson testasks ( 1 ) whether the commercial speech at issue is protected by the first amendment ( that is,whether it concerns a lawful activity and is not misleading ) and ( 2 ) whether the assertedgovernmental interest in restricting it is substantial . next is an analysisof the first two challenges that reached the supreme court , as well as a brief discussion ofsubsequent appellate court decisions . general oversight of these programs is provided by the u.s. departmentof agriculture's ( usda ) agricultural marketing service ; however , there is still some debate as toactually how much control and responsibility the usda has over the check - off programs . johanns , ingeneral , appears to have fortified the constitutionality of check - off programs and has likely enhancedthe ability of congress to provide similar promotional support for more agricultural products .  ( 56 ) the usda has stated that it is studying the beef check - offopinion to determine its impact on other first amendment challenges to check - off programs .
this report considers population longevity in the united states , as measured by life expectancy . life expectancy is the expected number of years to be lived , on average , by a particular cohort , if current mortality trends continue for the rest of that cohort's life . it most commonly refers to life expectancy at birth , the median number of years that a population born in a particular year could expect to live . this tells us that , for those born in calendar year 2003 in the united states , 50% will die before that age ; the other half will live longer . in the united states , data on mortality are collected and compiled through the vital statistics system by the centers for disease control and prevention ( cdc ) / national center for health statistics ( nchs ) . in addition , it considers whether life expectancy will continue to increase in future years . there is a lively debate among researchers regarding whether the biological limits of life spans have been reached or whether future increases are probable . while this report concentrates on trends and differentials in life expectancy at birth , appendix b table b - 2 provides estimates of life expectancy at selected additional ages in 2003 ( the most recent final data available ) . what program changes are required to ensure the continued viability of such programs as the number of beneficiaries increases ? . while this report focuses on describing the demographic context of longevity change in the united states , these trends have implications for a wide range of social and economic issues that are likely to be considered by congress . for instance , one consequence of lengthening life expectancies is that the older population's needs for careâassistance with daily tasks to allow continued community - living for high - functioning seniors , institutions for those with more severe disabilities or cognitive impairments , training of a specialized work force in geriatric careâare likely to increase , particularly for the oldest - old . at the same time , there is the recognition that government programs , such as social security and medicare , will face financial pressures to meet the increasing needs . life expectancy at age 60 in the year 2003 was 22.2 years in the united states . what will be the federal government's role in an environment of competing demands for limited resources ? . according to the u.s. census bureau , international data base , the highest attained life expectancy to date for a national population was that of andorra in 2006 , when life expectancy was 83.5 years for the total population ( 86.6 years for females ; 80.6 years for males ) . for instance , based on recently released final data , life expectancy at birth in 2003 was 77.5 years . measures of life expectancy are published in official life tables , which are based on age - specific death rates . this report documents the improvements in life expectancy that have occurred , analyzing both the underlying factors that contributed to mortality reductions as well as the continuing longevity differentials by sex and race . life expectancy at age 60 , for instance , refers to the additional number of years that a person who has already attained age 60 will live beyond age 60 .
persons suspected of terrorist or criminal activity may be transferred from one state ( i.e. , country ) to another to answer charges against them . besides receiving persons through rendition , the united states has also rendered persons to other countries over the years , via the central intelligence agency ( cia ) and various law enforcement agencies . unlike in the case of rendition and extradition , the legal justification for removing an alien from the united states via deportation or denial of entry is not so that he can answer charges against him in the receiving state ; rather , it is because the united states possesses the sovereign authority to determine which non - nationals may enter or remain within its borders , and the alien fails to fulfill the legal criteria allowing non - citizens to enter , remain in , or pass in transit through the united states . a distinct form of rendition is extradition , by which one state surrenders a person within its territorial jurisdiction to a requesting state via a formal legal process , typically established by treaty between the countries . unlike in extradition cases , persons subject to this type of rendition typically have no access to the judicial system of the sending state by which they may challenge their transfer . over the years , several persons have been rendered into the united states by u.s. authorities , often with the cooperation of the states where such persons were seized , to answer criminal charges , including charges related to terrorist activity . although the deportation or exclusion of an alien under immigration laws may have the same practical effect as an irregular rendition ( especially if the alien is subject to "expedited removal" under § 235 of the immigration and nationality act , in which case judicial review of a removal order may be very limited ) , this practice is arguably distinct from the historical understanding of what constitutes a rendition . the terms "irregular rendition" and "extraordinary rendition" have been used to refer to the extrajudicial transfer of a person from one state to another , generally for the purpose of arrest , detention , and / or interrogation by the receiving state ( for purposes of this report , the term "rendition" will be used to describe irregular renditions , and not extraditions , unless otherwise specified ) . in contrast , noncitizens who have not entered the united states have historically been recognized as receiving few , if any , constitutional protections ( though noncitizens in foreign locations over which the united states exercises significant control , such as guantanamo bay , cuba , may be owed greater protections than other noncitizens abroad ) . the surrender of a fugitive from one state to another is generally referred to as rendition . in august , the task force issued recommendations to ensure that u.s. transfer practices comply with applicable standards and do not result in the transfer of persons to face torture . on august 24 , 2009 , the special task force on interrogation and transfer polices issued its recommendations to the president , including with respect to the practice of rendition . however , renditions may be effectuated in the absence of extradition treaties , as well .
improving border and transportation security ( bts ) are essential strategies for improving andmaintaining homeland security . 107-56 ) ; highly specific actions to prevent immediate threats ( legislative activity concerning aviation security , visa policy , bioterrorism , and maritime security ) ; and a return to broader and more comprehensive approaches ( including the creation of the 9 / 11commission , and the recently passed intelligence reform bill ) . recent congressional actions concerning terrorism and border security fall into severalcategories including broad efforts to understand the terrorist threat ( including several commissions:gilmore , bremer , and hart - rudman ) ; structural changes to provide a proper framework for action ( enacting legislation , p.l .  ( 1 ) while in the immediate aftermath of 9 / 11 efforts primarilyconcentrated on an expanded federal role in aviation security ( in particular on the heightenedscreening of passengers and baggage ) , increasingly attention is being turned towards other modesof transportation . 107-296 , to create the department of homeland security ( dhs ) , andenacting the usa patriot act , p.l . transportation security involves securing the flow of people and goods alongthe nation's highways , railways , airways , and waterways . border security entails regulating the flow of traffic across thenation's borders so that dangerous and unwanted goods and people are detected and denied entry . the indications are that in both alegislative and oversight capacity , the 109th congress will be dealing with issues that confront bordersecurity and homeland security issues in a comprehensive and more integrated fashion . this requires a sophisticated border management system that balances the need for securing thenation's borders with facilitating the essential free flow of legitimate commerce , citizens , andauthorized visitors . this appendix provides summaries of the bts - related provisions of the 9 / 11 commissionrecommendations , ( 21 ) the intelligence reform and terrorism prevention act ( irtpa ) of 2004 , and a summary ofhspd - 11 . this report is intended as an overview of selected concepts and issues that may be of interestto the 109th congress , and should not be considered exhaustive . subtitle c of title iv concerns air cargo security and: requires tsa to develop bettertechnologies for air cargo security ; authorizes funding for equipment , research and development ; requires dhs to finalize its air cargo requirements within eight months ; and requires a pilot programusing blast - resistant containers . hspd - 11 is the administration's response to one of the 9 / 11 commissionrecommendations , and significant portions of the irtpa similarly reflect these recommendations . the president issued homeland security presidential directive ( hspd ) - 11 on august 27,2004 . in addition,doj's executive office for immigration review ( eoir ) plays a significant policy role through itsadjudicatory decisions on specific immigration cases . dhs's citizenship andimmigration services bureau ( uscis ) is charged with approving immigrant petitions . further , this subtitle alsocontains provisions: requiring tsa to develop a plan for implementing enhanced explosive detectionequipment ; preserving the anonymity of federal air marshals ; improving screener performance ; enhancing in - line baggage screening ; improving the security of pilot licenses ; improving biometrictechnology and technology to protect against the threat of shoulder fired missiles .
 ( 1 ) bse is a degenerative disease that is fatal to cattle , affecting their nervous system , and it has beenlinked to a rare but fatal human form of the disease which has occurred primarily in the unitedkingdom , where most bse cases also have been reported . this report provides a chronology of selected events leading up to and following thediscoveries of bovine spongiform encephalopathy ( bse , or "mad cow disease" ) in north america . as of this writing , 10 native cases have been confirmed on this continent , seven in canada and threein the united states . nor does itcover a number of policy developments that are not directly bse - related , but that nonetheless havearisen within the context of bse debate , such as a universal animal identification ( id ) program andcountry of original labeling ( cool ) for meats and other commodities . it does not contain entries for the introduction of the many bse - related billsintroduced into this or previous congresses , except for those in recent years where committee orfloor action has occurred or where markedly widespread attention has been focused . the following chronology is not intended to be comprehensive . it is intended to be a timelinefor selected regulatory , legal , and congressional developments that are frequently referenced in theongoing policy debate . u.s. and industry officials were forced to redouble their efforts , and agree to additionalconcessions , to regain market access , which japan finally granted in late july . theseinclude: crs report rs22345 , bse ( "mad cow disease" ) : a brief overview , by[author name scrubbed] ; crs report rl32414 , the private testing of mad cow disease: legal issues ,by stephen r. viã±a ; crs report rs21709 , mad cow disease and u.s . efforts to restore beef and cattle trade between the united states and canada have been morefruitful , although some u.s. cattlemen continue to express concerns about the potential impacts onu.s . efforts to fully restore beef and cattle trade encountered several setbacks in 2006 . beef trade , by charles e.hanrahan and [author name scrubbed] ; and crs report rl32199 , bovine spongiform encephalopathy ( bse or "mad cowdisease" ) : current and proposed safeguards , by [author name scrubbed] and sarah a.lister . in congress , mounting frustration led to the introduction of several measures aimed atcoercing japan into moving more quickly to reopen its border . other crs reports may provide more background and context for this policy debate . this brought to four canada's reportednative - born cases ( including the one found in the united states ) .  ( the senate had voted in early march to block the usda rule permitting canadiancattle to enter , but necessary house action did not occur. ) .  ( asnoted , the pending senate version of the fy2007 usda appropriation , h.r . 5675 ) demanding trade sanctions against japan havebeen introduced but likely will not be acted upon if the market does reopen as anticipated . at hearings and other venues , u.s. policymakers and industry officials had been expressingfrustration with the pace of these market - opening efforts .
in 1992 , the united states ratified the united nations framework convention on climate change ( unfccc ) which called on industrialized countries to take the lead in reducing greenhouse gases . since then , the bush administration has focused u.s. climate change policy on voluntary initiatives to reduce the growth in greenhouse gas emissions . over the past 16 years , a variety of voluntary and regulatory actions have been proposed or undertaken in the united states , including monitoring of utility carbon dioxide emissions , improved appliance efficiency , and incentives for developing renewable energy sources . this focus was particularly evident in the administration's 2006 climate action report ( car ) submitted under the provisions of the unfccc . further , in june 2008 , the senate considered legislation ( s. 3036 ) to enact an economy - wide cap - and - trade system to reduce u.s. greenhouse gas emissions . a cap - and - trade system is the favored approach of the incoming administration , and similar legislation may have a better chance of passage in the 111 th congress . current major regulatory programs that monitor or reduce greenhouse gas emissions are identified , along with their estimated effect on greenhouse gas emissions . in 2001 , president george w. bush rejected the kyoto protocol to the unfccc , which called for legally binding commitments by developed countries to reduce their greenhouse gas emissions . climate change is viewed as a global issue , but proposed responses generally require action at the national level . this report provides background on the evolution of u.s. climate change policy from ratification of the unfccc to the george w. bush administration's rejection of the kyoto protocol programs , to the present . the energy independence and security act ( eisa ) of 2007 directly addresses some climate change issues , but still generally focuses on energy supply and consumption . it should be noted that reductions from these programs combined represent about 3% of year 2000 greenhouse gas emissions , and total u.s. emissions have continued to grow: emissions increased approximately 3% between 2000 and 2005 ; emissions have grown approximately 17% since 1990 . the list of federal regulatory programs discussed here is primarily drawn from activities listed by the george w. bush administration in its most recent ( 2006 ) submission to unfccc . in this sense , they could be considered the results of a "no regrets" policy in which climate change effects resulting from related air quality and energy policies are included in the decision - making process on new or modified rules . finally , energy legislation enacted in the 109 th and 110 th congresses that could directly or indirectly reduce greenhouse gases is discussed . these regulatory programs were generally implemented to achieve energy or environmental goals other than the reduction of greenhouse gas emissions , but produced a concomitant emissions reduction . in its 2007 decision in massachusetts v. epa , the supreme court found that the environmental protection agency has the authority to regulate greenhouse gas emissions from motor vehicles under the clean air act . this will be a pivotal challenge to the 111 th congress's and the incoming administration's anticipated efforts to enact legislation to limit greenhouse gas emissions .
the consideration of a measure in the committee of the whole and in the house can be divided into five stages: ( 1 ) the house resolves itself into the committee of the whole ; ( 2 ) members engage in general debate on the measure ; ( 3 ) members offer , consider , and vote on amendments to the measure ; ( 4 ) the committee of the whole rises and reports back to the house with a recommendation ; and ( 5 ) the house votes on the recommendation and then on the measure itself . they can discuss legislation , propose changes to the pending text , and suggest actions that may facilitate deliberation or expedite decision making . members of the house of representatives have multiple opportunities to participate in the consideration of measures on the floor . an important parliamentary device designed to allow greater participation in debate is the committee of the whole ( formally , the committee of the whole house on the state of the union ) . the house considers most major measures in the committee of the whole ; in fact , house rules require revenue , appropriations , and authorization measures to be first considered in the committee of the whole ( house rule xviii , clause 3 ) . to achieve these legislative objectives , members rely on standard procedures and phraseology that have evolved over the course of congressional history . the house can agree to resolve itself into the committee of the whole in one of three ways: by a special rule , by unanimous consent , or by motion . finally , in very limited circumstances a member may make a motion to resolve into the committee of the whole to consider ( or further consider ) a bill , although it is not done in modern practice . the committee of the whole can be understood as the assembly in a different form ; it is a committee of the house composed of every representative that meets in the house chamber . typically , the house adopts a special rule , a simple resolution reported by the committee on rules , authorizing the speaker to declare the house resolved into the committee of the whole to consider a particular measure . various rules and procedures , discussed in this report , govern how and when members can participate in debate , offer amendments , make motions and requests , and take other actions in the committee of the whole . less frequently , a member might ask unanimous consent that the house resolve itself into the committee of the whole for consideration of a particular measure . after the house resolves itself into the committee of the whole to consider a particular bill or resolution , members engage in general debate on the measure . although there is variation in the language used by members to engage in these activities , the report also presents some examples of parliamentary phraseology . in either case , the house sets the procedural conditions under which the particular measure is considered in the committee of the whole . measures considered in the committee of the whole typically are subject to conditions governing debate and amendments that are specified by a special rule from the committee on rules or a unanimous consent agreement .
the act's stated purposes are to ( 1 ) ensure prompt and fair recovery of legitimate class actionclaims ; ( 2 ) reflect the purpose behind the constitution's diversity jurisdiction clause ; and ( 3 ) toencourage commercial innovation and consumer - friendly prices . theact sets out congress' findings describing in essentially these words the: ( 1 ) circumstances in whichclass actions are valuable to our legal system ; ( 2 ) abuses of the class action process that have harmedclass members with legitimate claims and defendants that have acted responsibly , adversely affectedinterstate commerce , and undermined public respect for our judicial system ; ( 3 ) the manner by whichclass members have been harmed by a number of actions taken by plaintiffs' lawyers , which providelittle or no benefit to class members as a whole , including ( i ) plaintiffs' lawyers receiving large fees,while class members are left with coupons or other awards of little or no value , ( ii ) unjustifiedrewards made to certain plaintiffs at the expense of other class members , and ( iii ) confusingpublished notices that prevent class members from being able to fully understand and effectivelyexercise their rights ; ( 4 ) abuses in class actions which undermine the national judicial system , thefree flow of interstate commerce , and the concept of diversity jurisdiction as intended by the framersof the united states constitution , in that state and local courts are ( i ) keeping cases of nationalimportance out of federal court , ( ii ) sometimes acting in ways that demonstrate bias againstout - of - state defendants , and ( iii ) making judgments that impose their view of the law on other statesand bind the rights of the residents of those states . short title . this section also states that it amends title 28 of the unitedstates code . the act may be cited asthe "class action fairness act of 2005. . findings and purposes of the act . proponents argue: class action process has been manipulated in recent years ; ( 14 ) u.s. companies have been flooded with labor and employment litigation , muchof which has been entirely without merit ; ( 15 ) proposed changes in the law will increase sanctions against lawyers who bringfrivolous claims to court . consumer class action bill of rights and improvedprocedures for interstate class actions . inparticular , section 3 would add the following: section 1711-class action definitions ( 1 ) class action - the term is defined to include any civil action filed in federal district courtunder rule 23 of the federal rules of civil procedure , as well as actions filed under similar rulesin state court that have been removed to federal court . s. 5 would add five newsections to 28 u.s.c . which are intended to provide greater protections for class members . notifications to appropriate federal and stateofficials this provision requires defendants to notify the appropriate state and federal official of theparticulars of any class action settlement and delays the effective date of the settlement until 90 daysafter they have done so .  ( 2 ) class counsel - the term is defined as "the persons who serve as the attorneys for the classmembers in a proposed or certified class action. .
india is a federal republic of more than one billion inhabitants . the bulk of executive powerrests with the prime minister and his or her cabinet ( the indian president is a ceremonial chief of statewith limited executive powers ) .  ( 2 ) the 543-seat lok sabha ( people's house ) is the locus of national power , with directly - elected representatives from each ofthe country's 28 states and seven union territories . most of india's prime ministers have come from the country'shindi - speaking northern regions and , until 2004 , all but one had been upper - caste hindus .  ( 20 ) since thenew government was seated , india and pakistan have agreed to increase bilateral counternarcoticscooperation ; to establish a hotline to reduce the threat of accidental nuclear war ; to continue mutualnotifications of missile launches ; to return their respective embassies to full strength ; and tore - establish consulates in bombay and karachi . a smaller upper house , the rajya sabha ( councilof states ) , may review , but not veto , most legislation , and has no power over the prime minister orthe cabinet .  ( 4 ) numerous analysts weighed in on the meaning of the complex electoral results .  ( 3 ) during april and may 2004 , india held a four - phase national election to seat a new loksabha .  ( 22 ) itremains unclear how the upa intends to address roiling separatist violence in several of india'snortheastern states . investor fears that a new coalition government including communists mightcurtail or halt india's economic reform and liberalization process apparently led to huge losses in thecountry's stock markets: bombay's benchmark sensex index lost 11% of its value on may 17 , thesecond - largest daily loss ever , and the value of india's largest companies reportedly declined by some$40 billion over seven days , with state - owned businesses slated for public sale taking the greatesthits . however , huge reversals for the incumbent nda - allied telugudesam party of the andhra pradesh state - - as well as for the bjp , which fell from 181 seats inparliament to only 138 - - were seen by many as evidence that india's rural poor were not persuadedby the nda's "india shining" campaign that sought to highlight the country's economic gains ( andhra pradesh's capital , hyderabad , has been touted as an information technologyboom - town ( 5 ) ) .  ( 23 ) . national and state legislators are elected to five - year terms .  ( 21 ) india also agreed toincrease bilateral defense ties with japan through periodic ministerial - level interaction .  ( 24 ) the congress - led government continues to state that it has noplans to contribute indian troops for service in iraq , although u.s. officials are reportedly seekingto "overcome" indian reservations . dixit has beenassigned to take the lead role in relations with china , replacing his predecessor , brajesh mishra , andthe world's two most populous countries have vowed to bolster defense and trade ties while movingforward on efforts to resolve outstanding territorial disputes . it also is notable that the bjp - led coalition received slightly more total votes thandid the congress - led alliance .
on december 17 , 2003 , the environmental protection agency ( epa ) issued proposed rules toaddress the effects of interstate transport of air pollutants on non - attainment of the national ambientair quality standards ( naaqs ) for fine particulates ( pm 2.5 ) and ozone ( specifically , the 8-hourstandard ) .  ( 1 ) the proposed interstate air quality ( iaq ) rule appeared in the federal register january30 , 2004 . for pm 2.5 , the proposed rule finds that the interstate transport of sulfur dioxide ( so 2 ) andnitrogen oxides ( nox ) from 28 states and the district of columbia contributes significantly todownwind non - attainment ; for ozone , the proposed rule finds that interstate transport of nox from25 states and the district of columbia contributes significantly to downwind non - attainment of the8-hour standard . states are to implement controls by may 31 , 2004 . epa estimates of regional nox and so2 caps and percentage reduction ( million tons ) source: proposed interstate air quality rule ( 69 federal register 4566-4650 ) based on the cost - effectiveness methodology , each of the affected states is assigned a statewide "emissions budget. . with the iaq rule , epa proposes a region - wide emissions cap for nox and so 2 to be implemented in two phases - - 2010 and 2015 .  ( 2 ) inthe nox sip call , epa found 21 states and the district of columbia significantly contributed to non - attainment of the 1-hour ozone naaqs . however , epa strongly believes that the regional emissions cap can be most cost - effectivelyachieved through a regional cap - and - trade program focused on electric generators and intends onissuing a proposed cap - and - trade model program rule to encourage that option .  ( 3 ) to remedy thesituation , epa set statewide emissionsbudgets for nox emissions , and recommended that states achieve those budgets through "highlycost - effective" controls on electric generators and large industrial facilities under a regional cap andtrade program . to remedy the situation , the proposed rule generally follows the methodology epa employed in an earlier regulation that addressed interstate transport of ozone pollution , the nox sip call . each covered state would be required to submit a revised state implementationplan ( sip ) identifying measures it intended to implement to achieve its emissions budget .  ( 39 ) other potential categories of benefits are notassessed . the difference between the costsand benefits of the proposed rule is an order of magnitude in favor of the benefits . however , ifpromulgated , the proposed rule would have far - reaching effects in terms ofeconomics , environmental impact , and policy . based on the methodology employed in the proposedrule , epa's estimates of emissions under the caps are provided in table 1 , along with percentreductions from the basecase . this number is based primarily on one benefit - - reduced premature fatalities amongadults resulting from reduced pm 2.5 . with much of the public focus on the accompanying proposed mercury rule , theinterstate air quality rule has not received much attention .  ( 41 ) the twoproposed rules are integrated in such a way that the technologies reducing so 2 andnox emissions under the interstate air quality rule also reduce enough hg emissionsto meet the 2010 reduction requirements of the proposed mercury rule .
on august 11 , 2006 , revised grazing regulations of the bureau of land management ( blm ) took effect ( 43 c.f.r . congress also has examined the development of the 2006 regulatory changes and related policy options through committee oversight . the 1995 changes were the result of a several - year process of evaluating ideas and shaping alternatives , and occurred in the midst of a decades - long dispute over the ownership , management , and use of federal rangelands . the agency also considered related policy changes , but it appears that policy changes are no longer being considered . among the changes made in 1995 , many of which were reexamined by blm during the development of the 2006 regulatory changes , are those that: separated grazing preference from permitted use , so that a permittee's preference for receiving a grazing permit was not tied to a specific amount of grazing based on historic levels ( described as animal unit months , or aums ) ; allowed permittees up to three years of nonuse of their permits ; authorized suspending or canceling a permit if a permittee is convicted of violating certain state or federal environmental laws ; eliminated the express requirement that a permittee be engaged in the livestock business ; replaced the term affected interest with interested public ; allowed conservation use for the term of a grazing permit , thereby excluding livestock grazing from all or a portion of an allotment ; required title of permanent structural improvements to be held in the name of the united states ; required that water rights for livestock grazing be held in the name of the united states , to the extent allowed by state law ; imposed a surcharge on a permittee who allows livestock not owned by the permittee or the permittee's children to graze on public land ; eliminated grazing advisory boards and replaced them with the broader interest resource advisory councils ; and adopted rangeland management standards called fundamentals of rangeland health . the previous revision of grazing regulations culminated in comprehensive changes effective august 21 , 1995 . part 4100 ) . congress considered many of the 1995 changes as part of legislative proposals or committee oversight . some of the regulations have been enjoined . the 1995 changes were highly controversial , with criticism from many ranching interests that those new rules weakened grazing privileges and would reduce livestock grazing on federal lands , and from environmental organizations that the changes did not go far enough in protecting public lands . supporters saw the changes as improving resource and range management and broadening participation in public land decisionmaking . the court struck down the rule pertaining to conservation use for the term of a permit on the grounds that a grazing permit was for grazing and the secretary could more appropriately accomplish conservation use through the land use planning process . the regulations , challenged on their face , were upheld by the courts as not exceeding the authority of the secretary , with one exception . among them are changes to allow shared title to range improvements , allow private acquisition of water rights , reduce requirements for public involvement , modify the administrative appeals process , broaden the definition of grazing preference , change the timeframe and procedures for remedying rangeland health problems , remove the limit on permit nonuse , and eliminate conservation use grazing permits .
congress might consider reforms to the nation's immigration system , and , thus , the detention of noncitizens ( aliens ) in the united states may be an issue . congressional interest in the policy of detaining noncitizens in the united states while determining whether noncitizens should be removed from the united states tends to be varied . for example , as the department of homeland security ( dhs ) expands programs to locate removable aliens from jails throughout the country , dhs may need additional detention beds in areas of the united states where traditionally there has not been a need for detention space . for example , while some want to increase the categories of aliens who are detained and increase the amount of detention space , others want to create alternatives to detention and exempt asylum seekers from mandatory detention . the immigration and nationality act ( ina ) provides broad authority to detain aliens while awaiting a determination of whether they should be removed from the united states and mandates that certain categories of aliens are subject to mandatory detention ( i.e. , the aliens must be detained ) by dhs . it begins with a discussion of the authority to detain noncitizens while awaiting a determination of whether the noncitizen is removable from the united states . the report also presents general policy issues surrounding detention of aliens , including concerns about the number of aliens subject to mandatory detention ; the justness of mandatory detention , especially as it is applied to asylum seekers arriving without proper documentation ; and the proper limits on the length of time in detention for aliens who have been ordered removed but cannot be returned to their home country . in addition , immigration enforcement activities affect the need for and allocation of detention resources . the bill would have allowed dhs to detain indefinitely , subject to six - month reviews , an alien under orders of removal who could not be removed if ( 1 ) there was a significant likelihood that the alien would be removed in the reasonably foreseeable future ; ( 2 ) the alien would have been removed but for the alien's refusal to cooperate with the dhs secretary's identification and removal efforts ; ( 3 ) the alien had a highly contagious disease that posed a public safety threat ; ( 4 ) release would have had serious adverse foreign policy consequences ; ( 5 ) release would have threatened national security ; ( 6 ) release would have threatened the safety of the community , and the alien had either been convicted of one or more aggravated felonies or other designated crimes or been convicted of one or more crimes of violence and due to a mental condition or personality disorder was likely to engage in future acts of violence ; or ( 7 ) release would have threatened the safety of the community , and the alien has been convicted of at least one aggravated felony . the report continues with a discussion of the resources for immigration detention and concludes with a discussion of legislation in the 112 th congress related to detention . other detained aliens include those who are arrested in the united states for being illegally present , or who arrived at a port - of - entry without proper documentation ( e.g. , fraudulent or invalid visas , or no documentation ) , but most of these aliens are quickly returned to their country of origin through a process known as expedited removal .
following the creationof the intelligence oversight committees in the senate ( 1976 ) and in the house ( 1977 ) , congressconsidered charter legislation that included , among other proposals , one that would have created theposition of an nid to manage the ic . there have been a variety of proposals concerning the nid ( 4 ) position . boren and mccurdy failed to win adoption of their legislation in the face ofopposition by the department of defense ( dod ) and the congressional armed services committees . their legislation also would have created a separatedirector of cia . confronted by strong opposition to the overall legislation , which also included language governingcovert actions , the committees did not report the respective bills . in 1992 , senator david boren and representative david mccurdy , respective chairmen of the senate select committee on intelligence ( ssci ) and house permanent select committee onintelligence ( hpsci ) , introduced legislation creating the nid position and giving the position theauthority to program and reprogram funds . in december 2002 , the congressional joint inquiry into intelligence community activities before and after the terrorist attacks of september 11 , 2001 ( 5 ) , recommended that a new cabinetlevel senate - confirmed nid position be established , and that a separate director be named to managethe cia .  ( 14 ) from the prospective of proponents , failure to establish an empowered nid with hiring , firing and budget authority will leave the ic with divided management of intelligence capabilities ; lack ofcommon standards and practices across the foreign - domestic intelligence divide ; structural barriersthat undermine the performance of joint intelligence work ; and a weak capacity to set priorities andmove resources . some critics have voiced concern about the 9 / 11 commission's recommendations to locate the office of the nid in the executive office of the president .  ( 20 ) they also expressconcern that congress will experience greater difficulty in conducting oversight of the ic becausethe proximity of the nid to the white house will more frequently raise the issue of executiveprivilege .  ( 13 ) some proponents add what theycharacterize as a third essential authority - - the powerto set standards for the ic's information infrastructure and personnel .  ( 6 ) . a presidentially selected deputy would have managed the cia .  ( 12 ) they also argue that an nid must be empowered with two authorities the dci now lacks: the authority to hire and remove ic agency heads in consultation with the defense secretary ( currently,the secretary of defense selects principal ic agency heads for the three combat support agencies - - nsa , nro , and nga - - with the concurrence of the dci ) ; and the authority to move funding andpersonnel within or across ic agencies at any time during the year of execution with congressionalapproval . some critics contend that the 9 / 11 commission's concept of the ndi would shift too much influence over the ic to the defense department , because dod would retain most of its roles underthe commission's proposal and , they say , stand to gain influence . they argue the ic's three largest agencies - - nsa , nro and nga - - are combat support agencies that collect and disseminate intelligence affecting tactical militaryoperations .
the north american free trade agreement ( nafta ) , as approved and implemented bycongress , entered into force on january 1 , 1994 .  ( 78 ) since mexico is not currently a party to the wto agp , its procurement obligations with the unitedstates are governed solely by nafta . in addition to the wto and nafta , many of the other free trade agreements ( ftas ) thatthe united states has in effect contain provisions with respect to government procurement . procurement obligations between the united states andcanada had been , prior to nafta , contained in the u.s. - canada free trade agreement , whose$25,000 threshold for federal goods contracts has been carried forward into the naftaagreement .  ( 77 ) chapter 10 of nafta contains extensive procurementobligations , which generally follow and build upon provisions contained in the 1979 gattprocurement code .  ( 79 ) in addition to exceptions in individual schedules , nafta procurement obligations , likethose of the agp , are subject to national security and general exceptions .  ( 83 ) moreover , our most recent ftas such as the u.s. - - chile fta,u.s. - - singapore fta , u.s. - - morocco fta and the u.s. - - australia fta ( 84 ) each contain procurementprovisions that closely track those provided for by the agp .  ( 101 ) as amended by the uruguay round agreements act , the taaalso authorizes the president to waive the prohibition on procurement of products from a non - partycountry or instrumentality where the country has: ( 1 ) agreed to apply transparent and competitiveprocedures to its government procurement equivalent to those in the agreement and ( 2 ) maintainsand enforces effective prohibitions on bribery and other corrupt practices in connection with itsgovernment procurement .  ( 103 ) at this time , however , no statutory changes have been madeto implement the procurement chapters of the u.s. ftas with jordan , chile or singapore . for example , the u.s. - - israel fta contains provisions for the waiver of any buy national provisionsfor contracts with a value greater than $50,000 .  ( 102 ) specific amendments to the taa have been made through the years to implementprocurement obligations contained in u.s. ftas . furthermore , the dominicanrepublic - central american free trade agreement ( dr - cafta ) also contains provisions relatingto government procurement that are similar to those contained in the u.s. - morocco andu.s. - australia ftas ( i.e. , without a national security exception ) , however , while implementinglegislation has been enacted for dr - cafta , the agreement has not yet taken effect .  ( 97 ) specifically , the statute permits the president to: the president may designate a foreign country for purposes of the taa only if he determinesthat the country or instrumentality: is a party to one of the wto agreement on government procurement or thenafta and will provide appropriate reciprocal competitive government procurement opportunitiesto u.s. products and suppliers of such products ; is a country or instrumentality , other than a major industrial country , which willotherwise assume wto procurement obligations and will provide such opportunities to suchproducts and suppliers ; is a country or instrumentality , other than a major industrial country , which willprovide such opportunities to such products and suppliers ; or is a least developed country .
congress recently completed action on the bush administration's fy2004 supplemental budgetrequest to fund continuing military operations and reconstruction in iraq and afghanistan . some members of congress have urged the president to include thecosts of current and future operations in iraq and afghanistan in the department of defense's ( dod's ) regular appropriations , arguing that these are now ongoing operations that should beplanned for and funded in the annual defense budget .  ( 1 ) a majorissue in the congressional debate on this , and other such supplementals of the past , is whethermilitary and peacekeeping operations should be funded with supplemental requests or via the regulardefense appropriations process . this report examines 46 cases since fy1990 in which congress approved funding for combat or peacekeeping operations using regular appropriations , supplemental appropriations , or acombination of the two . in initial post - combat peacekeeping operations,however , congress has tended to rely on a combination of supplemental and regular appropriations . others prefer supplementals due to theunpredictability of military and peacekeeping circumstances in iraq and afghanistan . as peacekeeping operations have become ongoing , congress has switched to using regularappropriations .  ( 2 ) infy1995 , when the united states first launchedairstrikes in support of u.n. peacekeepers , dod used a combination of supplemental appropriationsand fy1995 regular appropriations to fund combat operations .  ( 3 ) except for funds appropriated forafghanistan in the fy2003 consolidated appropriations resolution , both operations have beenfunded to date using supplemental appropriations , including the recently enacted fy2004supplemental . according to the president , the united states concluded major military operations inafghanistan in december , 2001 and in iraq on may 1 , 2003 . examining the funding patterns for combat operations in the first gulf war , somalia , haiti,kosovo , afghanistan , and operation iraqi freedom shows they were all funded initially withsupplemental appropriations . although the president has declared the end of major combat in both operations , lowintensity conflict is still prevalent , making it unclear whether iraq and afghanistan can yet bereferred to as ongoing peacekeeping operations . table 1 shows that since 1990 , congress generally has funded combatoperations with supplemental appropriations . thisunpredictability , they argue , makes it extremely difficult to estimate the costs of either type ofoperation in advance . thus , although supplementalappropriations were not used to fund the united states' initial involvement in bosnia , congress didturn to supplemental appropriations to fund combat and later peacekeeping operations after the initialhumanitarian airlift . table 1 suggests that in the past decade , congress generally has funded combat operations withsupplemental appropriations and ongoing peacekeeping operations with regular appropriations . in each case , the president requested supplemental funding shortlyafter operations were underway , and congress approved the requests within months . eachoperation , however , has gone through an interim period of initial post - combat peacekeeping in whichcongress has used different combinations of supplemental and regular appropriations . for more specific information on funding for kosovo , see crs report rs20161 ( pdf ) , kosovo military operations: costs and congressional action on funding ,by [author name scrubbed] . going forward , congress might designate a pointat which an operation becomes ongoing , and thus merits funding in the regular appropriationsprocess .
the 109th congress is considering legislation to reauthorize the block grant of temporaryassistance for needy families ( tanf ) for five years . the 108th congress and its predecessor , the107th congress , both inconclusively debated a long - term authorization for tanf and relatedprograms . the program has received 11 short - term extensions since the original funding authorityfor tanf expired on september 30 , 2002 . 240 , introduced by house republican leaders and making its waythrough house committees of jurisdiction , is similar to bills that passed the house in 2002 and 2003 . that bill was approved by the house ways and means committee's subcommittee on humanresources on march 15 , and awaits full committee action , as well as consideration by othercommittees that have jurisdictions over parts of the bill . the senate finance committee has reported an original bill , s. 667 ( s.rept.109-51 ) .  ( 1 ) . 109-68 ) funds the programthrough december 31 , 2005 . s. 667would add $6 billion over five years to current levels of mandatory child care funding . the latest extension ( p.l . it does not address non - tanf provisionsof both bills , such as revisions to the child care and development fund , child supportenforcement , abstinence education , and transitional medicaid . the table provides references to current law provisions in the social securityact ( ssa ) . h.r.240 would add $1 billion over five years above current levels of mandatory child carefunding . 240 have many similarities , with both extendingbasic tanf funding at current levels through fy2010 and incorporating president bush's proposalto provide categorical "marriage promotion" grants . both bills also raise tanf work participationstandards , though the two differ in terms of how much more work would be required and whatactivities count toward the participation standards . 240 is the level of funding for child care . it also denotes the section number in each of the bills in which the provision is found . s. 667 and h.r . one of the key differences betweens . this report provides a comparison of the tanfprovisions of s. 667 and h.r . 240 ( tanfprovisions ) . table 1 provides a detailed comparison of the tanf provisions of s. 667 and h.r . table 1.comparison of current law with s. 667 and h.r . h.r . 240 . 667 and h.r . 240 .
these laws are deemed consistent with u.s. international obligations provided they conform to the trade remedy provisions agreed to as part of the uruguay round of multilateral trade negotiations ( 1986-1994 ) and other trade agreements to which the united states is a party . the united states and many of its trading partners use trade remedy laws to lessen the adverse impact of various trade practices on domestic industries , producers , and workers . this report will , first , discuss congressional interest in these laws , and give an overview of recent legislation to amend the laws in congress . second , it describes ad and cvd laws , procedures and investigations , and provides a statistical overview of existing cases . many in congress support trade remedy laws and actions because they can assist in mitigating the adverse effects of international trade on domestic industry , producers , and workers . acting on legislation in a manner consistent with previously agreed upon multilateral commitments , balancing that action with the need to regulate and minimize unfair trade practices , and assisting domestic import - competing industries to become more internationally viable presents congress with policy challenges . some workers in the service sector are also feeling the effects of import competition due to increased offshore outsourcing . in order to obtain relief , the usitc must determine that a domestic industry is substantially injured by import surges . others believe that trade remedy actions ( the vast majority of which are ad or cvd investigations and orders ) in and of themselves introduce inefficiencies in both domestic and international economies that result in decreased economic welfare . third , safeguard statutes and investigations are discussed . these factors , among others , are reasons that many in congress support strengthening these laws and insist that the united states must preserve the ability to "rigorously enforce its trade laws" in international negotiations . some key industries may currently be facing injury from increased import competition , which can lead to factory closures and loss of domestic manufacturing jobs . although individual u.s. safeguard actions ( in particular , the 2002 action on steel ) have been the subject of intense debate , on the whole , many economists find safeguard measures less objectionable than ad or cvd actions . in addition , in a global trading environment in which many domestic manufacturers ( makers of shoes and furniture , for example ) also import a portion of their product lines , the distinctions between u.s. domestic producers and foreign exporters have become less clear . competitive advantage and a liberalized world trading system create both winners and losers in domestic economies . some reasons for this include their temporary nature , the requirement that industries take steps to positively adjust to import competition , the higher injury threshold , and the requirement of presidential action . for example , some in congress have become concerned about the additional costs accruing to u.s. producers who use imports of intermediate goods subject to ad and cvd orders in finished products , such as steel , to manufacture finished products such as automobiles and buildings . finally , an appendix provides a chart outlining briefly all u.s. trade remedy statutes , major actors , and remedies presented .
4 ( the welfarereauthorization bill ) with current law . 4 , alsoincluded many changes to the child support enforcement ( cse ) program , a component of thegovernment's social safety net . during the 108th congress , the house of representatives and the senate finance committeeapproved two different versions of a bill that would have reauthorized and revised the temporaryassistance for needy families ( tanf ) block grant . in 1996 , congress passed significant changes to the cse programas part of its reform of welfare . thesenate finance committee reported a substitute version of the bill in september 2003 ( s.rept.108-162 ) . 4 ; disagreement aroseregarding amendments to the bill , a motion to limit debate was overruled , and the senate did notvote on passage of the bill . 4 was passed by the house in february 2003 . 4 passed the house but not the senate during the 108th congress . on march 29-april 1 , 2004 , the senate debated h.r . table 1 provides a detailed and comprehensive comparison of the cse provisions of thehouse - passed and senate finance committee reported versions of h.r . nevertheless , it seems likely that the109th congress will consider the substantive and numerous cse changes that were included in h.r.4 as part of any new tanf reauthorization bill . comparison of current law with h.r.4 , "personal responsibility , work , and family promotionact of 2003" as passed by the house and "personal responsibility and individual development for everyone act ( pride ) " as reported by the senatefinance committee: child support provisions source: congressional research service . there is some concern that the widely favored cse provisions that were in h.r.4 were not debated as a separate stand - alone bill . this legislation , h.r . the table specifies the section number in each of the bills inwhich the provision is found . h.r . as noted earlier , h.r . table 1 .
on september 14 , 2012 , the president reported to congress , "consistent with" the war powers resolution , that on september 12 , 2012 , he ordered deployed to libya "a security force from the u.s. africa command" to "support the security of u.s. personnel in libya. . this action was taken in response to the attack on the u.s. "diplomatic post in benghazi , libya" that had killed four america citizens , including u.s . the president added on september 13 , 2012 , that "an additional security force arrived in yemen in response to security threats there. . other military operations reported by the president include the deployment of u.s. combat - equipped military personnel to uganda "to serve as advisors to regional forces that are working to apprehend or remove joseph kony and other senior lord's resistance army ( lra ) leaders from the battlefield and to protect local populations. . on june 15 , 2012 , president reported to congress "consistent with" the war powers resolution , a consolidated report regarding various deployments of u.s. armed forces equipped for combat . he further stated that: "although these security forces are equipped for combat , these movements have been undertaken solely for the purpose of protecting american citizens and property. . in the efforts in support of u.s. counterterrorism ( ct ) objectives against al - qa'ida , the taliban , and associated forces , he noted that u.s. forces were engaged in afghanistan in the above effort were "approximately 90,000. . the total number of u.s. military personnel deployed for this mission is "approximately 90," and elements of these u.s. forces have been sent to "forward locations in the lra - affected areas of the republic of south sudan , the democratic republic of the congo , and the central african republic. . he noted that the "u.s. military has taken direct action in somalia against members of al - qa'ida , including those who are also members of al - shabaab , who are engaged in efforts to carry out terrorist attacks against the united states and our interests. . these security forces will remain in libya and in yemen , he noted , "until the security situation becomes such that they are no longer needed. . with regard to other counter - terrorism operations , the president stated that the united states had deployed "u.s. combat - equipped forces to assist in enhancing the ct capabilities of our friends and allies including special operations and other forces for sensitive operations in various locations around the world . the president also reported that presently the united states was contributing "approximately 817 military personnel: to the nato - led kosovo force ( kfor ) in kosovo. . the president further stated that the u.s. military had been "working closely with the yemini government to operationally and ultimately eliminate the terrorist threat posed by al - qa - ida in the arabian peninsula ( aqap ) , the most active and dangerous affiliate of al - qa'ida today. . these u.s. forces "will not engage lra forces except in self - defense. .
endangered and threatened species — and the law that protects them , the 1973 endangered species act ( esa , 16 u.s.c . the most common cause of species' decline is habitat loss or alteration . because of strong support and strong opposition , esa has not been reauthorized since the last authorization expired in 1992 .  ) — are controversial , in part , because dwindling species are often harbingers of resource scarcity . congress faces the issue of how to balance these interests ( which may fall on various sides of any given species controversy ) with the protection of endangered and threatened species and , as stated in esa , "the ecosystems upon which endangered species and threatened species depend. . consequently , congressional efforts in the 110 th congress focused on addressing specific controversial features of esa and on oversight of concerns such as the science used for making decisions and designation of critical habitat . esa has been among the most contentious environmental laws , because of its strict substantive provisions , which can affect the use of both federal and nonfederal lands and resources . habitat loss occurs due to development , changes in land management practices , competition from invasive species , and other factors , nearly all related to economic , political , or social interests . increasing numbers of animal and plant species face possible extinction . in the 109 th congress , there were several unsuccessful attempts to enact comprehensive legislation that would have reauthorized the esa . §§ 1531 , et seq . esa reauthorization has been on the legislative agenda since the funding authorization expired in 1992 , and bills have been introduced in each subsequent congress to address various aspects of endangered species protection . others argue ( and the courts have largely agreed ) that fws and nmfs have misinterpreted and failed to enforce the current statute . issues for the 110 th congress included effects of esa on private and federal land use , promotion of species recovery , agency use of scientific information , specific regional resource conflicts , and other matters . in the absence of federal regulatory action on climate change , environmental groups are eyeing use of the endangered species act ( among other approaches ) as a means of restricting greenhouse gas emissions . below are descriptions of some of the issues that were considered , either in oversight or legislation . with limited exceptions , fws or nmfs must designate ch at the time a species is listed . 1422 ; s. 2223 , as reported by the senate committee on finance on october 24 , 2007 ( s.rept . there are also disagreements over the value and timing of ch designation . there may be little information on many species facing extinction , and only limited personnel or funds available to conduct studies on many of the less charismatic species , or those of little known economic import . the 110 th congress considered several proposals to provide compensation to landowners who voluntarily provide habitat to threatened or endangered species: s. 700 ; h.r . fws and nmfs developed an interagency cooperative policy on information standards under the endangered species act . however , some critics argue that ch designation places undue burdens on landowners or that it has little conservation benefit .
the kingdom of saudi arabia's relations with the united states , its stability , and its future trajectory are subjects of continuing congressional interest . u.s. - saudi security cooperation and u.s. concern for the continuing global availability of saudi energy supplies continue to anchor official bilateral relations as they have for decades . in particular , saudi leadership transitions , trends in global oil prices , saudi budget pressures and reform plans , aggressive transnational terrorist threats , assertive saudi foreign policies , and saudi - iranian tensions have fueled recent congressional discussions . in this context , the trump administration's efforts to reinvigorate u.s. - saudi relations have drawn increased public attention and have generated debate . previously , the obama administration had differed with saudi leaders over iran , the iranian nuclear program , and conflicts in syria , iraq , and yemen . from 2012 through 2016 , the obama administration notified congress of proposed foreign military sales to saudi arabia with a potential value of more than $45 billion . amid some continuing differences on these issues , bilateral ties have been defined since 2017 by arms sale proposals , yemen - related security cooperation , and shared concerns about iran , al qaeda , and the islamic state organization ( is , aka isil / isis or the arabic acronym da'esh ) . this package of previously discussed and newly proposed defense sales is intended to address saudi needs for maritime and coastal security improvements , air force training and support , cybersecurity and communications upgrades , missile and air defenses , and enhanced border security and counterterrorism capabilities ( see " arms sales , security assistance , and training " below and appendix b ) . president donald trump and saudi officials announced agreement on some of these sales and others during the president's may 2017 trip to the kingdom , as part of a package that may potentially be worth more than $110 billion . u.s. policy initiatives have long sought to help saudi leaders address economic and security challenges in ways consistent with u.s. interests . u.s. support to the kingdom's operations in yemen and saudi use of u.s. - origin weaponry has drawn new attention to congressionally reviewed arms sales and questions of authorization . the succession changes and crown prince mohammad bin salman's efforts to assert his role as the shaper of the kingdom's national security and economic policies have resulted in an apparent consolidation of authority under one individual and sub - branch of the family that is unprecedented in the kingdom since its founding . president obama maintained u.s. logistical support for saudi operations in yemen but decided in 2016 to reduce u.s. personnel support and limit certain u.s. arms transfers . shifts in saudi foreign policy toward a more assertive posture — typified by the kingdom's military operations in neighboring yemen and a series of regional moves intended to counteract iranian initiatives — have accompanied the post - 2015 leadership changes . concerns about yemeni civilian deaths in saudi airstrikes , the operation's contribution to grave humanitarian conditions , and gains by al qaeda and islamic state supporters have led some members of congress and u.s. officials to urge all parties to seek a prompt settlement .
the federal budget process involves both congress and the executive branch . the practice of impoundment reflects this sharing of powers between the branches in the implementation of the federal budget . the term "impoundment" refers to executive actions to withhold or delay the spending of funds provided in law . this changed during the nixon administration ( 1969-1974 ) , when impoundment of funds developed into a major conflict , eventually involving the courts as well as congress and the president . the term "rescission" denotes one type of impoundment , that involving permanent cancellation of the funds . this report begins by reviewing the framework for handling rescissions established by the impoundment control act of 1974 ( ica , 88 stat . the constitution provides in article i that "no money shall be drawn from the treasury but in consequence of appropriations made by law.... " article ii stipulates that the president "shall take care that the laws be faithfully executed. . while instances of presidential impoundment date back to the early 19 th century , presidents usually sought accommodation rather than confrontation with congress . 332 ) and by amendments to it in 1987 ( 101 stat . a section with review and analysis of data on rescission requests and outcomes pursuant to the 1974 law follows , including comparisons among the respective administrations . 1200 ) was in force . president george w. bush sent no formal ica rescission requests to congress , but some controversy developed over his use of "cancellation statements" proposing spending reductions . attention then turns to actions which took place during the brief period that the line item veto act of 1996 ( liva , p.l . 786 ) . according to an assessment of congressional power over impoundments since 1974 , coauthored by a former director of the congressional budget office ( cbo ) , "although the courts did much to curb presidential impoundments , through title x of the new budget act , congress also helped itself to recapture its influence over the impoundment of funds. . 100-119 ) that also included changes in the gramm - rudman - hollings act , congress enacted several other budget process reforms as well . the impoundment control act has been in effect for over 35 years . in the first few years following enactment of the 1974 law , congress approved presidential requests in a number of separate rescission bills . some 90% of the rescissions proposed by president carter involved defense programs , including the cancellation of the b - 1 bomber . in terms of the percentage of the total dollar amount requested during the administration and approved by congress , president ford had less overall success ( 16% ) than any of his successors . in particular , president ford attempted to rescind funding that congress had added to the president's budget , mainly involving domestic social programs , but the effort met with limited success . during the carter administration , the same political party ( democrats ) controlled both houses of congress along with the white house . in addition , absent a specific request from the president , congress of its own accord may initiate rescission actions , by cancelling previously appropriated funds in a subsequent law .
 ( 3 ) enacting statutory rights for whistleblowers and establishing new executive agencies toprotect those rights has not produced the protections that some expected .  ( 1 ) over the years , agency employees have received credit for revealing problems of defense costoverruns , unsafe nuclear power plant conditions , questionable drugs approved for marketing,contract illegalities and improprieties , and regulatory corruption . national security whistleblowers wereexempted from the civil service reform act of 1978 and the whistleblower protection act of 1989 . individual members and congressionalcommittees have attempted to provide long - term protections to whistleblowers , enabling them toprovide the kinds of agency information that congress wants without costs and injuries to theirgovernment careers . some protections are available in statutes passed in recent years , including the intelligencecommunity whistleblower protection act of 1998 . as explained in this report,the office of special counsel , the merit systems protection board , and the federal circuit - - theagencies created by congress to safeguard the rights of whistle blowers - - have not in many casesprovided the anticipated protections to federal employees . the purpose of this report is to explore the statutory and political protections available tonational security whistleblowers . in 1978 , a senate panel found that the fear of reprisal "renders intra - agency communications a sham,and compromises not only the employee , management , and the code of ethics , but also theconstitutional function of congressional oversight itself. . first , an examination of the civil service reform act and thewhistleblower protection act will explain why national security whistleblowers were excluded fromthe protections provided in those statutes . agency whistleblowers operate within a system of mixed messages . on the one hand , thecode of ethics adopted by congress in 1958 directs all government employees to "expose corruptionwherever discovered. . second , to the extent that those statutes are consideredmodels to protect national security whistleblowers , the experience of the office of special counsel,the merit systems protection board , and the federal circuit is relevant in evaluating protections fornational security whistleblowers .  ( 2 ) on the other hand , exposingcorruption can result in their being fired , transferred , reprimanded , denied promotion , or harassed . this conflict between the branches is seen in the issuance of executive orders by presidentstheodore roosevelt and william howard taft in 1902 and 1909 and the resulting legislation - - thelloyd - lafollette act of 1912 - - adopted by congress to maintain access to agency information . presidents may decide to centralize control of agency information by requiring the agencyhead to approve the release of any information . whistleblower activity is often viewed as a struggle between the executive and legislativebranches . members of congress regularly express a need toobtain information from employees within the agency , without seeking the approval of the agencyhead . theconstitutionality of the lloyd - lafollette act continues to be challenged today by the justicedepartment . congress passed legislation in 1978 to abolish the civil service commission and create suchnew institutions as the office of personnel management ( opm ) , the merits systems protectionboard ( mspb ) , and the office of special counsel ( osc ) .  ( 45 ) the legislative history of the civil service reform act anticipated that federal agencywhistleblowers would report wrongdoing not only to their supervisors but to congress , the public,and the press .
the logan act , designed to cover relations between private citizens of the united states and foreign governments , has prompted much controversy as to its scope and effect in its more than 200 years . as amended , the act states: any citizen of the united states , wherever he may be , who , without authority of the united states , directly or indirectly commences or carries on any correspondence or intercourse with any foreign government or any officer or agent thereof , in relation to any disputes or controversies with the united states , or to defeat the measures of the united states , shall be fined under this title or imprisoned not more than three years , or both . described as either a "paper dragon or sleeping giant" by one commentator , proclaimed to be possibly unconstitutional by others , it represents a combination of legal and policy factors in both domestic and international concerns . this section shall not abridge the right of a citizen to apply , himself or his agent , to any foreign government or the agents thereof for redress of any injury which he may have sustained from such government or any of its agents or subjects . because the united states had not assisted the french revolutionaries to their satisfaction and because the united states had ratified the jay treaty with great britain , the french government authorized plunderings of american merchant ships . otherwise , there do not appear to have been any substantial changes in the act since its original enactment on january 30 , 1799 , as 1 stat . three of these issues involve the constitutionality of the act , its application in this situation to members of congress , and its current viability . after the french revolution , difficulties developed between the federalist administration of the united states and the various revolutionary governments of france . this mission resulted in the xyz letters controversy , and its failure led to such strong anti - france feelings in the united states that preparations for war were begun by the congress . it is possible that this interest will result in congressional consideration of whether the act should be repealed or retained . the house of representatives passed the bill on january 17 , 1799 , and the senate passed it on january 25 , 1799 . representative roger griswold of connecticut introduced a resolution in congress to prevent actions similar to logan's: resolved , that a committee be appointed to inquire into the expediency of amending the act entitled "an act in addition to the act for the punishment of certain crimes against the united states," so far as to extend the penalties , if need be , to all persons , citizens of the united states , who shall usurp the executive authority of this government , by commencing or carrying on any correspondence with the governments of any foreign prince or state , relating to controversies or disputes which do or shall exist between such prince or state , and the united states .  , that if any person , being a citizen of the united states , or in any foreign country , shall , without the permission or authority of the government of the united states , directly or indirectly , commence or carry on any verbal or written correspondence or intercourse with any foreign government , or any officer or agent thereof , relating to any dispute or controversy between any foreign government and the united states , with an intent to influence the measures or conduct of the government having disputes or controversies with the united states , as aforesaid ; or of any person , being a citizen of or resident within , the united states , and not duly authorized shall counsel , advise , aid or assist , in any such correspondence with intent as aforesaid , he or they shall be deemed guilty of a high misdemeanor ; and , on conviction before any court of the united states having jurisdiction thereof , shall be punished by a fine not exceeding — thousand dollars , and by imprisonment during a term not less than — months , not exceeding — years .
during the cold war , the u.s. nuclear arsenal contained many types of delivery vehicles for nuclear weapons , including short - range missiles and artillery for use on the battlefield , medium - range missiles and aircraft that could strike targets beyond the theater of battle , short - and medium - range systems based on surface ships , long - range missiles based on u.s. territory and submarines , and heavy bombers that could threaten soviet targets from their bases in the united states . the report not only reaffirms the basic contours of the current u.s. force structure and the ongoing modernization programs , it also calls for the development of a new low - yield warhead for deployment on trident ii ( d - 5 ) missiles . while some programs have been open to scrutiny , congress has continued to support funding for most aspects of the ongoing modernization programs . it then offers details about each category of delivery vehicle — land - based intercontinental ballistic missiles ( icbms ) , submarine launched ballistic missiles ( slbms ) , and heavy bombers — focusing on their current deployments and ongoing and planned modernization programs . the trump administration emphasized its continuing support for the u.s. nuclear arsenal in its nuclear posture review , which was released on february 2 , 2018 . the long - range missiles and heavy bombers are known as strategic nuclear delivery vehicles . the short - and medium - range systems are considered nonstrategic nuclear weapons and have been referred to as battlefield , tactical , and theater nuclear weapons . this report reviews the ongoing programs that will affect the expected size and shape of the u.s. strategic nuclear force structure . yet , nuclear weapons continue to play a key role in u.s. national security strategy , and the united states does not , at this time , plan to either eliminate its nuclear weapons or abandon the strategy of nuclear deterrence that has served as a core concept in u.s. national security strategy for more than 60 years . and , even though the president pledged to reduce the roles and numbers of u.s. nuclear forces , the 2010 nuclear posture review noted that "the fundamental role of u.s. nuclear weapons , which will continue as long as nuclear weapons exist , is to deter nuclear attack on the united states , our allies , and partners. . most members of congress have supported the general contours of u.s. nuclear posture . while senator james inhofe , who will likely chair the senate armed services committee , has offered strong support for the nuclear modernization programs , representative adam smith , who is likely to chair the house armed services committee , has noted that "the current $1.5 trillion plan to build new nuclear weapons and upgrade our nuclear weapons complex is unrealistic and unaffordable. . nevertheless , questions about the costs of these programs , and the trade - offs they might require within the defense budget , have surfaced in recent years , particularly following the passage of the budget control act in 2011 . under the terms of the 2002 strategic offensive reduction treaty ( known as the moscow treaty ) between the united states and russia , this number was to decline to no more than 2,200 operationally deployed strategic nuclear warheads by the end of 2012 .
as congress weighs comprehensive immigration reform legislation that would likely include strengthened enforcement measures , a significant expansion of guest workers , and perhaps include increased levels of permanent immigration , some question whether the department of homeland security ( dhs ) can handle the increased immigration workload . there are at least three elements to consider when assessing dhs effectiveness in immigration policy: ( 1 ) the immigration laws and regulations , ( 2 ) the management and administration of the agencies charged with implementation of the immigration laws and regulations , and ( 3 ) the funding resources and staffing to carry out these laws and regulations . currently , three agencies in dhs have important immigration functions: customs and border protection ( cbp ) , immigration and customs enforcement ( ice ) , and u.s . in response to growing concerns that the immigration responsibilities and other important duties of dhs were not functioning effectively , dhs secretary michael chertoff announced the second stage review ( 2sr ) to base work on priorities driven by risk . citizenship and immigration services ( uscis ) . in 2004 , the u.s. government accountability office ( gao ) reported that many of the management problems that plagued the former immigration and naturalization service ( ins ) have carried over to the three dhs immigration agencies . over the years , congress has considered all three elements to address perceived , as well as reported , problems in immigration policy . the report opens with a brief history of the federal responsibility for immigration and the legislative debate that led to the transfer of most immigration functions to dhs . "strengthen[ing] border security and interior enforcement and reform[ing] immigration processes" is on the six - point agenda driving secretary chertoff's plans to improve dhs management . as figure 1 illustrates , these three elements drive the effectiveness of immigration policy . it analyzes the division of immigration responsibilities in dhs and sets the stage for the current debate over how these functions are organized . late in 2004 , the heritage foundation released a report that reached the following conclusion: " ... in consolidating responsibility for border , immigration , and transportation security , dhs actually increased the number of involved agencies to eight and created additional problems that now need solving. . this report focuses on the management and administration element . it follows with an organizational chart depicting current immigration functions in dhs . an analysis of available immigration workload data offers some perspectives on the work of the three agencies over time . the major immigration duties of the various dhs agencies are summarized and secretary chertoff's "second stage review" is explained . the report concludes with a summary of key concerns , overarching views , and emerging policy questions . as congress considers whether comprehensive immigration reform is needed and whether the current configuration of immigration functions in dhs would effectively implement such reform , a series of questions about dhs management emerges . the underlying question remains whether a sufficient length of time has elapsed to assess dhs's efficacy in managing immigration policy . for many years , the ins collected data measuring its workload , known as the performance analysis system ( pas ) .
theseorganizations are believed to have been helped by weakening government institutions in somecountries , more open borders , and the resurgence of ethnic and regional conflicts across the formersoviet union and many other regions . mainly due to its clandestine nature , international crime is hardto measure . starting in the 1990s with the end of the cold war and the advent of globalization , manycriminal organizations ramped up their operations and expanded them worldwide . by the most conservative estimates , criminal proceeds ( 1 ) comprise between two and fivepercent of global gross domestic product ( gdp ) . crime networks have exploited expanding trade and financialmarkets , while benefitting from rapidly advancing technology , broadened international travel , andimproved global communications .  ( 2 ) transnational organized crime tends to develop in nations where law enforcement institutionsare weak and citizens have limited economic alternatives . collaboration between the two groups could heighten threats to the united states and its interests . transnational crime is believed to most frequently originate in regions suchas sub - saharan africa , the former soviet union , latin america , and the caribbean , but its effectsare global . farmers frequently turn to drugcultivation , boosting the international narcotics trade . across the globe , government corruption and illicit trade fueland sustain each other . u.s. anti - nuclear smuggling efforts are coordinated by the departments of state , defense,energy , homeland security , commerce , and other agencies . they have been linked with criminal groups in money laundering , counterfeiting , and other activities .  ( 57 ) homeland security department . stronger international law enforcement cooperation and moreeffective government partnerships with the private sector both may be central to effectivelycombating transnational organized crime . the goal of thecontainer security initiative , launched in january 2002 by the former u.s. customs service ( nowpart of dhs ) is to increase inspection of the approximately seven million shipping containersentering the u.s. annually . dhs's customs and border protection ( cbp ) is generally charged withprotecting u.s. borders from incoming nuclear material . unemployed citizens seek work abroad andfall victim to people - trafficking rings . commerce's bureau ofindustry and security ( bis ) is responsible for safeguarding u.s. national security and for promotingits foreign policy and economic interests by implementing u.s. export - control policy on dual - usecommodities , software , and technology . dhs also leads interagency efforts to develop technology toprotect the united states from wmd threats . many experts maintain that terrorists are increasingly funding themselves through crime . an improved understanding of international organized crime's dynamics might help congressas it coordinates , funds , and oversees anti - crime policies and programs . the request includes $675 million for energy department wmd threat - reduction efforts , up from$530 in fy2006 . the usa patriotimprovement and reauthorization act ( p.l . announced by president bush in may2003 , it creates international agreements and partnerships to permit the united states and its alliesto search planes and ships suspected of carrying nuclear material or technologies . the president'sfy2007 budget requests about $1.12 billion for energy , state , and defense department programsthat provide nonproliferation and threat reduction assistance to russia and other former soviet states .
one of the majority's prerogatives is writing the house's rules and using its majority status to effect the chamber's rules on the day the new house convenes . it is a feature of the house , but not of the senate , that it must adopt rules at the convening of each congress . although each new house largely adopts the chamber rules that existed in the previous congress , each new house also adopts changes to those rules . in the 1994 general election , republicans won a majority of seats in the house for the first time since the 83 rd congress ( 1953-1955 ) . it elects its speaker , chairs its committees , holds majorities on its committees , selects its officers , and manages its legislative agenda . the first purpose of the report is to identify the sources of the broad rewriting of house rules in the 104 th congress and additional changes in subsequent congresses . the second part of the report organizes rules changes affecting committees and the house floor topically and changes affecting budgetary legislation , house administration , and ethics by congress , and briefly explains the changes in layman's terms . it is also a feature of the house that it relies heavily on its formal rules , and formal means of temporarily changing them , rather than on the informal , ad hoc procedures so often used in the senate . the changes made by the republican majority in the 104 th congress rules resolution and in subsequent rules resolutions adopted by republican majorities through the 109 th congress addressed nearly every aspect of the legislative process , budget process , committee organization , administrative operations , and ethical standards . among the many subjects that the rules may cover , these changes can strengthen the ability of the majority to control the legislative process and the legislative agenda , and they can bestow rights on the minority party , minority interests , and individual members . democratic caucus and republican conference rules and decisions also had an impact on how specific house rules ( such as rules on suspension of the rules and on committee assignment limits ) were implemented . in drafting rules for the 104 th and subsequent congresses and in other exercises of the house's rulemaking authority , republicans could draw on their experience and on a variety of partisan and bipartisan plans and proposals . republicans built their critique of democratic management of the house over many years . the first part analyzes the sources of republican rules changes . for each rule , it also contains the house parliamentarian's notes describing changes to the rule ( or its specific clauses ) and decisions of presiding officers and the house based upon the rule . this report has two principal parts reflecting its two principal purposes . this volume , printed in each congress to reflect adoption of a rules resolution , contains the current provisions of house rules . these changes were included in the rules resolutions adopted at the beginning of the 104 th through 109 th congresses , special orders adopted in conjunction with the rules resolutions , and speakers' policy announcements made at the convening of each of these congresses .
beginning in the late 1970s , congress deregulated the railroad industry by giving railroads more flexibility to set rates and negotiate confidential contracts with their customers . an important policy question for congress is whether more competition will lead to a more robust and efficient railroad system or undermine it by discouraging investment in rail infrastructure . captive rail shippers often cannot ship their product economically by truck because of its bulk or the long distance of their shipments , and lack viable access to a navigable waterway to ship by barge . over the last decade , as major railroads have consolidated and have achieved higher profitability , some members of congress have questioned whether the present regime needs to be revised to protect the interests of rail customers who are poorly positioned to benefit from competition among freight transportation providers — a group often referred to as "captive shippers. . the legal structure under which the rail industry now operates was put in place at a time when railroads were in financial peril . the surface transportation board ( stb or board ) recently began a review of its policies regarding these two issues , and they are addressed in legislation supported by captive shippers . captive rail shippers are a small minority of all rail customers , and the argument between them and the railroads is long - standing . organizations representing captive shippers have called upon congress to reimpose regulation upon certain aspects of railroad operations in order to protect shippers' interests . however , the captive shipper issue has wider economic implications than just the division of revenue between shippers and railroads . after reviewing shipper and railroad points of view , the last section of the report discusses the implications of injecting more rail - to - rail competition into the industry . this report provides background on the current railroad regulatory regime . they typically claim that the railroad serving them acts like a monopoly , charging excessive rates and providing inadequate service . it then explains "bottlenecks" and "terminal switching arrangements," two of the main points of contention between railroads and their captive customers . in the 111 th congress , the surface transportation board reauthorization act of 2009 ( s. 2889 ) , reported by the senate commerce committee , and bills reported by the senate and house judiciary committees ( s. 146 and h.r . the last major changes to u.s. law concerning the economic regulation of railroads were the railroad revitalization and regulatory reform act of 1976 ( the so - called "4r act," p.l . s. 49 , the railroad antitrust enforcement act of 2011 , has been ordered to be reported by the senate judiciary committee . in the senate , these bills have been reintroduced in the 112 th congress as s. 49 and s. 158 . congress faces consideration of whether addressing the problems of captive shippers would be detrimental or beneficial to maintaining a strong and vibrant railroad system . 233 , which was also referred to the house transportation and infrastructure committee ) would have changed current railroad practices to allow "captive shippers" more access to competing railroads by addressing , among other provisions , "bottlenecks" and "terminal switching arrangements. .
this report describes the president's fy2008 request for funding for dhs programs and activities , as submitted to congress on february 5 , 2007 . the report does not follow specific funding issues related to mandatory funding — such as retirement pay — nor does the report systematically follow any legislation related to the authorization or amendment of dhs programs . it compares the enacted fy2007 amounts to the request for fy2008 , and tracks legislative action and congressional issues related to the fy2008 dhs appropriations bills with particular attention paid to discretionary funding amounts . it includes the office of the secretary and executive management ( os&em ) , which is comprised of the immediate office of the secretary and 12 entities that report directly to the secretary ; the undersecretary for management ( usm ) and its components , such as the offices of the chief administrative services officer , chief human capital officer , and chief procurement officer ; the office of the chief financial officer ( ocfo ) ; the office of the chief information officer ( ocio ) ; analysis and operations office ( aoo ) ; office of the federal coordinator for gulf coast rebuilding ( ofcgcr ) ; and office of the inspector general ( oig ) . title ii contains the appropriations for the bureau of customs and border protection ( cbp ) , the bureau of immigration and customs enforcement ( ice ) , the transportation security administration ( tsa ) , the us coast guard , and the us secret service . title iii includes appropriations for the federal emergency management agency ( fema ) , the national protection and programs directorate ( nppd ) , and the office of health affairs ( oha ) . congress expanded fema's authorities and responsibilities in the post - katrina emergency reform act ( p.l . the house and senate appointed conferees to resolve the differences between the two resolutions and adopted a conference agreement on may 16 , 2007 . citizenship and immigration services ( uscis ) , the federal law enforcement training center ( fletc ) , the science and technology directorate ( s&t ) , and the domestic nuclear detection office ( dndo ) . on may 2 , 2007 the house failed to override the president's veto by a vote of 222-203 . 21 on march 16 , 2007 and passed the budget resolution on march 23 , 2007 . emergency funding for border security in the consolidated appropriations act , 2008 ( p.l . the house and senate adopted the conference report ( h.rept . title i would have provided the following amounts: analysis and operations — $15 million ; cbp salaries and expenses — $110 million ; cbp amo operations and procurement — $120 million ; fletc — $5 million ; ice salaries and expenses — $10 million ; tsa aviation security — $970 million ; tsa federal air marshals — $8 million ; office of health affairs — $15 million ; nppd ipis — $37 million ; fema management and administration — $25 million ; fema state and local programs — $553 million ; fema emergency management performance grants — $100 million ; uscis — $10 million ; dndo research , development , and operations — $39 million ; and dndo systems acquisition — $224 million .
this report analyzes the threat to u.s. security posed by the al qaeda organization . this report will not analyze all al qaeda - inspired movements worldwide , but it will address al qaeda's relationship with some of its known affiliates . the state department's report on international terrorism for 2004 deems the organization as "the most prominent component" of a global movement of islamic militants that has "adopted the ideology and targeting strategies of [al qaeda founder osama] bin laden and other senior al qaeda leaders. . although u.s. officials say that the post - september 11 struggle against al qaeda uses all aspects of u.s. national power ( legal , economic , diplomatic , as well as military ) , a cornerstone of the post - september 11 u.s. effort has been the military effort in afghanistan . the u.s. - led war succeeded in ousting the taliban regime there ( december 2001 ) and replacing it with a pro - u.s. , moderate government . those who take this view tend to believe that u.s. counter - efforts should focus more intently on homeland security , stressing such measures as improving airline security , establishing enhanced security measures for passenger train travel , and expanding security of u.s. ports . some tend to favor additional powers for law enforcement to investigate potential islamist cells in the united states . many believe that , no matter the structure and capabilities of al qaeda , stabilizing iraq will likely be crucial to reducing the recruitment of militants willing to conduct acts of terrorism against the united states and its allies . the september 11 attacks instilled greater urgency in the u.s. effort against al qaeda . central intelligence agency paramilitary officers and other u.s. personnel ( some as contractors ) in pakistan are dedicated to this search , assisting pakistani forces and agents . in july 1999 , president clinton imposed a ban on u.s. trade with taliban - controlled afghanistan and froze taliban assets in the united states . the bush administration asserts that the absence of attacks inside the united states since september 11 demonstrates that the main thrust of administration policy is succeeding . the united states did covertly finance ( about $3 billion during 1981-1991 ) and arm ( via pakistan ) the afghan mujahedin factions , particularly the islamic fundamentalist afghan factions , fighting soviet forces . on december 19 , 2000 , u.n. security council resolution 1333 banned any arms shipments or provision of military advice to the taliban . many believe that the weakening of central direction renders al qaeda less able to conduct catastrophic attacks inside the united states because its diffusion limits its ability to orchestrate complicated , coordinated plots similar to the september 11 , 2001 attacks . reflecting this view , the state department report on terrorism for 2004 ( p. 7 ) says , as do many experts , that: ... the core of al - qa'ida has suffered damage to its leadership , organization , and capabilities...at the same time , al - qa'ida has spread its anti - u.s. , anti - western ideology to other groups and geographical areas . the clinton administration also pursued a number of covert operations against bin laden during 1999-2000 , and the bush administration considered some new options prior to september 11 , including arming anti - taliban opposition groups .
congress completed action on the bill the week of december 17 , 2007 , and the president signed it on december 26 ( p.l . with the end of the first session of the 110 th congress at hand and only the defense appropriation legislation enacted , congress passed a consolidated spending measure for all remaining appropriations bills . 2764 , the state , foreign operations , and related programs appropriations bill , became the vehicle for a $555 billion omnibus spending bill that included funding for domestic agencies . the state department operations and foreign aid programs comprise and total $35 billion , including $2.4 billion in emergency supplemental funds . the bill included some of the emergency supplemental funding requested by the white house . 110-161 ) . the international affairs budget , also known as function 150 , funds a variety of u.s. government programs and activities , including foreign economic and military assistance , contributions to international organizations and multilateral financial institutions , state department and u.s. agency for international development ( usaid ) operations , public diplomacy , and international broadcasting programs . the senate appropriations committee recommended $10.08 billion for state department operations ( including ned funds ) . the senate version provides a total of $34.2 billion in discretionary spending , the same as the house - passed bill . related agencies , which are also funded in the state and foreign operations appropriations bill , include the broadcasting board of governors ( bbg ) , and u.s. assessed contributions to united nations ( u.n. ) , international organizations , and u.n. peacekeeping . h.r . the senate appointed conferees also on september 6 . the state department does not provide a list of restrictive countries , although the fy2008 foreign operations congressional budget justification lists certain countries with no categorization: belarus ; burma ; china ; cuba ; iran ; libya ; north korea ; venezuela ; west bank and gaza ; and zimbabwe . the administration's fy2008 budget request for the department of state is $10.014 billion , representing a 10.5% increase over the fy2007 estimate , but a decline of 4.3% as compared with the fy2006 actual appropriation ( the most recent enacted appropriation for the department of state ) , including rescissions and supplementals . the total is $2.95 billion over last year's level and $700 million less than the president's request . several provisions of the senate bill differ from those of the house version . the senate bill recommends $509.5 million ( about $8 million more than the house bill ) for educational and cultural exchanges . it approved $35.7 million ( $2.2 million below the house level ) for related agencies . on june 28 , 2007 , the senate appropriations committee reported out its version of the fy2008 state , foreign operations and related programs bill . the senate bill recommends $50 million more than the house bill for contributions to international peacekeeping activities . the bill provides a total of $34.243 billion . on june 5 , the house appropriations subcommittee on state , foreign operations , and related agencies marked up the fy2008 spending measure .
many analysts , policy makers , and politicians argue that the u.s. health care system would perform better if market or market - like institutions played a larger role . government intervention may enhance economic efficiency , although in other cases government action may exacerbate market failure . the special characteristics of health care often lead to market failures . the extent of government activity vis - a - vis the health system is seen by many economists and health care analysts as a policy response to the inequalities and inefficiencies associated with such market failures . the report provides an overview of efforts to expand the use of market or market - like institutions in health care and considers effects of these initiatives or proposals on the federal budget . this report explains what well - grounded economic theory has to say about the limits and capabilities of the market in the health care sector . these conditions essentially state that consumption or production by one person does not affect others , that no one has a privileged position in the market , and that property rights are well - defined . nonetheless , improving the performance and efficiency of the health system presents significant policy and political challenges even to well - designed reforms . the challenge for those who wish to expand the use of market incentives in health care is to design policies that align material incentives facing consumers and providers of health care so that changes in behavior enhance economic efficiency . reforms that are designed to address sources of market failure have better chances of enhancing economic performance than those that are not . this view is based on the belief held by economists that markets generally work most efficiently when left alone , provided that certain conditions are met . these limits and capabilities then outline what the government can or cannot do to improve the health care system's performance . even if some view market forces and the use of the price system to allocate health care services as an intrusion , consumers and providers of health care are strongly affected by economic incentives . both friends and foes of the expanding role of markets have sometimes relied on crude ideas about what markets can or cannot accomplish . health care professionals often view a market orientation as a threat to their traditions , ethics , and culture . consumers use less health care when they must pay a larger share of the cost . physicians increased the volume ( i.e. , number of patient visits ) and intensity of patient care ( i.e. , number or complexity of services provided in an average visit ) seen after reductions in medicare part b payments . if those conditions are violated , however , markets may function inefficiently , which is what economists call "market failure. . dissatisfaction with the performance of the u.s. health care system has spurred wider interest in using market or market - like institutions to generate better results and lower costs . absent the political will to increase taxes significantly , rising federal health care expenditures will force major cuts in benefits or fundamental changes in the health delivery system . a bottom - line mentality , they argue , cannot deliver the same high quality of care as the so - called traditional approach based on professional ethics and responsibilities .
the corporation for national and community service ( cncs ) was established by the national and community service trust act of 1993 ( p.l . operating as an independent federal agency , the cncs oversees all national and community service programs authorized by the national and community service act of 1990 ( ncsa ) and the domestic volunteer service act of 1973 ( dvsa ) . although authorization of appropriations under the serve america act expired in fy2014 , ncsa and dvsa programs have continued to receive funding through the departments of labor , health and human services , and education and related agencies appropriations act ( labor - hhs - ed ) . the ncsa and dvsa were last reauthorized by the edward m. kennedy serve america act ( p.l . 103-82 ) . 113-235 ) ; the consolidated appropriations act , 2016 ( p.l . 111-13 ) . 115-31 ) ; and the consolidated appropriations act , 2018 ( p.l . 114-113 ) ; the consolidated appropriations act , 2017 ( p.l . this report provides a summary of each ncsa and dvsa program and compares funding under labor - hhs - ed in the consolidated and further continuing appropriations act , 2015 ( p.l . cncs programs are funded through the end of fy2018 under the consolidated appropriations act , 2018 ( p.l . the final enacted appropriations law for fy2018 included $1.064 billion for cncs . the purpose of the ncsa is to address unmet human , educational , environmental , and public safety needs and to renew an ethic of civil responsibility and community spirit in the united states by encouraging citizens to participate in national service programs . the overall fy2018 funding level for cncs is 3% above the fy2017 level of $1.030 billion . 101-610 and last reauthorized in 2011 by the edward m. kennedy serve america act ( p.l . ncsa programs include americorps state and national grants , the national service trust , the national civilian community corps ( nccc ) , and learn and serve america ( lsa ) . 115-141 ) . program focus : nccc is a full - time residential program that focuses on short - term projects that meet national and community needs related to disaster relief , infrastructure improvement , environment and energy conservation , environmental stewardship , and urban and rural development . the ncsa was enacted in 1990 as p.l . program focus : created in 1993 , programs under americorps state and national grants identify and address critical community needs , including tutoring and mentoring disadvantaged youth , managing or operating after - school programs , helping communities respond to disasters , improving health services , building affordable housing , and cleaning parks and streams . grants include formula grants to states and territories , and competitive grants to states , territories , indian tribes , and national nonprofit organizations . 115-141 ) . in addition to education awards , the national service trust provides interest payments on qualified student loans to recipients of americorps grants and participants in nccc or vista who have obtained forbearance ( postponement of loan repayment ) . 111-13 ) . program focus : the vista program encourages americans to participate in community service in an effort to eliminate poverty .
although the european union's ( eu ) 27 member states have ceded some national sovereignty ( or competency ) to eu institutions in a variety of areas , including economic and trade policy , energy policy remains primarily the responsibility of the member states . decisions regarding long - term oil or gas purchases , the development and improvement of energy - related infrastructure , and the use of particular fuels continue to be made at the national level by individual member states . the strain on global demand exerted by the emerging economies of countries such as china and india , persistent instability in energy producing regions , the threat of terrorist strikes against energy infrastructure , and russia's apparent willingness to use its energy power for political ends , are all raising concerns in europe over how to address external influences that could affect future energy requirements . at their march 2007 summit , eu member states moved to boost european coordination to help secure and diversify energy supplies , increase the development and use of renewable and alternative energy resources within the eu , and reduce energy demand and consumption . recent calls for eu - wide energy coordination have been driven by rising european concern about the effects of energy production and consumption on global climate change . although member state governments remain reluctant to cede national sovereignty over energy - security aspects of their foreign policies , they have set binding eu - wide targets for the use of renewable energies and biofuels , and have agreed to ambitious but non - binding energy efficiency and carbon emission reduction targets for the year 2020 . as uncertainties surrounding global energy supply and demand persist , issues pertaining to u.s. , european , and global energy security are may gain importance in the second session of the 110 th congress . members of both parties have introduced legislation aimed at increasing energy independence and energy security and reducing carbon emissions . the commission proposals focus on three broad interconnected goals: increasing european - wide energy security ; enhancing sustainability ; and fostering competition in europe's internal energy market . nonetheless , most observers expect member states to continue to retain significant national control over national energy markets and external relations with energy - producing countries . europe's renewed interest in energy security has been influenced by both internal and external factors . in several hearings during the first session of the 110 th congress , members of congress voiced concern about europe's dependence on russian energy resources , and the potential for russian manipulation of european energy markets . internally , steadily rising energy prices , declining european energy production and a fragmented internal energy market have contributed to anxieties over europe's ability to meet future energy demand . concern over europe's dependence on russian energy resources has corresponded with growing public calls for eu - wide action on climate change . to this end , eu member states' recent energy policy decisions center largely on promoting energy efficiency , developing renewable energy and clean fuel sources , and reducing overall greenhouse gas emissions . in addition , member states are considering potentially significant reforms to further liberalize energy markets .
 ( 3 ) this report focuses on four immigration policy implications of hurricane katrina . the devastation and displacement caused by hurricane katrina in the gulf coast region ofthe united states pose a host of environmental , human resource , and other public policy challenges . the total number of foreign nationals affected by hurricane katrina is not known . caught in the web of this tragedy and its sweeping dilemmas are a unique subset ofimmigration - related issues . the loss of livelihood , habitat , and life itself has very specificimplications for foreign nationals who lived in the gulf coast region .  ( 1 ) the department of homeland security ( dhs ) estimates that34,242 naturalized citizens , 24,087 lprs , and 71,992 nonimmigrants may be affected by hurricanekatrina . whether the noncitizen orforeign national is a legal permanent resident ( lpr ) , a nonimmigrant ( e.g. , temporary resident sucha foreign student , intracompany transferee , or guest worker ) or an unauthorized alien ( i.e. , illegalimmigrant ) is a significant additional factor in how federal immigration and public welfare laws areapplied .  ( 2 ) jeffrey passel,a demographer who specializes in unauthorized migration , estimates that at least an additional20,000 to 35,000 unauthorized aliens are victims of hurricane katrina . in this context , the key question is whether congress should relax any of these lawspertaining to foreign nationals who are victims of hurricane katrina . issues pertaining to how the loss of life or livelihoodaffects eligibility for immigration visa benefits are discussed next . the report closes withbackground on relief from removal options for katrina - affected aliens . surveydata from the u.s. census bureau estimate that over 270,000 foreign - born persons lived in alabama,louisiana , and mississippi in 2004 . it follows with an overview of the rules fornoncitizen eligibility for federal benefits . it openswith a discussion of employment verification and other documentary problems arising for those whohave lost their personal identification documents . theina and applicable regulations provide for three categories of documents: ( 1 ) those that establishboth identity and employment eligibility ; ( 2 ) those that establish identity only ; and ( 3 ) those thatestablish work eligibility only . as legislation to ease the federaleligibility rules for public assistance for hurricane katrina victims generally is under consideration,the question of whether to ease the specific rules for noncitizens has arisen ( s. 1695 ) . 3827 would amend the ina to authorize dhs to waive for not more than 90days employer attestation or verification requirements due to disaster - caused document loss ( duringa major disaster - declaration period ) .  ( 6 ) given that the individuals affected by hurricane katrina are now scattered across the unitedstates , this moratorium on sanctioning employers may have broad implications and is not withoutits critics . 3827 , the immigration relief for hurricane katrina victims act of 2005 . the house - passed bill also would authorize dhs to replace orprovide temporary identity and employment authorization documents lost , stolen , or destroyed asa consequence of hurricane katrina .  ( 4 ) employers who fail to properly comply as required by law are subject to sanctions . legislation addressing thesepolicy areas is discussed in the relevant sections .
among the creative works that u.s. copyright law protects are sound recordings , which the copyright act defines as "works that result from the fixation of a series of musical , spoken , or other sounds. . owners of copyrighted sound recordings have exclusive rights to reproduce , adapt , or distribute their works , or to perform them publicly by digital means . some members of congress voiced concern as well . on march 9 , 2007 , the copyright royalty board issued its decision , which was published as a final rule and order on may 1 , 2007 . enactment of the copyright royalty and distribution reform act of 2004 , p.l . as required by law , in march 2007 the copyright royalty board announced royalty rates for the period that commenced ( retroactively ) from january 1 , 2006 , through december 31 , 2010 . however , the copyright law also provides several types of statutory , or compulsory , licenses for sound recordings . congress interceded as well with enactment of the small webcasters settlement act ( swsa ) of 2002 , p.l . normally , anyone who wants to exercise any of the copyright owner's exclusive rights must obtain the copyright owner's permission to do so , typically by direct negotiations between copyright owners and users . in 1998 , in the digital millennium copyright act ( dmca ) , congress amended several statutory licensing statutes to provide for and clarify the treatment of different types of internet broadcasting , or "webcasting. . in making this determination , the two factors in section 114 ( f ) ( 2 ) ( b ) ( i ) and ( ii ) must be considered , but neither factor defines the standard . the final determination of the crb establishes new rates for commercial and noncommercial webcasters who qualify for the § 114 compulsory license ; the decision is effective on july 15 , 2007 . rates established pursuant to the original ratemaking determination and swsa were to remain in effect through 2005 . these licenses allow third parties who pay statutorily prescribed fees to use copyrighted sound recordings under certain conditions and according to specific requirements , without having to negotiate private licensing agreements . although the past two years have been consumed with the reactions to the copyright royalty board's may 2007 decision , time marches on , and the crb announced on january 5 , 2009 , that it would begin the third proceeding ( "webcaster iii" ) to determine the royalty rates for the statutory license covering internet transmissions of sound recordings , applicable to the next royalty period that runs from january 1 , 2011 , through december 31 , 2015 . some transmissions of sound recordings are exempt from the public performance right , for example , a nonsubscription broadcast transmission ; a retransmission of a radio station's broadcast within 150 miles of its transmitter ; and a transmission to a business establishment for use in the ordinary course of its business . rates are as follows: for commercial webcasters: $.0008 per performance for 2006 , $.0011 per performance for 2007 , $.0014 per performance for 2008 , $.0018 per performance for 2009 , and $.0019 per performance for 2010 .
presidential signing statements are official pronouncements issued by the president contemporaneously to the signing of a bill into law that , in addition to commenting on the law generally , have been used to forward the president's interpretation of the statutory language ; to assert constitutional objections to the provisions contained therein ; and , concordantly , to announce that the provisions of the law will be administered in a manner that comports with the administration's conception of the president's constitutional prerogatives . the number and scope of such assertions in the george w. bush administration in particular gave rise to extensive debate over the issuance of signing statements , with the american bar association ( aba ) publishing a report declaring that these instruments are "contrary to the rule of law and our constitutional separation of powers" when they "claim the authority or state the intention to disregard or decline to enforce all or part of a law ... or to interpret such a law in a manner inconsistent with the clear intent of congress. . while the history of presidential issuance of signing statements dates to the early 19 th century , the practice has become the source of significant controversy in the modern era as presidents have increasingly employed the statements to assert constitutional objections to congressional enactments . this report focuses on the use of signing statements by recent administrations , with particular emphasis on the administrations of george w. bush and barack obama . however , in analyzing the constitutional basis for , and legal effect of , presidential signing statements , it becomes apparent that no constitutional or legal deficiencies adhere to the issuance of such statements in and of themselves . rather , it appears that the appropriate focus of inquiry in this context is on the assertions of presidential authority contained therein , coupled with an examination of substantive executive action taken or forborne with regard to the provisions of law implicated in a presidential signing statement . applying this analytical rubric , it seems evident that the issues involved center not on the simple issue of signing statements , but rather on the view of presidential authority that governs the substantive actions of the administration in question . there is no explicit constitutional provision authorizing the issuance of presidential signing statements . however , presidents have issued such statements since the monroe administration , and there is little evident constitutional or legal support for the proposition that the president may be constrained from issuing a statement regarding a provision of law . article i of the constitution provides only that the president "shall sign" a bill of which he approves , while in vetoing a measure the president is required to return the measure "with his objections to that house in which it shall have originated. . the first controversy arising in this context stemmed from a signing statement issued by andrew jackson in 1830 that raised objections to an appropriations bill that involved internal improvements . while the broad assertions of executive authority contained in many signing statements carry significant implications , both practical and constitutional , for the traditional relationship between the executive branch and congress , they do not have legal force or effect , and have not been utilized to effect the formal nullification of laws .
the united nations high commissioner for refugees ( unhcr ) has helped over 3.69 million afghan refugees return to afghanistan since march of 2002 , marking the largest assisted return operation in unhcr's history . issues of particular concern to the 110 th congress are 1 ) continuing and sustaining refugee returns as part of afghanistan's overall reconstruction ; 2 ) developing funding strategies for the next phase of afghanistan's remaining refugees ; and 3 ) examining the refugee situation in light of border security issues , particularly with regard to pakistan's recently announced plan to lay land mines and build a fence along its border with afghanistan . in addition , more than a million refugees have returned to afghanistan without availing themselves of unhcr's assistance ( also known as "spontaneous returns" ) bringing the total number of returnees to 4.8 million or more . in the long term , the impact of afghan migration trends may need to be better understood in light of its potential impact on political arrangements in south asia . the success of the repatriation program thus depends on the success of the overall reconstruction effort in afghanistan , including the extent to which returned refugees ( and idps ) are integrated into reconstruction efforts . almost all of these afghans have returned from neighboring iran and pakistan , where the vast majority of afghan refugees have lived for well over two decades ( see table 1 ) . the united states government ( usg ) has provided humanitarian assistance to afghan refugees since the early 1980s . another factor influencing the success of the repatriation program is the sustainability of previous returns to afghanistan — that is , the degree to which returnees are being adequately anchored in their communities , whether they are receiving health care , education , and opportunities to make a living . almost all assistance has been provided through the migration and refugee assistance ( mra ) account , and has been programmed by the department of state's bureau of population , refugees , and migration ( prm ) . afghans began fleeing their country in april 1978 , when the marxist people's democratic party of afghanistan ( pdpa ) , overthrew the government of muhammad daoud ( who had himself seized power from his cousin afghan king zahir shah in a bloodless coup in 1973 ) . a related issue may be whether pakistan and iran would be receptive to encouragement to grant citizenship to afghans who do not want to return to afghanistan . thus , as funding is declining , its importance may be increasing . the united states thus faces the challenge of maintaining its crucial assistance in this area of the world despite competing priorities . this funding is used not only for the protection and care of refugees in countries of asylum , but also for the reintegration of afghan returnees in afghanistan . funding for afghan refugees declined rapidly since it peaked after the u.s. - led invasion in october 2001 . maintaining security along the border with afghanistan is also a concern . even after four years of exceptionally high refugee return numbers , the population of afghan refugees in pakistan and iran remains the second - highest in the world .
in june 2007 , exxonmobil corporation and conocophillips , two of the largest u.s. oil companies , abandoned their multi - billion dollar investments in the heavy oil deposits of the orinoco basin in venezuela . this action followed the breakdown of negotiations between the companies and the government of president hugo chavez and petroleos de venezuela ( pdv ) , the venezuelan national oil company . this report assesses the position of national oil companies , and how their evolving strength may affect the availability of supply in the oil market , and hence , oil security . this amounted to approximately 10% of the company's total reserve holdings , and its production from venezuela amounted to 4% of its total crude oil production . venezuela , traditionally , has a large share of crude oil imports into the united states . four other international oil companies , including total sa from france , statoil from norway , bp from great britain , and chevron from the united states , accepted agreements that raised the pdv share in their orinoco projects from approximately 40% to a controlling interest of about 78% . on the venezuelan side , pdv expanded its reserve and production position , and its strength in the international oil market . this oil flow is now more directly under the control of the venezuelan government which may or may not allow the flow of crude oil to follow economic market forces . the company was seen as less likely to be able to meet its reserve replacement targets and the price of its shares fell on the stock market . although conocophillips continues to negotiate compensation for its holdings , the company took a $4.5 billion dollar write - off against second - quarter 2007 earnings . the report also examines the effects of national oil company expansion on the major private international oil companies as well as how these companies might differ in motivation and results . policy options to deal with the rise of national oil companies by the countries without them are also evaluated . conocophillips , especially , was adversely affected by the decision . conocophillips recorded 1.1 billion barrels of proved reserves from its venezuelan ventures . if current production declines in the face of growing world demand , it is likely that prices will rise , and the possibility of physical shortages will be heightened . in the oil industry , based as it is on current production to generate current earnings and on reserve positions to ensure the future viability of the enterprise , several standards need to be applied to assess the evolving nature of the companies in the industry . as nations establish their own national oil companies , territories open for exploration and development by private companies may diminish . it is also not likely that the reserve positions of the companies will change in favor of the international oil companies in the future . if exploration and development expenditures are reduced because of problems encountered by some firms in accessing international capital markets , the relative scarcity of oil might increase , leading to higher future prices , as well as potentially restricted supply . these five firms hold only 3.8% of world liquid reserves , and their major holdings are in the united states and canada .
as the economy of the people's republic of china ( prc ) has boomed in the past decade , raising living standards for many of its citizens , incidents of social protest also have risen dramatically . economic development has brought about or exacerbated a host of economic , social , and political problems , including income inequality , environmental pollution , official corruption , and ambiguous property rights , which in turn have fueled grievances . in the medium term , ongoing u.s. efforts to promote civil society and the rule of law in the prc could help people and institutions in china to develop legal understanding and procedures for expressing and resolving social grievances . to a large extent , the prc government at various levels has been unable or unwilling to mitigate social anger . social unrest in china affects ongoing u.s. policies promoting human rights and democracy in china and broader considerations about engagement with the prc . in the longer run , social unrest may adversely affect the business climate for foreign investment , the pace of economic reforms ( including compliance with wto commitments ) , political stability in the prc , and chinese foreign policy . in the short run , social unrest raises many human rights concerns toward china among many u.s. policy - makers . as part of its recommendations to the president and the congress in 2005 , the congressional - executive commission on china urged the united states government to encourage the prc to take further steps to address the causes of social unrest . the prc government's efforts to address social unrest have been hampered by tensions between the central and local governments , institutional weaknesses , inconsistent policies , and the inability or unwillingness to undertake fundamental political reforms . workers are not allowed to form unions independent of the state - controlled all china federation of trade unions ( acftu ) . policy options for congress include monitoring the situation , increasing assistance for local democracy , civil society , and rule - of - law programs in china , supporting a free press and independent judiciary , or pressing the chinese government to respect the rights of protestors and release jailed activists . at the end of 2005 , the central government pledged a number of additional reforms aimed at rural unrest , including better management of land use , strengthening the legal system , protecting farmers' land , raising rural incomes , increasing social spending on health care and education , and abolishing the national tax on farmers . these steps include ensuring that village elections are free from government interference , giving chinese citizens the power to enforce constitutional protections , making the judiciary independent , and removing restrictions on the news media and non - governmental organizations . some analysts argue that the challenges of addressing grievances and controlling protests will encourage beijing to seek a stable international environment in which it can focus on domestic economic growth and social stability . others argue that social unrest may cause beijing to adopt a more hostile international posture . social unrest could also undermine the power of the chinese communist party , although current indicators do not point to a significant loss of political control .
social security plays an important role in reducing poverty , not only among the aged but among children as well . in fy2013 , combined federal and state tanf expenditures , in the form of cash aid to families , amounted to an estimated $8.7 billion , of which approximately $4.3 billion ( 49% ) was from federal funds . this report examines the effects of social security on child poverty . social security administration ( ssa ) data indicate that in december 2012 , 3.3 million social security beneficiaries ( 5.7% of all beneficiaries ) were children under the age of 18 . children may be eligible for social security benefits when a parent who is a covered worker dies , becomes disabled , or retires . in order to address questions relating to the income and poverty status of families in which children live , and the impact of social security benefits on income and poverty status of families with children , other data sources must be used . among child beneficiaries , 1.2 million ( 37.2% of all child beneficiaries ) were children of deceased workers , 1.7 million ( 52.9% of all child beneficiaries ) were children of disabled workers , and about 322,000 ( 8.9% of all child beneficiaries ) were dependent children of retired workers . in addition to receiving social security benefits in their own right , children may economically benefit from social security by living with other family members who receive benefits . the estimates presented in this report are based on a crs analysis of u.s. census bureau survey of income and program participation ( sipp ) data in april 2013 . for this analysis , u.s. census bureau survey of income and program participation ( sipp ) data are used in this report . unlike welfare programs , in which eligibility is determined on the basis of limited income , social security is a work - related entitlement , in which benefits are determined on the basis of workers' employment and earnings history , without respect to current income . child benefits generally apply to all biological children of a worker ( assuming that paternity / maternity has been established ) and to legally adopted children .  ( the pia is based on the parent's social security earnings record. ) . while ssa administrative data provide a broad overview of the numbers of individuals receiving social security benefits and the type and amount of benefits received , they provide little information about the characteristics of individuals receiving benefits or the importance of social security to individual and family economic well - being . for children of disabled or retired workers , the child's benefit is generally equal to 50% of the parent's primary insurance amount ( pia ) before adjustments . social security benefits paid on behalf of children exceed federal dollars spent on cash welfare to families with children under the temporary assistance for needy families ( tanf ) program . it should also be noted that estimates of the pre - transfer poverty status of children ( i.e. , poverty status excluding social security from total income ) provide one measure of the relative importance of social security in combating poverty .
the senate subcommittee on energy and water development appropriations approved its version of the bill , s. 1751 , on june 26 , and the full senate appropriations committee approved it june 28 . the energy and water development bill includes funding for civil works projects of the u.s. army corps of engineers ( corps ) , the department of the interior's central utah project ( cup ) and bureau of reclamation ( bor ) , the department of energy ( doe ) , and a number of independent agencies , including the nuclear regulatory commission ( nrc ) and the appalachian regional commission ( arc ) . the act provides $31.4659 billion for energy and water programs , about $1 billion below the fy2007 appropriation and about $500 million above the administration's request . the omnibus funding measure was passed by congress december 19 , 2007 , and signed by the president december 26 , 2007 . the fy2008 energy and water development bill was enacted as division c of the consolidated appropriations act for fy2008 ( p.l . on march 16 , 2007 , the department of energy ( doe ) submitted its "operating plan" to congress , detailing funding for individual programs not specifically identified in p.l . that supplement was voted out by the committee july 12 , and the house approved the bill july 17 , 2007 . energy and water development programs were funded for fy2007 in the revised continuing appropriations resolution , 2007 ( h.j.res . on june 20 the bill was debated on the house floor , but was not voted on pending submission by the appropriations committee of a supplement specifying funding for individual projects . the house appropriations committee reported out its fy2008 energy and water development appropriations bill , h.r . independent agencies that receive funding from the energy and water development bill include the nuclear regulatory commission ( nrc ) , the appalachian regional commission ( arc ) , and the denali commission . 110-161 ) . the bush administration's fy2008 budget request was released in february 2007 . 2641 , on june 6 , 2007 . the bill as reported did not contain indications of funding for specific projects . 110-5 ) . 110-161 provided $5.587 billion for the u.s. army corps of engineers ; it was an increase over the administration's budget request of $4.871 billion and 5% above the fy2007 appropriations ( not including supplemental funds ) of $5.340 billion . often congress will direct funding to projects not included in the administration's request . table 2 includes budget totals for energy and water development appropriations enacted for fy2001 to fy2008 . 20 , p.l . these adjustments affect the total amount appropriated in the bill but are not included in the totals of the individual titles . the department of the interior requested that congress provide an increase in funding for the central utah project ( cup ) completion account and a reduction for the bureau of reclamation ( bor ) for fy2008 . major doe activities historically funded by the energy and water bill include research and development on renewable energy and nuclear power , general science , environmental cleanup , and nuclear weapons programs , and now includes programs for fossil fuels , energy efficiency , the strategic petroleum reserve , and energy statistics , which formerly had been included in the interior and related agencies appropriations bill .
the crude oil windfall profit tax act ( p.l . 96-223 ) was enacted in 1980 as part of acompromise between the carter administration and the congress over the decontrol of crude oilprices . despite its name , the crude oil windfall profit tax was not a tax on profits . however , the tax's role in increasingdependence on imported oil , distorting resource use in the energy markets and the economy , as wellas the administrative and compliance burden of the tax , all played a role in its repeal . the structure of the wpt was based on the structure of the oil price control program . several bills would appropriate the proceedsfor the low - income home energy assistance program , which gives grants to poorerhouseholds to offset high energy bills and for residential weatherization . the major economic issues concerning the wpt and its effects were: revenues , increaseddependence upon foreign oil , economic efficiency , and the tax's administrative and complianceburden . it was an excisetax - - or more accurately , a system of excise taxes - - on domestically produced oil effective march1 , 1980 . some bills would allocate thereceipts to offset the cost of supplemental spending bills targeted to aid victims ofhurricanes katrina and rita . there are currently 14 bills in the 109th congress to impose some type ofwpt . the congress was concernedthat the oil industry was not paying its fair share of federal taxes . the algebraic formula for the wpt liability is as follows: t t = ï [p t m - p t b ( 1+ ï t - 2 ) ] ( 1- s ) ( 1- c ) where t t = the wpt in $ / barrel , in time t ( e.g. , in the 1st quarter of any year ) , ï = the wpt tax rate in percent ( see table 2 in the text ) , p t m = the market ( removal ) price of domestic crude oil at the wellhead at time t , p t b = the base price corresponding to the type of oil produced , as specified by law ( see table 2 ) ï = rate of inflation , as measured by the gnp deflator , so that ï t - 2 is the gnp deflatorlagged two quarters , ( 61 ) s = the rate of state severance tax , if any c = the rate of federal corporate income ta . the tax was imposed on the difference between the market price of oil , which wastechnically referred to as the removal price , and a statutory 1979 base price that was adjustedquarterly for inflation and state severance taxes . as discussed above , the need for revenue was one of the reasons for enacting the windfallprofit tax and was a principal issue in the debate over its repeal . domestic crude oil is oil producedfrom an oil well located in the united states , or in any of its possessions , and it includes thecontinental shelf area of the united states .  ( 8 ) all domestically produced oil that was not specifically tax - exempt was classified into oneof three categories or "tiers" based upon the age of the well , the type of oil , and the amount of dailyproduction .
recent changes in the way the program is funded have largely addressed concerns at the federal level about "spiraling costs" ; however , the new funding structure has not reduced budget pressures for the local public housing authorities ( phas ) that administer the program . the section 8 housing choice voucher program has come under increasing criticism from the administration and congress for its cost and its complexity . noting these concerns , the administration has argued in each of the past several years that the existing section 8 voucher program should be dismantled and replaced with a new , broader - purpose grant program . thus far , low - income housing advocates and pha groups have generally opposed the administration's reform initiatives , although both have begun to call for some type of reform to lessen the administrative burdens on phas and to help them better administer their voucher programs in a budget - constrained environment . the administration's reform proposals have changed over the years , and they have differed substantially from the reform proposals supported by pha groups and low - income housing advocates . bills to enact the president's reform have been introduced in congress , although no further action has been taken . despite their differences , each proposal would alter several key features of the current program , which are discussed below . in 2006 , a bipartisan voucher reform bill , which would have modified the voucher program but largely retained its current structure , was approved by the house financial services committee , but no further action was taken before the close of the 109 th congress . every year since 2003 , the president has proposed eliminating the section 8 voucher program and replacing it with a new initiative . 1841 and s. 947 , 108 th congress ) was a bush administration initiative that would have replaced the existing tenant - based voucher program that is administered by local phas with a formula grant to states . the president's flexible voucher program ( fvp ) , was first recommended in the second session of the 108 th congress in the administrative provisions section of the fy2005 hud budget request . on may 22 , 2006 , the chairman of the housing and community opportunity subcommittee of the house financial services committee introduced the section 8 voucher reform act of 2006 ( h.r . the 2003 hanf program ( h.r . pha groups opposed the proposal to transfer administration to states and also voiced concerns about erosion in funding levels . specifically , the bill proposed to modify the current definition of income to exclude imputed income from assets ; eliminate or replace many of the deductions and allowances from income ; provide phas with several methods for calculating income ; change the targeting threshold to the greater of 30% of ami or the poverty level ; eliminate the gross income calculation for rent ; modify income reexamination requirements ; and modify the process and timing for conducting housing inspections . proposals from the 108 th and 109 th congresses are discussed briefly below ; a comparison of bills from the 109 th congress to current law can be found in table 1 . unlike the bush administration proposals , which sought to eliminate the voucher program and replace it with a new program , h.r .
the department of justice ( doj ) was created in june 1870 , with the attorney general as its head . since its establishment , doj has expanded to include 40 agencies . the major investigative agencies — the federal bureau of investigation ( fbi ) , the drug enforcement administration ( dea ) , and the bureau of alcohol , tobacco , firearms and explosives ( atf ) — prevent and deter crime and arrest offenders . doj oig lists grant management as a management challenge because ( 1 ) oig reviews continue to find that many grantees do not submit financial and progress reports ; ( 2 ) numerous deficiencies continue to be found in the cops office's monitoring of grantee activities ; ( 3 ) audits found that grants were not regularly awarded in a timely manner and grantees were slow to spend funds ; and ( 4 ) more than 375 audits of cops grants have resulted in significant dollar - related findings . a 2003 oig audit of ojp and cops grant programs found ( 1 ) a structural overlap between the cops office and ojp ; ( 2 ) an overlap in grant programs between the cops office and ojp ; ( 3 ) a lack of on - line grant application processing in the cops office ; ( 4 ) an overlap in ojp's organization structure ; and ( 5 ) inefficiencies in ojp's automated grant management systems . congress attempted to address some of these issues when it passed the violence against women and department of justice reauthorization act of 2005 ( p.l . the united states attorneys office prosecutes offenders and represents the federal government in court . for years , some have questioned the effectiveness of doj grant programs and have called for program evaluations . the office of justice programs ( ojp ) , the community oriented policing services ( cops ) office , and the office of violence against women ( ovw ) , provide grant funds to state , local , and tribal governments for crime prevention and intervention programs as well as funding for criminal justice system improvement programs . marshals service ( usms ) provides protection to the federal judiciary , apprehends fugitives , and detains people in federal custody . the bureau of prisons ( bop ) provides confinement and supervision for convicted federal offenders . this report does not discuss any other discretionary grant programs administered by ojp and cops , nor does it discuss the justice assistance grant program ( jag ) , any grant program administered by the office on violence against women ( ovw ) , any grant program administered by the office of victims of crime ( ovc ) , or ojp and cops grant programs that have traditionally received funding through earmarks . the government accountability office ( gao ) assessed six evaluations of five drug courts and found mixed results . since 2000 , doj oig has identified grant management as one of doj's top ten management challenges . the administration responded by requiring federal agencies to submit strategic and annual performance plans and report on program performance . this section discusses the following doj grant programs: weed and seed , the drug court discretionary grant program , the prisoner re - entry initiative , the president's dna initiative , the debbie smith dna backlog grant program , the kirk bloodsworth post - conviction dna testing program , the paul coverdell grant program , assistance to indian tribes ( indian country prison grants , tribal courts grant program , indian country alcohol and crime demonstration program ) , and tribal law enforcement assistance .
the program is administered by the bureau of justice assistance ( bja ) , which is part of the department of justice's ( doj ) office of justice programs ( ojp ) . the state criminal alien assistance program ( scaap ) was created by §20301 of the violent crime control and law enforcement act of 1994 , and it is currently codified in §241 ( i ) of the immigration and nationality act ( ina ) . the department of homeland security ( dhs ) aids bja in administering the program . 2282 ) , and to allow costs related to criminal aliens charged with specified crimes to be considered for scaap reimbursement ( s. 168 ) . in the 111 th congress , legislation has been introduced to reauthorize the program until fy2014 ( h.r . the administration's fy2010 budget request did not include funding for scaap ; however , funding for the program was included in the commerce , justice , science and related agencies appropriations act of 2010 ( h.r . 2847 as passed by the house on june 18 , 2009 , would appropriate $300 million for scaap , and the senate reported version would appropriate $228 million for the program . the ina defines the term "undocumented criminal alien" in the context of scaap to mean an alien who ( 3 ) ( a ) has been convicted of a felony or two or more misdemeanors ; and ( i ) entered the united states without inspection or at any time or place other than as designated by the attorney general ; ( ii ) was the subject of exclusion or deportation proceedings at the time he or she was taken into custody by the state or a political subdivision of the state ; or ( iii ) was admitted as a nonimmigrant and at the time he or she was taken into custody by the state or a political subdivision of the state has failed to maintain the nonimmigrant status in which the alien was admitted or to which it was changed under section 248 , or to comply with the conditions of any such status . legislation had been introduced in previous congresses that would have modified the program to include covering costs for indigent defense , translators , criminal aliens charged with two misdemeanors or a felony , and limited reimbursement to border states and states with large numbers of unauthorized aliens . although the program is intended to compensate states and localities for correctional officers' salary costs , funds provided through scaap payments until recently have been unrestricted and could be used for any lawful purpose . scaap is designed to reimburse states and localities for correctional officers' salary costs incurred for incarcerating "undocumented criminal aliens. . currently , this includes all 50 states , the district of columbia , guam , puerto rico , the u.s. virgin islands , and more than 3,000 counties and cities . florida , illinois , new york , and texas have consistently received larger awards as well , with smaller awards going to states such as west virginia , vermont , north dakota , and the u.s. territories . levels of funding for the program have fluctuated from $130 million in fy1995 to $565 million in fy2002 and have remained relatively consistent between $400 and $410 million for fy2006 through fy2009 .
over the past 15 years , the u.s. current account has moved from a small surplus to a deficit that in 2005 was nearly $800 billion . the final tally for 2006 has not been completed , but preliminary data suggests the deficit will grow to near $900 billion . the size of this surplus has varied , hitting a low of $4 billion in 1998 and a high of $37 billion in 2003 , but over the past 25 years , the surplus has remained between $15 billion and $30 billion . the net accumulation of liabilities through 2005 is $2.7 trillion , which is equivalent to about 22% of u.s. gdp . the current account deficit has increased also as a share of gross domestic product ( gdp ) , climbing from near zero to a record 6.2% in 2005 . the investment income balance is a tally of u.s. earnings on its foreign investments net of foreigners' earnings on their investments in the united states . despite the huge increase in u.s. external debt , the investment income component of the current account has remained in surplus . since 2003 , the surplus has fallen , reaching $28 billion in 2004 and $11 billion in 2005 . because a current account deficit is a reflection of a concurrent net inflow of borrowed funds from the rest of the world , the accumulation of debt from a long succession of large annual deficits has caused the united states to move from being a small net creditor to the rest of the world to being a large net debtor . does it suggest there is no reason for concern about u.s. international imbalances because its accumulated debt is economically costless ? . a surplus in the investment income balance ( the u.s. earns more than it pays ) means that the united states , despite being a large net debtor on an accounting basis ( value of foreign liabilities exceeds value of foreign assets ) , is on an economic basis a net creditor . therefore , the u.s. trade deficit and its consequences will continue to be legitimate matters of concern for economic policy makers . it is reported as a component of the current account balance — the nation's most comprehensive measure of international transactions . because the united states is generating net capital income receipts suggests that it is an economic net creditor to the rest of the world and is bearing no debt service cost on its large external debt . the significance of this enduring surplus of investment income is that the united states , although a large net debtor , has been borrowing free of any economically meaningful debt service cost . there is , however , an apparent paradox in u.s. international transactions in this period . an economically significant debt would generate net capital income payments to the rest of the world , that is , a debt burden in the form of real resources being transferred to the rest of the world . it is probably true that the valuation of u.s. external assets and liabilities is subject to measurement error . even ignoring the likely bias associated with the reporting of retained earnings to compute the investment income balance , the likely pace of debt accumulation by the united states in conjunction with a likely future of higher world interest rates , suggests that the current investment income surplus will soon turn to deficit .
the receipt of "gifts" by members and staff of the house of representatives and of the senate , including the receipt or acceptance of payment or reimbursement of travel expenses from outside , private , third - party sources , is generally restricted by the operation of federal statutory law , as applied by the house and senate rules . the wording of the house and senate rules on this subject are substantially identical , other than as to the permissible duration of such trips , which is limited in the house to four days for domestic and seven days for foreign travel ( excluding travel days ) , and in the senate to three days for domestic travel and seven days for foreign travel ( also excluding travel days ) . members and staff may generally not accept private gifts , reimbursements , or payments of their expenses , other than from their relatives and certain long - term personal friends , when the value of a gift is $50 or more ( or when multiple gifts of under $50 from the same source aggregate $100 or more in a calendar year ) . there do exist exceptions to the gifts prohibitions under both house and senate rules which allow for the acceptance of some travel expenses from outside , third parties for what is characterized as "officially connected" travel by members , officers and employees of the house and senate in specifically defined and limited circumstances . under these provisions , members of congress and congressional staff are prohibited from soliciting or accepting gifts from any private sources unless expressly permitted by an exception in the congressional rules . the travel that has recently raised several questions has been the acceptance of private payment or reimbursement of "officially connected" travel by members and staff .  ( b ) each advance authorization to accept reimbursement shall be signed by the member orofficer under whose direct supervision the employee works and shall include — ( 1 ) the name of the employee ; ( 2 ) the name of the person who will make the reimbursement ; ( 3 ) the time , place , and purpose of the travel ; and ( 4 ) a determination that the travel is in connection with the duties of the employee as an officeholder and would not create the appearance that the employee is using public office for private gain . both the rules of the house of representatives and the rules of the senate expressly permit , as an exception to the general gifts restriction , the payment or reimbursement by certain outside , private sources of the "necessary" travel expenses of members for events such as conferences , fact - finding tours , symposia or lectures which , although not core congressional functions , are "in connection with" or sufficiently related to a member's official duties . this report discusses the statutory and congressional rule structure under which members of the house and senate , under an exception to the gift rules , may generally accept from some private sources — other than registered lobbyists or registered foreign agents — necessary travel expenses , including transportation , food and lodging , for travel "in connection with" their official duties , such as for fact - finding trips , conferences or symposia , under certain circumstances and limitations .
u.s. interests in the republic of korea ( r.o.k. — south korea ) involve security , economic , and political concerns . the united states suffered over 33,000 killed and over 101,000 wounded in the korean war ( 1950-53 ) . if approved , it would be the second - largest u.s. fta ; only the north american free trade agreement would be larger . in 2007 , the united states and south korea signed a free trade agreement ( fta ) . the united states agreed to defend south korea from external aggression in the 1954 mutual defense treaty . the treaty obligates the united states and south korea to ( 1 ) seek to settle international disputes "by peaceful means" ; ( 2 ) refrain from "the threat or use of force" that is inconsistent with the purposes of the united nations ; ( 3 ) consult together when either party "is threatened by external armed attack" and resort to "mutual aid" and "appropriate means" to deter an armed attack ; ( 4 ) "act to meet the common danger in accordance with its constitutional processes" if the territories of either party "in the pacific area" are subject to "an armed attack. . the united states is south korea's third - largest trading partner ( replaced as number one by china in 2002 ) and second - largest export market . this force is intended to deter north korea's ( the democratic people's republic of korea — d.p.r.k. ) . crs report rl34330 , the proposed u.s. - south korea free trade agreement ( korus fta ) : provisions and implications , coordinated by [author name scrubbed] . under the mutual defense treaty , south korea grants the united states the rights to station u.s. military forces in south korea "as determined by mutual agreement. . neither president bush nor president obama has submitted the fta to congress for approval . however , other north korean policies and actions have affected u.s. interests including proliferation of missiles and other weapons of mass destruction to middle eastern countries , support for terrorist groups in the middle east and south asia , counterfeiting of u.s. currency and u.s. products , human rights abuses , and policies that have forced thousands of north koreans to flee to china as refugees . south korea is the seventh - largest u.s. trading partner . the united states maintains about 28,000 troops there to supplement the 650,000-strong south korean armed forces . since 1991 , u.s. attention has focused primarily on north korea's drive to develop nuclear weapons . crs report r40851 , south korea: its domestic politics and foreign policy outlook , by [author name scrubbed] . north korean policies are important issues in u.s. relations with china and japan . total trade is close to $80 billion annually . crs report r40684 , north korea's second nuclear test: implications of u.n. security council resolution 1874 , coordinated by mary beth nikitin and [author name scrubbed] . crs report rl34256 , north korea's nuclear weapons: technical issues , by mary beth nikitin .
congress uses data from the uniform crime reports ( ucr ) , the national incident - based reporting system ( nibrs ) , and the national crime victimization survey ( ncvs ) to inform policy decisions and develop appropriate responses to crime . this report reviews ( 1 ) the history of the ucr , the nibrs , and the ncvs ; ( 2 ) the methods each program uses to collect crime data ; and ( 3 ) the limitations of the data collected by each program . for example , in the 103 rd congress , the community oriented policing services ( cops ) program was created to provide state and local law enforcement agencies with grants to help them hire , rehire , and redeploy law enforcement officers to engage in community policing . such crime data have been used to shape policy in a variety of ways . in addition , the house and the senate appropriations committees increased funding for the federal bureau of investigation ( fbi ) to hire additional agents to investigate violent crime . for example , the edward byrne memorial justice assistance grant ( jag ) program formula uses ucr data to allocate federal funds to state and local governments for criminal justice programs . moreover , both the house and senate appropriations committees recommended increased funding for state and local law enforcement to support efforts to fight and prevent crime . 1700 ) that would increase authorized funding for and expand the scope of the cops program . in addition to shaping policy , congress has used crime data to develop formula allocations for certain grant programs . in the 110 th congress , two bills have been introduced ( s. 368 and h.r . because of the importance of crime data in both shaping policy and allocating federal funding , it is important to understand how each program collects data and the limitations of the data . the house report that accompanied the house commerce , justice , and science appropriations bill stated that the committee was concerned about the recent increase in the violent crime rate . the committees felt it was important for the fbi to help state and local law enforcement investigate violent crime in light of the recent increase in the violent crime rate . the aforementioned legislation and congressional action were based on crime data collected by the ucr and the ncvs . congress cited both ucr and ncvs crime statistics when articulating the need for more community policing officers . the impetus for the legislation was a recent increase in the violent crime rate as reported by the ucr . the report then compares the similarities and differences of ucr and ncvs data . it concludes by reviewing issues related to the nibrs and the ncvs . the ncvs has four major objectives: ( 1 ) developing detailed information about the victims and consequences of crime , ( 2 ) estimating the number and types of crimes not reported to police , ( 3 ) providing uniform measures of selected types of crimes , and ( 4 ) permitting comparisons over time and population types ( e.g. , urban , suburban , and rural ) . these issues include ( 1 ) barriers to implementing the nibrs nationwide , ( 2 ) potential increases in the crime rate because of transitioning to the nibrs , and ( 3 ) cuts in the ncvs sample size and the effects associated with the decrease in sample size .
a variety of offices at the federal level respond to complaints , grievances , and concerns from the public about government programs , services , and operations . despite their differences , they exhibit a common purpose — to represent the public in such matters — which is reflected in the classic ombudsman: that is , a high - ranking official who may be situated outside the executive and possessing independent resources and powers . this notion , which has developed over more than a century , has its modern genesis in sweden and its evolution largely in european parliamentary regimes . three with enhanced responsibilities are in the department of homeland security ( dhs ) : a privacy officer and an officer for civil rights and civil liberties , along with additional special duties for the inspector general ( ig ) . the intelligence reform and terrorism prevention act of 2004 , which expanded the government's powers to combat terrorism , established a new entity or added to the responsibilities and roles of existing ones to help protect civil rights and civil liberties . in brief , the concept of ombudsman has come to mean , in the words of former senator edward long , "a guardian of the people's rights against abuses and malfunctions by government , its programs , and its officials — a sort of watchman over the law's watchmen. . separate from these functions and duties , some ombudsman - like offices issue reports ( periodic and / or episodic ) to agency officials , congress , and / or the public , while others have no such obligation or practice . the u.s. federal government has not adopted the "classic" ombudsman . the american national red cross governance modernization act of 2007 established an ombudsman in the american national red cross ( anrc ) . freedom of information act ( foia ) amendments signed into law on december 31 , 2007 , created several new positions to assist the public in gaining access to government information . still other entities may be proactive ; that is , they seek out certain clientele groups to notify them about relevant government services , assist them in gaining access to these , and ensure that such services are delivered properly and fully . these entities , which differ in important respects , are variously referred to as complaint - handling , advocacy , public counsel , coordinative , and ombudsman offices . the law also required the creation of an office of government information services ( ogis ) in the national archives and records administration ; it is to review executive - branch agency compliance with foia policies , recommend foia policy changes to congress and the president , offer mediation services between foia requesters and administrative agencies , and issue advisory opinions if mediation has not resolved a dispute . other complaint - handling entities do follow up on such charges , examine the agency's operations , and , in some cases , mediate or resolve disputes between the aggrieved party and the agency . the legislation is designed to aid returning wounded military personnel in receiving appropriate medical care , when they are in the service ( and in the department of defense ) , as well as after they are discharged ( and under the jurisdiction of the department of veterans affairs ) .
child welfare agencies seek to ensure the well - being of children and their families , including protecting children from abuse or neglect and ensuring that they have a safe and permanent home . as the u.s. constitution has been interpreted , states have the primary obligation to ensure child welfare . other legislative proposals would authorize or require new services and protections for children in ( or about to enter ) foster care ; seek to improve services for youth who are aging out of care ( including those who have already exited due to age ) ; encourage greater access to a range of services for kinship caregivers and further encourage their involvement as decision - makers and use as caregivers for children who cannot remain safely with their parents ; aim to improve foster and adoptive parent recruitment efforts of state child welfare agencies ; permit direct access to federal title iv - e funds for tribal governments ; and make other related changes intended to enhance the safety , permanence , and well - being of children . the bulk ( $4.6 billion ) of this money was appropriated to reimburse states for the cost of providing foster care for children who meet federal eligibility criteria ( estimated 43% of national foster care caseload in fy2006 ) . state compliance with the majority of these federal requirements is checked as part of the child and family services review ( cfsr ) . at the same time , this discussion is not comprehensive and inclusion of a bill ( or exclusion ) is not intended to suggest the viability ( or lack of viability ) for a given proposal .  ( appendix a discusses several child welfare financing proposals made outside of congress — including a proposal by the bush administration — that have influenced or continue to influence legislative proposals. ) . federal child welfare policies focus , overall , on ensuring safety and well - being for all children served . adoption incentives ( authorized under section 473a of the social security act ) are bonus funds awarded to states that increase the number of children adopted out of foster care . 104-193 ) , congress ended the entitlement to cash aid for needy families with children and converted funding for this purpose to a block grant . legislation that would respond to a number of the concerns raised in the child welfare hearings held during 2007 , including proposals to change the federal child welfare financing structure , has been introduced in the 110 th congress . the 109 th congress enacted numerous changes intended to improve and strengthen child welfare services , including a number of new requirements that states must meet related to children in foster care . federal involvement in child welfare is tied to the financial assistance it provides to states to conduct these activities . in the 1996 welfare reform law ( p.l . a state that is not in "substantial conformity" with federal child welfare policy — as determined by the review — must implement a program improvement plan ( pip ) . an effort was made to identify bills with proposals that highlight a wide range of child welfare policy concerns and that would be expected to affect the primary populations served by the child welfare agency ( as well as the child welfare agency itself ) .
while the rapidly emerging field of nanotechnology is believed by many to offer significant economic and societal benefits , some research results have raised concerns about the potential environmental , health , and safety ( ehs ) implications of nanoscale materials . a key issue before congress regarding nanotechnology is how best to protect human health , safety , and the environment as nanoscale materials and products are researched , developed , manufactured , used , and discarded . this report identifies the potential environmental , health , and safety opportunities and challenges of nanotechnology ; explains the importance of addressing nanotechnology ehs concerns ; identifies and discusses nanotechnology ehs issues ; and summarizes several options for congressional action , including the nanotechnology ehs - related provisions of selected legislation . potential tools the federal government might use to address these issues include research and development , regulation , and international engagement . some of the properties of nanoscale materials ( e.g. , small size , high surface area - to - volume ratio ) that have given rise to great hopes for beneficial applications have also given rise to concerns about their potential adverse implications for the environment , and human health and safety . these properties are believed by many to offer substantial economic and societal benefits . nanotechnology — a term encompassing nanoscale science , engineering , and technology — is focused on understanding , controlling , and exploiting the unique properties of matter that can emerge at scales of one to 100 nanometers . the nni is a multi - agency federal effort to coordinate and expand federal nanotechnology research and development ( r&d ) efforts . such large investments and intensified efforts to capitalize on these public and private investments have caused some observers ( as detailed later in this report ) to suggest that there is insufficient information about the potential effects nanotechnology products and manufacturing processes may have on human health , safety , and the environment . for more information on nanotechnology and the nni see , see crs report rl34401 , the national nanotechnology initiative: overview , reauthorization , and appropriations issues , crs report rl34493 , nanotechnology and u.s. competitiveness: issues and options , and crs report rl34614 , nanotechnology and environmental , health , and safety: issues for consideration , all by john f. sargent . among the issues these stakeholders have identified are characterizing the toxicity of nanoscale materials ; developing methods for assessing and managing the risks of these materials ; and understanding how these materials move in , and interact with , the environment . with more than 1,000 nanotechnology products reportedly commercially available , there is great interest in protecting the health and safety of the scientists working with nanoscale materials , workers who manufacture the products , consumers who use the products , and members of the general public who may be exposed to nanoparticles , as well as in understanding the environmental impact of nanomanufacturing processes and the use and disposal of nanotechnology products . congressionally - mandated reviews of the nni by the national research council ( nrc ) and the president's council of advisors on science and technology ( pcast ) have concluded that additional research is required to make a rigorous risk assessment of nanoscale materials .
108-357 ; the jobs act ) contained a number of provisions related to the taxation of multi - national corporations . the american jobs creation act of 2004 ( p.l . the act's changes were due to take effect for tax years beginning after december 31 , 2008 . among these provisions were more generous rules for multinationals to use in allocating interest expense for purposes of the u.s. foreign tax credit . the implementation was , subsequently , delayed until tax years beginning after december 31 , 2010 , by p.l . 111-92 , delayed implementation of the worldwide allocation rules to 2018 , while the hiring incentives to restore employment act , p.l . 3962 , the affordable healthcare for america act of 2009 , would repeal the worldwide allocation rule . 7060 , would have also delayed or repealed the worldwide interest allocation rule . this rule is referred to as the "worldwide" allocation of interest and it is the subject of this report . other proposals introduced in the 110 th congress , including h.r . in the 111 th congress , the worker , homeownership , and business assistance act of 2009 , p.l . the jobs act's interest allocation provision was designed to correct what some argue was an imperfection in the design of the foreign tax credit rules . 111-147 , further delayed implementation to 2021 . tax planning techniques could undermine this objective — and lead to increased revenue loss and efficiency costs . specifically , the provision expands the subgroup election for banks to include other financial intermediaries , including insurance companies — which allows for the separate calculation of interest allocation . another proposal in the 111 th congress , h.r . because of effects detailed below , the more interest that is assigned to domestic sources , the more foreign tax credits a firm can claim and the lower its u.s. tax liability . some believed that the prior law's approach unduly left taxpayers exposed to double taxation of foreign - source income . this provision could insulate some firms from a portion of the interest allocation rules , and it is at odds with the theory underlying the act's other provisions . the act contained another relevant modification to the interest allocation rules , that would increase a firm's creditable taxes . the analysis here indicates that worldwide allocation rules , while losing revenue , would likely be better aligned with the objective of the foreign tax credit . in general , the tax code places a limit on the foreign tax credit . to calculate the limit , firms are required to separate interest and other expenses according to source — foreign or domestic . the jobs act addressed this perceived flaw . if debt is fungible , worldwide allocation is the most accurate method of ensuring that the u.s. foreign tax credit is used for its intended purpose: allowing the foreign tax credit to offset the full share of u.s. pre - credit tax that falls on foreign source income . 3920 , and h.r . as such , the foreign tax credit helps to define the u.s. tax jurisdiction and it is not a tax expenditure favoring selected groups .
the republic of yemen remains a country of concern to u.s. policy makers . although yemen itself is a resource - poor nation , it is strategically located next to saudi arabia ( figure 1 ) , one of the world's major oil producers , and the bab al mandab strait , through which commercial oil tankers carry an estimated 3.4 million barrels per day ( 3.5% to 4% of the global oil supply ) . its poverty has been exacerbated by the quadrupling of its population over the last 30 years . yemen's 1,184-mile coastline abuts the red sea and the gulf of aden across from the horn of africa , which until recently had been a major area of somalia - based piracy . issues such as terrorism and yemen's political stability are tied to broader questions regarding the country's long - term economic and environmental viability . for more than a decade , u.s. officials and members of congress have been concerned with the threat of terrorism emanating from yemen and directed against the united states . yemen is home to al qaeda in the arabian peninsula ( aqap ) , an affiliate of al qaeda ( aq ) . to date , the terrorist group has unsuccessfully attempted to target the united states at least three times ( in 2009 , 2010 , and 2012 ) using concealed explosive devices designed to destroy commercial aircraft or detonate inside parcel packages . according to the 2014 united nations human development index , yemen ranks 154 out of 187 countries . such dire socio - economic prospects , combined with yemen's proximity to both africa and arab gulf states , have made it a global transit and destination point for migrants and refugees . the u.s. department of homeland security considers aqap to be the aq affiliate "most likely to attempt transnational attacks against the united states. . agricultural development has been decimated by water shortages , political strife , and lack of investment , making the country dependent on food imports for up to 90% of basic staples . the intelligence services of saudi arabia helped disrupt two of these plots . in may 2014 , the world food program estimated that 10 million yemenis out of a total population of 25 million could be categorized as either severely food insecure or close to it . in recent years , saudi authorities have begun deporting more and more yemeni workers , thus exacerbating bilateral tensions . each year , thousands of asylum - seekers and economic migrants from somalia , ethiopia , and eritrea make what can be a perilous journey to yemen , where they either remain or seek passage to the wealthier gulf monarchies . however , in yemen no one group , including the central government , has a monopoly on armed force ; various actors can act as "spoilers" to disrupt the system in pursuit of their own interests ( figure 2 ) ; and that dynamic played out throughout 2014 . before that , the obama administration and other observers considered yemen to be one of the few relative arab spring "success stories" ; the government had new leadership ( president hadi ) and had managed to bring all the nation's political factions together under the rubric of the national dialogue conference ( ndc ) in an attempt to reach consensus on governance .
pursuant to the resource conservation and recovery act ( rcra ) , the u.s. environmental protection agency ( epa ) has established regulations regarding the transport , treatment , storage , and disposal of hazardous wastes . rcra establishes certain minimum standards that states must meet . however , states have the option to implement requirements that are more stringent than those specified under rcra . with increased legislative activity in the states , it is anticipated that stakeholders will increase their call for federal legislation regarding e - waste management . as more states propose such legislation , potentially regulated stakeholders ( particularly electronics manufacturers and retailers ) have expressed concern that they will be required to comply with a patchwork of state requirements throughout the united states . to date , 14 states have enacted some form of legislation or regulations that will affect e - waste recycling and disposal practices . to illustrate the issues associated with individual state action , this report discusses the key issues that have led to state action , describes common elements in state waste laws and proposals , and provides an overview of each enacted state law . many states have opted to do so — particularly with regard to the management of certain hazardous wastes generated by households . one goal common to both the hearings and the establishment of the working group was to explore potential national solutions to the e - waste management issue . a challenge to many states is how to finance an e - waste collection and recycling program . for example , leaded glass in a cathode ray tube ( crt ) may be recovered and reprocessed to produce new crts . fourteen states have enacted some form of e - waste management law . in 2005 , two congressional hearings were held to explore issues associated with e - waste , and the congressional e - waste working group was formed . recycling may include any of a number of services or processes , such as: sorting to find reusable devices ( which may in turn be sold or donated to an entity such as a school or charitable organization ) ; demanufacturing into component parts that can be resold ; or further processing components to extract materials such as metals , glass , or plastic . households and certain small businesses are essentially exempt from rcra . however , most state laws and proposals have certain broad elements in common , such as specifying the electronic devices covered under the law , how a collection and recycling program will be financed , collection and recycling criteria that must be implemented to minimize impacts on human health and the environment , and restrictions or requirements that products must meet to be lawfully sold in the state . this means that under federal law , hazardous wastes generated by those entities may be disposed of in municipal solid waste landfills or incinerators . aside from that similarity , each state's means of achieving its goals is significantly different . if more than 10% of the total products collected are orphan products , the department must provide recommendations for reducing the amount of orphan products or alternative methods for financing the collection , transportation , and recycling of orphan products .
to deal with this situation , a variety of government - to - government efforts and transatlantic dialogues have been created to increase understanding between policymakers and regulators on both sides of the atlantic , to minimize existing regulatory barriers , and to prevent the emergence of new regulatory barriers . the united states and the 27-member european union ( eu ) share a huge , dynamic , and mutually beneficial economic partnership . while the transatlantic market is today highly integrated due in large part to a massive amount of foreign direct investment by both u.s. and european companies in each other's markets , differences in regulatory approaches , standards , and philosophies militate against the development of an even tighter and more integrated marketplace . not only is the u.s. - eu commercial relationship , what many call the transatlantic economy , the largest in the world , it is also arguably the most important . they also agreed on a framework for advancing transatlantic economic integration ( the framework ) and created a new institutional structure , the transatlantic economic council ( tec ) , to advance the process of regulatory cooperation and barrier reduction . at the 2007 u.s. - eu summit , leaders of the eu and united states committed their governments to increasing the efficiency and transparency of transatlantic economic cooperation and to accelerating the reduction and elimination of barriers to international trade and investment with the ultimate objective of achieving a barrier free transatlantic market . since the establishment of the new transatlantic agenda ( nta ) in 1995 , there have been a number of new trc initiatives , all aimed at removing or reducing regulatory barriers to trade . it is presented in seven parts: the first section describes the nature and scope of u.s. - eu regulatory barriers ; the second section explains the rationale for regulatory cooperation ; the third section highlights the differences in u.s. - eu regulatory approaches ; the fourth section examines the various forms of regulatory cooperation ; the fifth section evaluates the results of past initiatives at regulatory cooperation ; the sixth section analyzes the creation and operation of the transatlantic economic council ; and the last section highlights the role of congress in transatlantic regulatory cooperation . these efforts , falling under the rubric of transatlantic regulatory cooperation ( trc ) , are seen as being important to today's u.s. - eu economic relationship . proponents maintain that trc undertakings can not only prevent disruptive and costly trade disputes from occurring , but also spur trade and investment flows by reducing costs for producers and consumers on both sides of the atlantic . much could depend upon whether the tec can exert enough political leverage to convince regulators to make reforms that will result in reduction of regulatory barriers between the eu and the united states , as well as increase the role that legislators on both sides of the atlantic play in the process . while each of these initiatives has made some progress toward reducing regulatory burdens , many u.s. and european companies heavily engaged in the transatlantic marketplace maintain that the results have not been materially significant . regulatory differences are also behind some of the most politically sensitive bilateral trade disputes .
the department of defense ( dod ) , however , operates a pay system called the national security personnel system ( nsps ) , which attempts to link pay increases more closely to employee performance without the use of grades or steps . as of june 2009 , the general schedule ( gs ) covered roughly 59.8% of federal employees . on october 28 , 2009 , the president signed the bill into law ( p.l . as of june 2009 , 211,000 ( 29.4% ) of dod's 717,000 employees were covered by nsps . the gs contains 15 pay grades , each of which is divided into 10 steps . federal employees rise within grades in the gs pay scale based on performance and length of service . dod must now return employees to the pay system in which they were formerly enrolled prior to the installation of nsps . on october 7 , 2009 , house and senate conferees reported a version of the national defense authorization bill for fiscal year 2010 that included language to terminate nsps by 2012 . as of june 2009 , dod employed more than 717,000 civilian employees — about 35.4% of federal civilian executive branch personnel worldwide . the senate agreed to the conference report on october 22 , 2009 . the legislation to eliminate the pay system follows years of complaints of nsps performance evaluation inconsistencies and litigation related to nsps payouts . the higher an employee's grade and step , the higher his or her pay . the report then analyzes lessons that can be learned from nsps and that may be applied to future attempts to create a federal performance - based pay system . this report reviews the creation of the nsps , examines how nsps operates , and discusses litigation against it . nsps is "the first civilian alternate personnel system to be implemented on a broad basis , across an entire executive department," and dod is "the largest department in the federal government. . on october 8 , 2009 , the house agreed to the conference report . 111-84 ) . not every dod employee , however , is eligible to enter nsps . many provisions in the dod proposal were ultimately included in title xi of the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2004 ( p.l . this report will be updated as necessary . the system has weathered several delays in its implementation , but currently covers 211,000 of dod's civilian employees . walker's response , submitted on july 3 , 2003 , included the following comments: based on our experience , while dod's leadership has the intent and the ability to transform the department , the needed institutional infrastructure is not in place in a vast majority of dod organizations... . nsps grew out of george w. bush administration assertions that the gs system was incapable of creating a responsive and flexible national security workforce . following the hearing , senators george v. voinovich and thomas carper asked then - comptroller general david m. walker to respond to several additional questions about dod's ability to motivate and control its workforce . the proposal recommended changing the statutory basis for much of dod's civilian personnel system to create a "more flexible , mission - driven system of human resources management" that could "adequately address the 21 st century national security environment. .
those who remain in north korea ( formally known as the democratic republic of north korea , or dprk ) also continue to suffer from a lack of food and other basic humanitarian provisions . the increased international attention given to the situation of north koreans seeking refuge , primarily in china , has led congress to take a greater interest in the refugee situation and the underlying causes within north korea and across its borders . the north korean human rights act ( nkhra ) authorizes the president new funds to support human rights efforts , improve the flow of information , and to require the president to appoint a special envoy on human rights in north korea . these include the pursuit of nuclear weapons and missile programs ; a history of proliferating missiles ; reported threats to export parts of its self - declared nuclear arsenal ; and possible possession of chemical and biological weapons programs . in 2004 the 108 th congress passed , and president bush signed , the north korean human rights act ( h.r . both the house and senate have held hearings and passed resolutions addressing the status of the refugees . food shortages , persecution , and human rights abuses have prompted thousands and perhaps hundreds of thousands of north koreans to go to china where they often become victims of further abuse , neglect , and lack of protection . additionally , several members of congress have written letters regarding the issue to the u.s. and chinese governments . amid an atmosphere of continuing tensions over north korea's nuclear program , the potential remains for worsening humanitarian conditions and a possible increase in north koreans fleeing the country . north korea is also on the u.s. list of states that sponsor terrorism . it also identifies the need for humanitarian food assistance and refugee care . the situation raises the questions of what more , if anything , can and should be done — by the united states and the international community — not only to focus attention on the abuses of the dprk regime , but to alleviate the suffering of north koreans . north korea has been viewed as a threat to u.s. interests for a number of important security reasons that go well beyond refugee concerns and human rights issues . china generally refuses international agencies and non - governmental organizations ( ngos ) access to the north koreans who cross its border ; this and its periodic practice of deportation , have led many to ask about international law and the protection of refugees in china . increasingly , some argue it is the suffering of ordinary north koreans that brings into sharp relief the continuing violation of fundamental rights — rights pertaining to food security , refugee status , and individual freedoms — and raises questions about how those rights should be protected and by whom . 4011 ; p.l . 108-333 ) . united states policy has adopted elements of several of these strategies in the past and future policies will likely be a combination of approaches . formulating policy toward north korea has been characterized as deciding among a range of bad options . the following outlines some basic approaches to dealing with north korea's human rights and refugee issues advocated by various constituencies , with an analysis of some of the possible diplomatic and security - related ramifications .
the following definition is used by some science and technology policy analysts as a cornerstone of thinking about science and technology ( s&t ) policy decisionmaking: [science and technology policy] is concerned with the allocation of resources for scientific research and technical development . it includes government encouragement of science and technology as the roots of strategy for industrial development and in economic growth ; but it also includes the use of science in connection with problems of the public sector . these differences include the rapidity of change in science and technology ; novelty of many issues in science and technology ; scale , complexity , and interdependence among technologies ; irreversibility of many scientific and technological effects ; public worries about real or imagined threats to human health and safety ; and the challenges to deeply held social values . scientific and technical knowledge and guidance influences many of today's public policies . for example , federal decisionmaking regarding nuclear power includes nuclear regulatory commission - safety and design ; federal power commission - rate bases and authority ; occupational safety & health administration - worker safety ; environmental protection agency - environmental impact studies ; department of energy - nuclear power research and development ; federal emergency management agency - nuclear power plant emergency ; department of homeland security , federal bureau of investigation , federal aviation administration , u.s. coast guard , and others - nuclear power plant security ; and department of transportation - shipment of radioactive materials . because science and technical knowledge and guidance influences public policy decisionmaking on many other issues , some think that science and technology policy does not need to be a separate field of inquiry . others , however , view s&t policy as different from other public policy issue areas . this section also discusses different perspectives on federal funding of research ; policy for science and science for policy ; and policy for technology and technology for policy . at the request of president washington , congress passed its first science and technology policy - related act , regarding patents , in 1790 . because of the close association of basic research with higher education , this aspect of science [and technology] policy is difficult to separate from overall educational policy and from [scientific and] technical [workforce] policy . this report will provide a basic understanding of science and technology policy including the nature of s&t policy , how scientific and technical knowledge is useful for public policy decisionmaking , and an overview of the key stakeholders in science and technology policy . these actions led to today's patent and trademark office ( pto ) . despite these challenges , scientific and technical knowledge and advice has the potential of being useful in making decisions related to public policy . congress makes decisions regarding all four of the s&t policy facets described earlier: science for policy , technology for policy , policy for science , and policy for technolog y . science and technology policy decisionmaking is both democratic and decentralized . science and technology policy issues tend to reach the presidential level if they involve multiple agencies ; have budgetary , economic , national security , or foreign policy dimensions ; or are highly visible to the public .
it also provides the projected effects of the options on social security and ssi benefit levels and eligibility in 2042 , and the interaction between the two programs . these four options were chosen to illustrate different approaches to mitigating poverty in a benefit cut scenario , allowing policymakers to see the potential pros and cons of generic options . the details of each option could be modified or combined with other provisions . this analysis does not cover potential transition issues nor the cost of the options modeled . the following section describes each of the four options crs modeled . one way to measure such targeting is to compare the estimated effects of potential policy options on the elderly poor vs. the elderly non - poor . if one of the objectives of reforming social security were to mitigate the effect of possible benefit reductions on the elderly poor , targeting spending would become an important consideration . in addition , social security faces long - term solvency problems . in nearly all cases , their increased social security benefits are projected to result in reduced ssi benefits or loss of ssi eligibility . each additional dollar of social security benefits could reduce ssi recipients' benefits by one dollar ( or more , after factoring in state supplements ) , and could disqualify some recipients for ssi altogether . other ways of analyzing the targeting of an option include measuring the poverty gap and looking at the proportion of people who fall below a given percentage of the poverty threshold ( e.g. , 150% or 200% of poverty ) . under option #1 , which would create a new minimum social security benefit at the poverty line , about two - thirds of the poor elderly ( 68% ) are projected to be unaffected . ultimately , future elderly poverty rates depend largely on how policymakers choose to address social security's looming solvency problems . once those decisions are made , the tradeoffs between any options to mitigate the effects of potential benefit cuts would be judged based on their effectiveness , efficiency , cost , and on policymakers' judgments about a myriad of other factors . among the non - poor elderly , most ( 84% ) are projected not to be affected , as shown in figure 8 . the remaining 5% of the elderly poor are projected to lose income under the option . in addition to considering benefit levels , poverty rates , and targeting , as examined above , policymakers examining the potential effects of social security reform on the elderly poor would likely consider other criteria when discussing policy changes to either social security or ssi . figure 7 shows the elderly poor , the target group for the modeled policy options . the income measure shows the projected net change in income under each option , including both social security and ssi benefits , so these projections reflect the interaction between the two programs . the federal budget is currently in deficit and is projected to remain so in the future . among the non - poor elderly , most ( 91% ) are projected not to be affected , as shown in figure 8 .
extension of pntr has implications for russia's accession to the world trade organization ( wto ) . the change would likely occur in the form of legislation to eliminate the application of title iv to trade with russia . granting russia permanent normal trade relations ( pntr ) status requires a change in law because russia is prohibited from receiving pntr under title iv of the trade act of 1974 . the wto requires its members to extend immediate and unconditional nondiscriminatory treatment to the goods and services of all other members . on november 16 , 2012 , the house passed ( 365-43 ) , and on december 6 , 2012 , the senate passed ( 92-4 ) h.r . title iv includes the so - called jackson - vanik amendment free emigration requirements . after 19 years of negotiations , russia joined the wto on august 22 , 2012 . president obama signed the legislation into law on december 14 , 2012 . the legislation also included provisions — the magnitsky rule of law accountability act of 2012 — that impose sanctions on individuals linked to the incarceration and death of russian lawyer sergei magnitsky . 6156 also authorized pntr status for moldova . 6156 , which does just that , among other things . the law also authorizes pntr for moldova . on november 16 , 2012 , the house passed ( 365-43 ) , and on december 6 , 2012 , the senate passed ( 92-4 ) h.r . only two countries — cuba and north korea — do not have ntr status in trade with the united states . it also contained other provisions that required: the ustr report annually to the senate finance committee and the house ways and means committee on russia's implementation of its wto commitments , including sanitary and phytosanitary ( sps ) standards and ipr protection and on acceding to the wto plurilateral agreements on government procurement and information technology ; the ustr report to the two committees within 180 days and annually thereafter on ustr actions to enforce russia's compliance with its wto commitments ; the ustr and the secretary of state report annually on measures that they have taken and results they have achieved to promote the rule of law in russia and to support u.s. trade and investment by strengthening investor protections in russia ; the secretary of commerce to take specific measures against bribery and corruption in russia , including establishing a hotline and website for u.s. investors to report instances of bribery and corruption ; a description of russian government policies , practices , and laws that adversely affect u.s. digital trade be included in the ustr's annual trade barriers report ( required under section 181 of the trade act of 1974 ) ; and the negotiation of a bilateral agreement with russia on equivalency of sps measures . "normal trade relations" ( ntr ) , or "most - favored - nation" ( mfn ) , trade status is used to denote nondiscriminatory treatment of a trading partner compared to that of other countries . it authorized the president to grant pntr by proclamation . it also finds that russia has problems with weak enforcement of ipr in some areas , including internet piracy .
these diseases will endanger u.s. citizens at home and abroad , threaten u.s. armed forces deployed overseas , and exacerbate social and political instability in key countries and regions in which the united states has significant interests. . nic cited a number of factors that heighten the infectious diseases threat , including increasing drug resistance , slow development of new antibiotics , urban sprawl , environmental degradation , and the growing ease and frequency of cross - border movements . in january 2000 , the national intelligence council ( nic ) released a report asserting that , "[n]ew and reemerging infectious diseases will pose a rising threat to u.s. and global security over the next 20 years . over the past decade , there has been considerable debate about countries' abilities to contain and prevent infectious disease outbreaks . although congress voted to increase support for global tb efforts , some members expressed concern that the additional funds might be provided at the expense of other global health programs . in 2003 , when the disease was ultimately contained , scientists called the agent severe acute respiratory syndrome ( sars ) . congress designates funds for global tb interventions only to the u.s. agency for international development ( usaid ) , while other agencies and departments draw from general funds ( see table a - 5 in the appendix ) . in fy2008 , congress significantly boosted support for global tb programs , providing $162.2 million to usaid for international tb efforts and directing ogac to provide not less than $150 million for joint hiv / tb programs . in fy2004 , congress appropriated $85.1 million to usaid for global tb efforts , $92.0 million in fy2005 , $91.5 million in fy2006 , and $94.9 million in fy2007 . who asserts that weak health systems play a key role in the continued spread of tb across africa . who is the directing and coordinating authority for health within the united nations system . in 2002 , the international community struggled to identify an unknown infectious disease that rapidly spread across 31 countries , infected more than 8,400 people , and killed 813 of those who contracted it . because agencies and departments might use discretionary funds to support global tb initiatives , some u.s. international tb activities might not be included here , such as research conducted by the national institute of health ( nih ) to develop a new tb drug with a shorter treatment regimen . since pepfar was launched in fy2004 , overall u.s. spending on international tb initiatives has hovered around $90 million ( see table a - 5 in the appendix ) . that same year , influenza a / h5n1 ( bird flu ) reemerged and spread to more than 50 countries . about 63% of those who contracted the disease have died . many health practitioners argue that inadequate access to rapid and accurate diagnostic tests significantly contribute to the rise in new tb cases on the continent . a number of u.s. agencies , centers , and departments implement a range of programs aimed at treating and containing the global spread of tuberculosis . it is responsible for providing leadership on global health matters , shaping the health research agenda , setting norms and standards , articulating evidence - based policy options , providing technical support to countries , and monitoring and assessing health trends .
this crs report analyzes the security implications of taiwan's presidential election of march 22 , 2008 , including the implications for u.s. assessments , security interests , and options for policymakers in congress and the bush administration . for details on u.s. arms sales , taiwan's missile program , a possible withdrawal of missiles by the people's liberation army ( pla ) , taiwan's defense budgets , etc . this analysis draws in part from direct information gained through a visit to taiwan to observe the election and to discuss views with a number of interlocutors , including those advising or aligned with president chen shui - bian and president - elect ma ying - jeou . this crs report will discuss the results of taiwan's presidential election and symbolic yet sensitive referendums on u.n. membership , outlook for taiwan's policies , implications for u.s. security interests in taiwan , and options for u.s. policymakers presented with a window of opportunity . the issue is what options might be pursued by u.s. policymakers in congress and the bush administration to advance u.s. interests . an alternative would be for the united states to continue its existing policy of resisting policy initiatives through the presidential inauguration on may 20 , 2008 ( until current president chen shui - bian leaves office ) . alternatively , a window of opportunity is presented for the first time in years to advance u.s. security interests in taiwan's self - defense , democracy , economy ( as the united states' 9 th largest trading partner ) , and role as a responsible global citizen ( for example , in weapons nonproliferation ) . there are a number of alternative futures for taiwan in the near and longer terms , including scenarios that are conducive to stability and policymaking , and scenarios that would challenge consensus - building and effective governance in taiwan , with implications for u.s. security interests in stability and deterrence . other relevant reports on the election and u.s. policy toward taiwan are: crs report rs22853 , taiwan ' s 2008 presidential election , by [author name scrubbed] , crs report rl30341 , china / taiwan: evolution of the " one china " policy — key statements from washington , beijing , and taipei , by [author name scrubbed] , and crs report rl33510 , taiwan: overall developments and policy issues in the 109 th congress , by [author name scrubbed] . a third approach to take ( either before or after ma's inauguration ) with comprehensive or certain options would strengthen u.s. - taiwan relations in military , political , or economic security . kmt stays unified ; dpp rebuilds ; and stable two - party democracy is sustained . kmt splits into factions ( ly out of control ) ; dpp re - organizes as strong challenge . the united states could wait until the kmt resolves internal debates and clarifies its national security policy , including decisions on military programs , organization , personnel , leadership , and spending . in one view , there is opportunity to turn u.s. attention from managing the cross - strait situation to urgent problems that require the prc's improved cooperation , such as dealing with nuclear proliferation in north korea and iran , the crisis in darfur in sudan , repression in burma , the crackdown in tibet , etc .
constitution , jefferson's manual , and rules of the house of representatives . it includes the text of the constitution ; the rules of the house and currently relevant portions of jefferson's manual of parliamentary practice ; a portion of the congressional budget act ; and other statutory provisions that operate as procedural rules . congress and its members . gaining familiarity with the key publications and websites listed in this report will assist congressional staff in obtaining this understanding , as well as providing a bibliography of sources to which staff ma y refer as questions arise in their wor . reference sources on the rules and procedure of the house and senate are listed below . house practice: a guide to the rules , precedents , and procedures of the house . washington: gpo , 2017. https: / / www.govinfo.gov / app / collection / hman this publication , often referred to as house rules and manual , is prepared for each congress by the house parliamentarian and is issued as a house document , most recently for the 115 th congress as h.doc . congressional staff can find official overviews and explanatory information on the house's "legislative process" website at http: / / clerk.house.gov / legislative / legprocess.aspx and on the senate's "legislative process" website at http: / / www.senate.gov / pagelayout / legislative / d_three_sections_with_teasers / process.htm . 112-31 ) was prepared for the senate committee on rules and administration by the congressional research service ( crs ) . copies are distributed to house offices and are also available from the house legislative resource center . a basic understanding of legislative procedure and processes is essential for congressional staff . washington: gpo , 2017. https: / / www.govinfo.gov / content / pkg / gpo - hpractice - 115 / pdf / gpo - hpractice - 115.pdf this one - volume publication prepared by william holmes brown and updated by charles w. johnson , john v. sullivan , and thomas j. wickham , jr. , all former house parliamentarians , provides more current summary information on house rules and selected precedents than procedure in the u.s. house of representatives ( see next entry ) . the constitution of the united states of america as amended: unratified amendments: analytical index . procedure in the u.s. house of representatives , 97 th congress: a summary of the modern precedents and practices of the house , 86 th congress - 97 th congress . crs has a variety of resources and services on legislative procedure available to members of congress and their staff . congressional quarterly's guide to congress . a current edition of just the standing rules of the senate is available on the committee's website at https: / / www.rules.senate.gov / rules - of - the - senate . washington: gpo , 2014. https: / / www.govinfo.gov / app / collection / sman this manual , prepared periodically by the senate committee on rules and administration , contains the standing rules , orders , laws , and resolutions affecting the senate , as well as copies of historical u.s. documents and selected statistics on the senate and other government entities .
in order to "improve portability and continuity of health insurance coverage in the group and individual markets," congress enacted the health insurance portability and accountability act of 1996 ( hipaa ) on august 21 , 1996 , p.l . in the absence of the enactment of federal legislation , hipaa required hhs to issue privacy regulations . subtitle f of title ii of hipaa is entitled "administrative simplification," and states that the purpose of the subtitle is to improve health care by "encouraging the development of a health information system through the establishment of standards and requirements for the electronic transmission of certain health information. . several statutory limitations are imposed on the secretary's authority to impose civil money penalties ( cmp ) . hipaa requires health care payers and providers who transmit transactions electronically to use standardized data elements to conduct financial and administrative transactions . enforcement of the privacy rule began on april 14 , 2003 , except for small health plans ( those with annual receipts of $5 million or less ) who have until april 2004 to comply . hhs will enforce the civil money penalties , and the department of justice will enforce the criminal penalties . section 264 of hipaa requires hhs to submit to the congress detailed recommendations on standards with respect to privacy rights for individually identifiable health information . the final privacy rule was issued by hhs and published in the federal register on december 28 , 2000 at 65 fed . where congress has not expressly preempted state and local laws , two types of implied federal preemption may be found: field preemption , in which federal regulation is so pervasive that one can reasonably infer that states or localities have no role to play , and conflict preemption , in which "compliance with both federal and state regulations is a physical impossibility , or where the state law "stands as an obstacle to the accomplishment and execution of the full purposes and objectives of congress. . hipaa does not give hhs authority to regulate other private businesses or public agencies . "contrary" is defined as situations where: ( 1 ) a covered entity would find it impossible to comply with both the state and the federal requirements , or ( 2 ) when the state law stands as an obstacle to the accomplishment and execution of the full purposes and objectives of congress . the secretary is also authorized to conduct compliance reviews . judicial review of the secretary's determination and the issuance and enforcement of subpoenas is available in the united states court of appeals . as part of its responsibilities under the health insurance portability and accountability act of 1996 ( hipaa ) , the national committee on vital and health statistics ( ncvhs ) monitors the implementation of the administrative simplification provisions of hipaa , including the standards for privacy of individually identifiable health information ( privacy rule ) . the interim final rule establishes procedures for investigations , imposition of penalties , and hearings for civil money penalties ; and is effective may 19 , 2003 thru september 16 , 2003 . enforcement and other activities to facilitate compliance include the provision of technical assistance ; responding to questions ; providing interpretations and guidance ; responding to state requests for preemption determinations ; investigating complaints and conducting compliance reviews ; and seeking civil monetary penalties and making referrals for criminal prosecution .
continuing appropriations acts , commonly known as continuing resolutions ( crs ) , have been an integral component of the annual appropriations process for decades . when congress and the president do not reach final decisions about one or more regular appropriations acts , they often negotiate and enact a cr . if interim or full - year appropriations are not enacted , a funding gap and government shutdown occur for affected agencies and programs . an "interim" cr provides agencies with stopgap funding for a period of time until final appropriations decisions are made , or until enactment of another interim cr . crs have become commonplace in the federal budget process , with crs occurring in some form in all but four years out of a 61-year period from fy1952 to fy2012 . this report analyzes potential impacts that interim crs might have on agency operations . it is possible , however , to identify some potential impacts of interim crs prospectively , utilizing several approaches . two general types of crs are used . a "full - year" cr , by contrast , provides final funding amounts for the remainder of a fiscal year in lieu of one or more regular appropriations acts . however , studies of the impacts of interim crs are quite limited aside from mostly anecdotal accounts . given the nature of budget deliberations and the potential for changes in the budget process to change power relationships among participants , the ways in which the impact of an interim cr may be framed might be viewed as similarly significant . another issue relates to interim crs as a product of high - stakes negotiation over major issues of fiscal and substantive policy . an implication of this involvement is that congress typically does not solely determine what the impacts of an interim cr will be , because the president , omb , and agencies may influence the nature and extent of potential impacts . claims about positive or negative impacts of crs may be used to argue that changes in cr language , budget priorities , or the budget process are necessary . first , the report discusses how an interim cr's provisions and requirements may impact directly upon an agency , based on what an interim cr explicitly is formulated to do . furthermore , interim crs are formulated differently from time to time , and may affect highly diverse agencies and programs in varying ways . the ways in which such claims are framed , however , typically rest on implicit assumptions about what would have happened in the absence of the interim cr ( e.g. , a government shutdown , on one hand , or agreement on final appropriations , on the other ) . without in - depth analysis of specific circumstances , therefore , it may be difficult , or in many cases impossible , to make generalizable statements about the impacts of interim crs on particular agencies at particular times . in any case , full - year crs effectively become regular appropriations acts for the fiscal year , complete with the certainty of final funding decisions . second , the report analyzes office of management and budget ( omb ) and agency documents that have provided guidance or requirements for how an agency should navigate through periods of interim crs .
 ( 1 ) the term is most often,although not exclusively , applied to wines , spirits , and agricultural products . the uruguay round agreement on trade - related aspects of intellectual property rights ( trips ) defines geographical indications as"indications which identify a good as originating in the territory of a member , or a region or locality in that territory,where a givenquality , reputation or other characteristic of the good is essentially attributable to its geographical origin. . rs21569 - - geographical indications and wto negotiations july 14 , 200 .  ( 2 ) the use of geographical indications for wines and dairy products particularly , which some countries consider to be protectedintellectualproperty , and others consider to be generic or semi - generic terms , has become a contentious international trade issue . they also provide consumers withchoices among products and with information on which to base their choices .  ( 14 ) additional costs cited by the unitedstates include potential for consumer confusion ( from re - naming and re - labelingproducts ) , potential producer conflicts within the wto , and a heightened risk of wto disputes .  ( 16 ) congress isclosely monitoring the doha negotiations ; the house agriculture committee has scheduled oversight hearings onthe protection ofgeographical indications for agricultural products . conversely , the united states and a number of other countries argue that the existing level of protection provided by trips enablescountries to maintain access to existing markets ; maintains ongoing access to trade opportunities in new andemerging markets ; provides adequate protection to producers and consumers ; and does not impose new administrative costs and legalobligations onmembers . exceptions to the protection of geographical indications include: where a term has been used for at least 10 years prior to april 15,1994 , or in good faith if prior to that date ; where a term is also subject to good faith trademark rights ; where a termhas significance asa personal name ; and where a term has become identified with the common name for a good or service . the united states , japan , chile , canada , new zealand , australia and others have all expressed concern about a registry withmandatory effect on grounds that it would lead to new and costly administrative burdens and legal obligations .  ( 13 ) proponents also argue that increasedprotection would bring more effective protection of consumers .  ( 12 ) additional protection for geographical indications of agricultural products is viewed as acorollary of efforts to liberalize agricultural trade and to promote trade of goods with higher added value . should negotiations result in agreements that require changesin u.s. law coveringgeographical indications , congress would take up legislation to implement such an agreement under expedited ( fasttrack ) proceduresestablished in the trade act of 2002 ( p.l . during the uruguay round multilateral negotiations ( 1986-1994 ) , the european union ( eu ) and switzerland made proposals for ahigher level of protection for geographical indications than provided in existing international agreements . proposals to extend protection accorded wines and spirits to other agricultural products have been made by the eu ( 11 ) and by a groupof european and developing countries . the debate over extending protection for geographical indications of agricultural products is reflected in the u.s. request forconsultations ( the first step in wto dispute settlement ) with the eu on eu regulations for the protection ofgeographical indicationsfor wines and spirits ( community regulation 1493 / 99 ) and for other agricultural products ( community regulation2081 / 92 ) .
this longevity and growth built on the efforts of the committee on oversight and government reform ( then the committee on government operations ) in spearheading their origination , beginning in 1976 . there are two types of inspectors general ( igs ) : ( 1 ) federal establishment igs are appointed by the president with senate confirmation , and may be removed only by the president except in the case of impeachment ; and ( 2 ) designated federal entity ( dfe ) igs are appointed and removed by the agency head in usually smaller agencies . substantial bipartisan and bicameral support was necessary at their creation , given the across - the - board opposition by executive agencies early on , and for their continued development . the inspector general act , as amended , will reach its 30 th anniversary in 2008 , and today there are more than 60 offices of inspectors general ( oigs ) . some of these purposes and powers of the igs include their charges to conduct and supervise audits and investigations within an agency ; provide leadership and coordination for recommending policies and activities to promote the economy , efficiency , and effectiveness of programs and operations ; have access to agency information and files and subpoena power for records and documents ; receive complaints from agency employees whose identities are to remain confidential ( with certain stated exceptions ) ; implement the cash incentive award program for employee disclosures of waste , fraud , and abuse ; hold independent law enforcement authority in offices in establishments ; receive a separate appropriations account for offices in establishments ; be appointed without regard to political affiliation and solely on the basis of integrity and demonstrated ability in relevant professions ( for establishment igs and the ig for the u.s . postal service ) ; remain in office without term or tenure limits ; report suspected violations of federal criminal law immediately and directly to the attorney general ; and operate under only the "general supervision" of the agency head , who is prohibited ( with only a few express exceptions ) from preventing or prohibiting an ig from initiating or carrying out an audit or investigation . in combating waste , fraud , and abuse , igs have been granted a substantial amount of independence , authority , and resources . the resulting connections between the igs and congress not only enhance legislative oversight capabilities , but also provide an avenue for potential support for ig findings , conclusions , and recommendations for corrective action . despite their institutional arrangements and authorities , modifications to the ig act have been seen as useful to enhance the ig's independence and power . the establishing mandates and statutory supports for the igs provide a useful vantage point to view the current proposals to modify the igs , their statutory powers and political power . in combination , these assets are probably greater than those held by any similar internal auditing - investigating office at any level of government , here or abroad , now or in the past . along with these , igs have critical reporting requirements to keep the agency head and congress "fully and currently informed" through specified reports and otherwise ( which includes testifying at hearings and meeting with members and staff ) .
during the past six decades , congress on four occasions has approved legislation designed to regulate lobbyist contact with members of congress . in 1995 , congress passed , and the president signed into law , the lobbying disclosure act , which repealed the 1946 act and created a detailed system of reporting thresholds . the initial provisions , which were contained in the legislative reorganization act of 1946 , required that lobbyists register with the house of representatives and the senate and dis close certain receipts and expenditures . it also creates a more effective and equitable system for administering and enforcing the disclosure requirements . finally , in 2007 , congress amended the 1995 act to further enhance disclosure and reporting requirements for lobbyists and lobbying firms . the lobbying disclosure act ( lda ) of 1995 provided specific thresholds and definitions of lobbyists , lobbying activities , and lobbying contacts , compared to the 1946 act . in reporting the lda , the house judiciary committee summarized the need for new lobbying provisions: the act is designed to strengthen public confidence in government by replacing the existing patchwork of lobbying disclosure laws with a single , uniform statute which covers the activities of all professional lobbyists . in 1998 , technical amendments to the 1995 law were passed . the most recent amendments to the lda , the honest leadership and open government act of 2007 ( hloga ) , mandated additional and more frequent disclosures . the technical amendments made to the lda in 1998 clarified the definition of covered executive branch officials , more clearly defined what constitutes a lobbying contact , and provided that organizations , whose lobbying activities are limited by their internal revenue code ( irc ) non - profit status , could use their tax estimates to report lobbying activities . the offices of the clerk and the secretary have sought to interpret the lda with respect to these problems in accordance with the original intent of the law , but it is necessary and appropriate to conform the language of the law to intent , and that is the motivation behind the introduction of s. 758 . in reporting the 1998 technical amendments , the senate committee on governmental affairs explained the need for change: once the lda was implemented by the clerk of the house and the secretary of the senate , several minor problems with the language of the statute materialized . the act streamlines disclosure requirements to ensure that meaningful information is provided and requires all professional lobbyists to register and file regular , semiannual reports identifying their clients , the issues on which they lobby , and the amount of their compensation . the guidance document is only meant as an interpretation of the law , and is not enforceable as law . pursuant to the 1946 act , the 1995 lda , as amended by the 1998 act , and the hloga , the clerk of the house and the secretary of the senate have had joint responsibility for implementing systems to register lobbyists . in addition to collecting registration and disclosure documents from lobbyists the clerk and the secretary are required to 1. provide guidance and assistance on the registration and reporting requirements of this act and develop common standards , rules , and procedures for compliance with this act ; 2. review , and , where necessary , verify and inquire to ensure the accuracy , completeness , and timeliness of registration and reports ; 3. develop filing , coding , and cross - indexing systems to carry out the purpose of this act , including — a. a publicly available list of all registered lobbyists , lobbying firms , and their clients ; and b. computerized systems designed to minimize the burden of filing and maximize public access to materials filed under this act ; 4. make available for public inspection and copying at reasonable times the registrations and reports filed under this act ; 5. retain registrations for a period of at least 6 years after they are terminated and reports for a period of at least 6 years after they are filed ; 6. compile and summarize , with respect to each semi - annual period , the information contained in registrations and reports filed with respect to such period in a clear and complete manner ; 7. notify any lobbyist or lobbying firm in writing that may be in noncompliance with this act ; and 8. notify the united states attorney for the district of columbia that a lobbyist or lobbying firm may be in noncompliance with this act , if the registrant has been notified in writing and has failed to provide an appropriate response within 60 days after notice was given under paragraph ( 7 ) .
combating terrorism has emerged as one of the most important u.s. foreign policy and national security priorities . rs20598 - - national commission on terrorism report: background and issues for congress updated february 6 , 200 . the united states andother cooperating nations confront four majortasks , namely , ( 1 ) deterring / identifying terrorists and their sponsors / supporters , ( 2 ) weakening terrorist financial andother infrastructures , ( 3 ) hardening potentialtargets , and ( 4 ) containing damage in the aftermath of terrorist incidents . areas not covered in the commission's report but dealt with by other panelsor expert advisory groups include ( 1 ) u.s. embassy security ( 1999 overseas advisory panel report ) ; ( 2 ) securityof u.s. military installations overseas ( 1996downing commission khobar towers report ) ; and ( 3 ) weapons of mass destruction ( wmd ) disaster consequencemanagement ( 1999 gilmore commissionreport ) . the report advocates: ( 1 ) using full , and what can be characterized as proactive , intelligence and law enforcement authority to collect intelligence regardingterrorist plans and methods ; ( 2 ) targeting firmly - - and with sanctions - - all states that support terrorists ; ( 3 ) disrupting non - governmental sources of terrorists'support - - especially financial and logistical ; ( 4 ) enhancing planning and preparation to respond to terrorist attacksinvolving biological , chemical , radiological ornuclear materials ; and ( 5 ) creating stronger mechanisms to ensure that funding for individual agencycounterterrorism programs reflects priorities integrated into acomprehensive national counterterrorism plan subject to congressional oversight . this is especially true of thoserecommendations which relate to ( 1 ) enhancingintelligence gathering ; ( 2 ) modernizing retrieval capability of databases which monitor the visa status of foreignstudents ; ( 3 ) expulsion of suspected terrorists ; and ( 4 ) contingency planning for an active military role ( including a possible lead role ) in the event of a catastrophicterrorist attack on u.s. soil . the most likely areas ofscrutiny include: ( 1 ) more productive counterterrorismpolicies and mindsets ; ( 2 ) enhanced use of legislative authority to impose sanctions on states that support or activelycountenance terrorism , and ( 3 ) methods ofachieving a more cohesive , better coordinated federal counterterrorism effort through enhanced budget coordinationmechanisms . laws , policies , and practices for preventing and punishing terrorism aimed at u.s. citizens ( p.l . for example , how might sanctions be fine tuned or graduated to enhance their effectiveness and make theirimposition more likely ; ( 5 ) what is an appropriate role for covert operations in a proactive counterterrorism policy ( should the u.s. ban on assassinations be reviewed ) ; ( 6 ) how can one insure that the best international talent joins forces to enhance technological research and development efforts to support counterterrorism goals ; and ( 7 ) what role , if any , should the media assume in a proactive counterterrorism policy . the number of terrorist groups is reportedlygrowing and the technology to inflict mass casualties is becoming more readily available . it also notes u.s. failure to use sanctions , or thethreat thereof , in response to greece'sinactivity / reluctance to investigate and prosecute terrorist activity - - inaction by greece which is portrayed astantamount to complicity .
federal efforts to assist members of the armed forces date to 1864 , when president abraham lincoln issued an order to allow members of the military to return home to cast a ballot if they could not vote absentee according to the laws of their respective states . little progress occurred concerning absentee voting by members of the military in the following decades , despite an expansion of state absentee voting laws . the first federal absentee voting law was the soldier voting act of 1942 ( p.l . some other states permitted an absent military voter to designate a proxy , who would cast a ballot , as directed , on the voter's behalf . eighteen states , all in the north , permitted soldiers to vote absentee by establishing remote voting at military encampments where units were usually organized by state . such laws generally extended absentee voting rights to those absent from their voting district , but who were permitted to send an absentee ballot by mail from within the state . it is the only area of election administration law in which legislation has been enacted since passage of the help america vote act of 2002 ( p.l . the law allowed members of the armed forces to vote for presidential electors and candidates for the u.s. senate and house , whether or not they were previously registered and regardless of poll tax requirements . even those state laws designed specifically to assist absent military voters either did not apply to overseas soldiers , or were ineffective because of the barriers to delivering and receiving mail in overseas locations . likewise , the first federal legislation to assist military voters was introduced in 1918 , but was not acted upon . 109-364 ) extended the interim voting assistance system ( ivas ) ballot request program through the end of 2006 and required the comptroller general to assess dod programs to facilitate uocava voting , including progress on an internet - based voting system . the federal voting assistance act ( p.l . congressional authority to regulate state voting procedures expired once the war ended , because the law noted that its provisions applied "in time of war. . only 28,000 of 5 million soldiers voted that year . when the issue arose for overseas soldiers in world war i , the war department announced that "it would not conduct or supervise the taking of the service vote," but pledged cooperation with the states that could establish their own means to do so . under congressional war powers , the 1942 law mandated procedures for the states to permit servicemembers to vote , but the law as amended in 1944 recommended that states follow such procedures . the issue subsided until world war ii , when the challenge of how to facilitate military voting — especially by those stationed overseas — emerged once again . 77-712 ) that guaranteed the right to vote in federal elections to members of the armed forces who were absent from their places of residence during wartime . the law was amended again in 1946 to include technical changes . a contradictory statement noted that the "soldier vote could not be taken in france or on other foreign soil in the theater of war without serious interference with military efficiency," and , in the end , "no states were allowed to poll the vote of soldiers on foreign soil. .
in his state of the union address on january 28 , 2003 , president george w. bush announced a new $720 million research and development ( r&d ) initiative to promote hydrogen as a transportation fuel . the hydrogen fuel initiative is intended to complement the freedomcar initiative , which focuses on cooperative vehicle research between the federal government , universities , and private industry . the freedomcar initiative replaced a related clinton administration initiative , the partnership for a new generation of vehicles ( pngv ) , announced in 1993 . for fy2004 , however , overall funding for research ( within the office of energy efficiency and renewable energy ) into hydrogen fuel , fuel cells , and vehicle technologies increased by about 30% . through fy2003 , the overall level of funding for pngv - and freedomcar - related research at the department of energy ( doe ) remained relatively constant , with some of the funds for hybrid vehicles transferred to fuel cell research . while both initiatives aimed to increase fuel efficiency of the automotive fleet , freedomcar extended the time frame by another 10 to 15 years and focused research on hydrogen fuel cell vehicles ; pngv focused mainly on diesel - fueled hybrid vehicles . some of this increase was offset by funding reductions in other programs , but the major portion of the increase was new funding . the initiative's goals are to develop hydrogen fuel cell power systems that are durable , and deliver higher efficiency at lower cost than today's systems ; transportation fuel cell systems that deliver greater efficiency and lower cost , and meet or exceed emissions standards ; hydrogen refueling systems that are highly efficient and deliver fuel at the market price of gasoline ; and on - board hydrogen storage systems with improved energy density and cost over existing systems . however , in 2007 congress enacted more stringent fuel economy standards for passenger cars and light trucks as part of the energy independence and security act of 2007 ( p.l . these issues include the proper role of the government in r&d , as well as the proper level of funding , and concerns over energy efficiency and fuel consumption . the creation of freedomcar and the president's hydrogen fuel initiatives have raised debate over several issues . the four goals for the hydrogen fuel initiative focus on improvements in fuel cell technology and improvements in the storage and delivery of hydrogen fuel . for example , the national automotive center ( nac ) , part of the army's tank - automotive research , development , and engineering center ( tardec ) , coordinates fuel cell vehicle research between the department of defense ( dod ) and private contractors , and partners with doe , the department of transportation ( dot ) , the environmental protection agency ( epa ) , academia , and industry . most federal research on hydrogen fuel and fuel cell vehicles is overseen by two offices within the doe office of energy efficiency and renewable energy ( eere ) . on august 8 , 2005 , president bush signed the energy policy act of 2005 ( p.l . however , for fy2009 , the bush administration has requested 30% below the fy2008 appropriation for hydrogen , fuel cell , and vehicle technologies programs .
the u.s. department of agriculture ( usda ) is responsible for conducting agricultural research at the federal level , and for providing partial support for cooperative research , extension , and post - secondary agricultural education programs in the states . this enacted legislation included aspects of proposed changes to the research title of the house - passed ( h.r . 2419 ) and senate - passed farm bill ( introduced as a substitute amendment to h.r . there also are 18 historically black land grant colleges of agriculture ( the 1890 institutions ) and more than 30 native american colleges that gained land grant status in 1994 ( referred to as the tribal colleges ) . the omnibus farm bill enacted may 22 , 2008 , also extends eligibility for certain research , education , and extension programs to non - land grant institutions that offer degree programs in agriculture . other new provisions in the both the house and senate bills included ( 1 ) a grant program to help non - land grant public colleges and universities improve their capacity for agricultural research , education , and outreach ; ( 2 ) establishment of an endowment fund , similar to that established for the tribal colleges , to provide a continuing base of support for hispanic - serving agricultural colleges ; ( 3 ) establishment of institutional capacity - building and competitive grant programs for the hispanic - serving colleges ; and ( 4 ) a larger commitment to bioenergy and biobased products . the state partners are the colleges of agriculture at land grant universities in 50 states and eight u.s. territories , with their affiliated state agricultural experiment stations , schools of forestry and veterinary medicine , and cooperative extension . this mission area of usda is called research , education , and economics ( ree ) . both the house and senate bills drew heavily on the recommendations of usda and nasulgc . in june 2008 , the 110 th congress completed action on the 2008 omnibus farm bill , the food , conservation , and energy act of 2008 , p.l . nifa would merge usda's two major competitive grant programs — the national research initiative ( nri ) and the initiative for future agriculture and food systems ( ifafs ) . small grant programs have supported agricultural education at hispanic - serving institutions , and at alaskan and hawaiian native - serving institutions . 107-171 ) with the provisions in the house - and senate - passed versions of h.r . in addition to research in the biological sciences , the mission also includes substantial economic data collection and analysis . the house version called for creating , within the office of the under secretary for research , education , and economics , an overall coordinating organization known as the national agricultural research program office ( narpo ) with six specialized directors . the effort to improve the safety of fresh cut produce was provided an additional total of $25 million in mandatory funds to supplement the annual appropriation . it will incorporate the purposes of the former initiative for future agriculture and food systems ( ifafs ) , whose authority the new farm bill repeals . the institute was to plan , coordinate , and manage all existing extramural usda research , education , and extension funds ( competitive grants , capacity - building grants , and formula funds ) .
congress , the two commissions , and others have determined that certain programs and systems that involve both the department of defense ( dod ) and the department of veterans affairs ( va ) are particularly problematic in providing continuity and quality of care and services to injured servicemembers . this report compares selected recommendations of the president's commission on care for america's returning wounded warriors ( pccww ) , often called the dole - shalala commission in reference to its co - chairs , and the veterans' disability benefits commission ( vdbc ) . in january 2008 , congress passed the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2008 ( p.l . the recommendations presented are those that relate to the transition of injured servicemembers from military service to civilian life and / or veteran status . this report does not examine certain other recommendations , such as those in the vdbc report regarding benefits for survivors of deceased servicemembers , or regarding evaluation of presumptive disability , i.e. , establishing service connection for certain long - term health effects of hazardous exposures . among the problems addressed in the act are the efficient maintenance and transfer of servicemembers' health and benefits records between the departments , and the separate evaluations of disability by each department . efforts to address these and other transition problems were already under way in both departments , partly in response to the recommendations of the pccww , the vdbc , and several other commissions or task forces . recommendations were made in the following broad categories: disability evaluation and compensation ; determining eligibility for benefits ; appropriateness of the benefits ; appropriateness of the level of benefits ; survivors and dependents ; disability claims administration ; transition ; and establishing an executive oversight group to implement recommendations . titles xvi and xvii of the act address matters related to the care and treatment of servicemembers and former servicemembers ( i.e. , veterans ) who were wounded , or who contracted an illness , while serving on active duty . as this report is limited to a comparison of the final recommendations of the pccww and the vdbc , it will not be updated . 110-181 ) . these legislative and administrative actions constitute the first wave of responses to the recommendations of these bodies . further congressional and administrative actions are anticipated . the pccww made six broad recommendations , each with several specific action steps directed to the congress , dod and / or va , and published a matrix of the 23 action steps in its main report . the vdbc made 113 recommendations , also directed to the congress , dod and / or va , designating 13 of them as priority recommendations . the pccww was established by executive order 13426 in march 2007 , and was to focus on the needs of a specific population , namely , seriously injured servicemembers returning from combat theaters in support of operations enduring freedom and iraqi freedom ( oef / oif ) . support walter reed army medical center ( wramc ) until its closure . the six broad recommendations are as follows: 1 . 108-136 ) to study benefits provided to veterans and their survivors to compensate for service - connected disabilities and deaths .
the proportion of high school graduates whose parents do not have a college degree has declined over the last threedecades , according to data collected by the u.s. department of education and the u.s. census bureau . rs21435 - - high school completion and postsecondary enrollment among first generation and low - incomestudents updated february 9 , 200 .  ( 3 ) over four out offive graduates in the class of 1972 would have been first generation college students were they to have gone tocollegecompared to two out of three graduates in the class of 2000 .  ( 4 ) this decline of would be first generation college studentsroughly coincides with the growth in educational attainment that occurred during the same period . the figures in tables 1 and 2 also support the large body of research which has established a strong link between thesocio - economic status of parents ( including income , occupation , and educational attainment ) and that of theirchildren . this parallels the rate of poverty for the u.s.population as awhole which has fluctuated between 16% and 20% over the same period . population were college graduates and by 2000 this had increased to 24% . another possibility would be an amendment to the definition of low - income to include studentsatgreater income levels whose enrollment likelihood is impacted by first generation status .  ( 8 ) among theindicators of class background used in this research were direct measureslike family income and parent's education and more indirect measures like educational aspirations and collegepreparedness - - all have been found to be positively associated with college attendance and completion .  ( 6 ) similar trends can be seen in the data on college students , although the department has only begun to collect such datasince 1987 . in 1970 , 11%of theu.s .  ( 5 ) the proportion of high school graduates from families with income below 150% of the official poverty level has remainedrelatively stable at around 21% over the last 30 years , according to these data . rates of college enrollment among low - income and first generation students were muchlowerthan the overall rate for 2000 high school graduates . college enrollment in the fall of 2000 among spring 2000 high school graduates by family income source: current population survey .  ( 7 ) these data indicate modest declinesin the proportion of low - income and first generation college students . table 3 indicates that the rate of college enrollment among students from low - income families is not altered by parentaleducation - - 69% of those whose parents did not attain a bachelor's degree were not enrolled , compared to 66% ofthosewhose parents have a bachelor's degree ( this difference is not statistically significant ) . college enrollment in the fall of 2000 among spring 2000 high school graduates by parental educational attainment source: current population survey . twenty percent of the class of 1972lived inlow - income families compared to 22% of the class of 2000 . in the final analysis of the combined effects of these factors,firstgeneration status was found to have little association with the rate of enrollment of low - income students , but wasstronglyassociated with the rate of enrollment of students from families with greater income .
proposed legislation in previous sessions of congress demonstrates legislative interest in the recently recognized phenomenon of patented tax strategies . as discussion of tax strategy patents may continue in the 112 th congress , a review of this controversial category of patents is appropriate . previously introduced , but unenacted legislation defined a "tax planning invention" as "a plan , strategy , technique , scheme , process , or system that is designed to reduce , minimize , determine , avoid , or defer , or has , when implemented , the effect of reducing , minimizing , determining , avoiding , or deferring , a taxpayer's tax liability or is designed to facilitate compliance with tax laws...." under the proposed legislation , such inventions would not have been patentable . the proposed , but unenacted legislation would have stipulated that patents upon tax strategies could not be obtained . still others believe that the patent system should not provide incentives for individuals to develop new ways to reduce their tax liability . the report begins by providing an overview of both the practical workings and innovation policy aspirations of the patent system . this report introduces the concept of tax strategy patents and reviews their implications for intellectual property and tax policy . according to some experts , tax strategy patents may limit the ability of taxpayers to utilize provisions of the tax code , interfering with congressional intent and leading to distortions in tax obligations . however , "tax preparation software and other tools or systems used solely to prepare tax or information returns" were not subject to this ban . tax strategy patents are the subject of a spirited debate . further , several of them have been the subject of infringement litigation in the federal judicial system . some of these applications have been approved as issued patents . the report next reviews competing views about the impact of tax patents upon innovation policy . in addition , some commentators believe that tax strategy patents present a positive development , potentially improving the public disclosure of tax shelters for the attention of congress and federal tax authorities . some observers believe that such patents negatively impact social welfare . legislation enacted in 1999 that accounted expressly for patents claiming "a method of doing or conducting business" arguably approved of such patents . discussion of the recently appreciated phenomenon of tax strategy patents therefore appears to be timely . others assert that tax strategy patents potentially complicate legal compliance by tax professionals and taxpayers alike . it then provides a brief history of the phenomenon of tax strategy patents . in furtherance of its oversight over the uspto , congress could continue to track that agency's activities with respect to tax strategy patents . although views on tax strategy patents vary , evidence suggests that numerous applications that arguably cover tax planning methods have been filed at the uspto . other commentators explain that patents on "business methods" have been obtained and enforced for many years . although business method patents have been held to be patentable at least since the issuance of the state street bank opinion in 1998 , the more recent phenomenon of tax strategy patents has resulted in a spirited discussion .
the house legislative resource center is a part of the house library ( see below ) . clerk of the house h - 154 capitol [phone number scrubbed] http: / / clerk.house.gov house offices only: https: / / housenet.house.gov / campus / service - providers / legislative - resource - center / office - of - the - clerk for assistance with archiving records , congressional record submissions , introduction of legislation , submission of amendments , and roll call vote questions . h ouse of representatives website http: / / www.house.gov house offices only ( housenet ) : http: / / housenet.house.gov websites of representatives , leadership offices and organizations , committees , and support offices . ho use legislative resource center 292 cannon house office building [phone number scrubbed] to order publications: [phone number scrubbed] or email [email address scrubbed] http: / / clerk.house.gov / about / offices_lrc.aspx house offices only: https: / / housenet.house.gov / campus / service - providers / legislative - resource - center for current and historical house documents , directories , payroll and financial disclosure reports , and lobbyist registrations . house library b81 cannon house office building [phone number scrubbed] http: / / library.clerk.house.gov house offices only: http: / / library.house.gov provides legislative reference assistance for house offices , including assistance in searching congress.gov ; offers classes on research topics , such as using the proquest congressional database ; preserves house documents and has the most complete collection of house publications . house legislative counsel 337 ford house office building [phone number scrubbed] https: / / legcounsel.house.gov house offices only: http: / / legcoun.house.gov / members / for assistance with legislative drafting and preparation of conference reports . also provides access to various subscription databases only available onsite at the house library . house technology call center h2-694 ford house office building [phone number scrubbed] or [phone number scrubbed] house offices only: https: / / housenet.house.gov / technology for technical assistance with , and training on , office computers and wireless devices , websites , software , and databases . the restricted housenet website serves as a portal to the other "house offices only" websites described below and includes access to "dear colleague" letters and commercial database subscriptions , including proquest congressional . offers classes on research topics and has the most complete collection of senate publications . house parliamentarian h209 capitol [phone number scrubbed] http: / / www.house.gov / content / learn / officers_and_organizations / parliamentarian.php for assistance with legislative rules , precedents , and practices . senate it / computer supp or t services 2 massachusetts avenue , ne ( postal square building , 6 th floor ) [phone number scrubbed] senate offices only: http: / / webster.senate.gov / officeequipment / computers / itcomputer - support / provides technical assistance with , and training on , office computers and wireless devices , websites , software , and databases . congress.gov website https: / / www.congress.gov for timely , accurate and complete legislative information , 93 rd congress ( 1973-1974 ) - present .
the u.s. patent and trademark office ( uspto ) examines and approves applications for patents on claimed inventi ons and administers the registration of trademarks . it also assists other federal departments and agencies to protect american intellectual property in the international marketplace . under the new statute , the use of fees generated is still subject to the appropriations process whereby congress provides the budget authority for the uspto to spend these fees . in addition , the new law grants the uspto authority "to set or adjust by rule any fee established or charged by the office" under certain provisions of the patent and trademark laws . proponents of the withholding approach to funding the uspto claimed that despite the ability of the appropriators to impose limits on spending current year fee collections , the office was provided with sufficient financial support to operate . under the america invents act , the budget authority to use fees collected by the uspto remains within the congressional appropriations process . 112-29 , the leahy - smith america invents act , makes several changes to the handling of fees generated by the uspto . the act requires that "patent and trademark fee amounts are in the aggregate set to recover the estimated cost to the office for processing , activities , services and materials relating to patents and trademarks , respectively , including proportionate shares of the administrative costs of the office. . it remains to be seen how this new approach addresses the issues associated with the operations of the uspto and the use of those fees collected within a given fiscal year . critics argued that , over time , a significant portion of the fees collected were not returned to the uspto due to the ceilings established by the appropriations process and the inability of the office to use the fees on a dollar - for - dollar basis . the uspto is funded by user fees paid by customers that are designated as "offsetting collections" and subject to spending limits established by the committee on appropriations . beginning in 1990 , appropriations measures have , at times , limited the ability of the u.s. patent and trademark office to use the full amount of fees collected in each fiscal year . this appears to provide the uspto with greater flexibility to adjust its fee schedule absent congressional intervention . these funds will be available to the uspto "to the extent and in the amounts provided in appropriations acts" and may only be used for the work of the uspto . they claimed that all fees were necessary to cover actual , time - dependent activities at the uspto and that the ability of the appropriators to limit funds severely diminished the efficient and effective operation of the office . fees generated above the amount provided in the appropriations legislation are to be put into a special fund and are restricted to use solely by the patent and trademark office . an additional issue was raised in regard to the fy2013 sequestration of fees paid to the uspto . however , to address the issue of fees withheld from the office in the past , the america invents act creates within the treasury a "patent and trademark fee reserve fund" into which fee collections above that "appropriated by the office for that fiscal year" will be placed .
the senate's emphasis on individual and minority rights , reflected in both its standing rules and chamber custom , can make it challenging for the chamber to achieve its various goals in a timely manner . for this reason , the senate routinely chooses to set aside its standing rules by unanimous consent . many of the pairs ( or groups ) are competing options for the same policy issue . these amendments or measures are sometimes of a controversial nature with potential to be subjected to extended consideration or even a filibuster . this is done formally through uc agreements , which in many cases outline the terms under which specific legislation will be considered . lastly , in many of these 60-vote threshold uc agreements , it is a pair ( or group ) of amendments or measures that are jointly held to the 60-vote requirement . under recent practice , these uc agreements sometimes include a provision imposing a 60-vote requirement for approval of amendments or legislation , instead of the simple majority vote ordinarily required in the senate . the 60-vote threshold in a uc agreement has the effect of bypassing the procedural vote to grant senators a direct vote on the policy issue at hand . for a cloture vote to be successful , in most cases three - fifths of all senators must vote in the affirmative ( i.e. , 60 votes if there are no vacancies ) . second , for cases in which a large majority either in favor of or against the question cannot be assumed , the 60-vote threshold accomplishes the same purpose as a filibuster by preventing or delaying passage , but without requiring the senate to engage in extended debate . in the senate , most points of order under the budget act may be waived by a vote of at least three - fifths of all senators duly chosen and sworn ( 60 votes if there are no vacancies ) . thus , surrendering the right to filibuster may be more palatable if senators are confident a measure will not pass without super - majority support . as with all uc agreements , once agreed to , they can be altered only by the adoption of a further uc agreement . votes on cloture often fail and consequently a vote on the actual measure or amendment may never occur . it is notable that unlike senate rules requiring super majorities , which typically are framed in terms of a fraction either of the membership or those voting ( e.g. , two - thirds , three - fifths ) , these uc agreements explicitly state the number of votes required . several possible effects could result from the senate choosing to impose a 60-vote threshold for the passage of legislation . first , for cases in which a large majority of senators is in favor of or opposed to the question , the time that would ordinarily be required to invoke cloture can be avoided . this allows the senate to debate and choose between contending alternatives in a timely and controlled manner . such uc agreements ensure that a measure will not be successful without the same level of super - majority support that would be required for cloture by stipulating that if the 60-vote threshold is not reached , the matter will be disposed of .
is the navy adequately funding programs for unmanned underwater vehicles ( uuvs ) and other advanced payloads so as to take full advantage of the ssgns' large payload capacity ? . potential oversight questions for congress include the following: why did the estimated cost of a four - boat conversion program increase by more than 60% since 1999-2000 ? . how would a continuing shortage of advanced seal delivery systems ( asdss ) affect the operational utility of the ssgns ? . if a decision is made to reduce the trident ssbn force from 14 boats to 12 , what would be the potential costs and merits of expanding the ssgn conversion program to include two additional trident boats ? . since the navy's plan for maintaining a fleet in coming years of 313 ships includes 4 ssgns , why does the navy's 30-year shipbuilding include no replacements for the 4 ssgns , resulting in the disappearance of ssgns from the fleet by 2028 ? . 110-329 of september 30 , 2008 ) approved the navy's fy2009 request for $3 million in other procurement , navy ( opn ) funding for the ssgn program . the fy2009 defense appropriations act ( division c of h.r . 2638 / p.l .
the year 2000 ( y2k ) computing crisis has received much attention in recent months — and deservedly so . accordingly , the department has major challenges ahead but limited time remaining to adequately deal with them . we are pleased to testify before you today on the status of the department of education's efforts to ensure that its computer systems supporting critical student financial aid activities will be able to process information reliably after december 31 , 1999 . in brief , education faces major risks that year 2000 failures could severely disrupt the student financial aid delivery process , including delaying disbursements and application processing . education is now accelerating its program , but with the slow start , it remains in a position of playing catch up . my statement today will describe the risks to the department of education , with a focus on student financial aid systems , actions the department has taken in recent months to address these risks , and key issues the department must deal with if its systems are to be ready for the century change: testing of systems , exchanging data with internal and external partners , and developing business continuity and contingency plans . therefore , it must also focus on developing appropriate contingency plans to ensure business continuity in the event of key systems failures . the department was very slow in implementing a comprehensive year 2000 program to address these risks — basic awareness and assessment tasks were not completed until recently . further , because of systems interdependencies , repercussions from year 2000-related problems could be felt throughout the student financial aid community — a network including students , institutions of higher education , financial organizations , and other government agencies . virtually every organization , public and private , that uses computers is at risk . as the world's most advanced and most dependent user of information technology , the united states possesses close to half of all computer capacity and 60 percent of internet assets . consequently , the upcoming change of century is a sweeping and urgent challenge for public - sector and private - sector organizations alike . our reviews of federal year 2000 programs have found uneven progress , and our reports contain numerous recommendations , which the agencies have almost universally agreed to implement . while progress has been made in addressing the federal government's year 2000 readiness , serious vulnerabilities remain and many agencies are behind schedule . while there has been recent progress , the department of education must mitigate critical risks that affect its ability to award and track billions of dollars in student financial aid . with its slow start , education has been playing catch up and working to accelerate its progress . to date , we have issued over 60 reports and testimony statements detailing specific findings and recommendations related to the year 2000 readiness of a wide range of federal agencies . for this reason we have designated the year 2000 computing problem as a high - risk area for the federal government , and have published guidanceto help organizations successfully address the issue . concurrent with its slowness in completing its assessment , education's estimated costs have fluctuated widely .
i am pleased to be here today to discuss the importance of having strong chief information officers ( cios ) at major federal agencies and ensuring an effective cio council to help bring about much - needed reforms in the government's management of information technology ( it ) . during the last decade , much attention has been focused on serious problems with federal information technology projects . to help reverse this trend , gao embarked on a concerted effort to learn how leading private and public sector organizations controlled system development projects and successfully applied technology to improve their performance . based upon our work and that of others , the congress , in conjunction with the administration , crafted two recent landmark reforms in federal information management: the paperwork reduction act ( pra ) of 1995 and the clinger - cohen act of 1996 . the picture that unfolded year after year was bleak: multimillion dollar and , in some cases , billion dollar system development efforts routinely came in over cost , behind schedule , and lacking in promised capabilities . our views are based not only on our work in the technology area , but also on our experiences in evaluating the implementation of other major management reforms , such as the chief financial officers ( cfo ) act of 1990 and the government performance and results act ( results act ) of 1993 . in addition to wasting resources , these disappointing efforts seriously weakened agencies' abilities to meet mission goals and improve operational efficiency . the challenge facing the federal government today is to provide the type of leadership needed to implement information technology reforms as rapidly as possible . furthermore , the agency cios , working collectively as a council , have a critical leadership role to play in addressing governmentwide technology issues and advising the office of management and budget ( omb ) on policies and standards needed to successfully implement legislative reforms . our resulting study identified a specific set of strategic practices that these organizations use to improve performance through information management . although we are beginning to see some progress , agencies still have a long way to go to translate legislative mandates into day - to - day management reality . under the law , agency heads are directly responsible for effective information management , but cios play a critical leadership role in driving reforms to help control system development risks , better manage technology spending , and succeed in achieving real , measurable improvements in agency performance . the following sections offer our observations on the status of efforts to promote effective cio leadership and the challenges and opportunities faced by the cio council . these reforms encompass many important elements identified in our best practices work , such as establishing more disciplined information technology investment control processes , developing an overall information architecture , and defining measures to show how information technology is contributing to improved program performance . central to implementing these reforms is the need to establish effective leadership at each agency . also , building federal agencies' capability to manage information resources has been a critical problem for years . it is very important for omb to follow through on its efforts to assess cio appointments and resolve outstanding issues .
this challenge is made more difficult by the age and poor documentation of some of the government's existing systems and its lackluster track record in modernizing systems to deliver expected improvements and meet promised deadlines . as you know , the federal government is extremely vulnerable to year 2000 problems due to its widespread dependence on computer systems to process financial transactions , deliver vital public services , maintain national security , and carry out its operations . today , i will briefly discuss the year 2000 risks facing the government ; highlight our major concerns with the government's progress in fixing its systems ; and introduce our guidance on year 2000 testing , which is designed to assist agencies in the most extensive and expensive part of remediation . likewise , more attention needs to be devoted to ( 1 ) ensuring the government has a complete and accurate picture of year 2000 progress , ( 2 ) setting national priorities , ( 3 ) ensuring that the government's critical core business processes are adequately tested , ( 4 ) recruiting and retaining information technology personnel with the appropriate skills for year 2000-related work , and ( 5 ) assessing the nation's year 2000 risks , including those posed by key economic sectors . many of the federal government's computer systems were originally designed and developed 20 to 25 years ago , are poorly documented , and use a wide variety of computer languages , many of which are obsolete . for example: flights could be grounded or delayed and airline safety could be degraded ; the military services could find it extremely difficult to efficiently and effectively equip and sustain their forces around the world ; internal revenue service tax systems could be unable to process returns , thereby jeopardizing revenue collection and delaying refunds ; the social security administration process to provide benefits to disabled persons could be disrupted ; and payments to veterans with service - connected disabilities could be erroneous or severely delayed . addressing the year 2000 problem in time will be a tremendous challenge for the federal government . overall , the government's 24 major departments and agencies are making slow progress in fixing their systems . because of the urgent nature of the year 2000 problem and the potentially devastating impact it can have on critical government operations , we designated the problem as a high - risk area for the federal government in february 1997 . these included establishing governmentwide priorities and ensuring that agencies set their own agencywide priorities , developing a comprehensive picture of the nation's year 2000 readiness , requiring agencies to develop contingency plans for all critical core requiring agencies to develop an independent verification strategy to involve inspector general or other independent organizations in reviewing year 2000 progress , and designating lead agencies responsible for ensuring end - to - end operational testing of processes and supporting systems is performed . in may 1997 , the office of management and budget ( omb ) reported that about 21 percent of the mission - critical systems ( 1,598 of 7,649 ) for these departments and agencies were year 2000 compliant . since that time , we have issued over 40 reports and testimony statements detailing specific findings and recommendations related to the year 2000 readiness of a wide range of federal agencies .
107 - 252 ) established the federal election assistance commission ( eac ) and gave it the responsibility to develop and update a set of voluntary voting system guidelines ( vvsg ) . the help america vote act of 2002 ( hava , p.l . it established the technical guidelines development committee ( tgdc ) , chaired by the director of the national institute of standards and technology ( nist ) , to develop recommended guidelines for consideration by the eac . hava's accessibility requirements went into effect in january 2006 , and many states have adopted new security requirements for voting systems , including paper - audit - trail requirements , in the wake of controversies that emerged subsequent to the passage of hava ( see crs report rl33190 , the direct recording electronic voting machine ( dre ) controversy: faqs and misperceptions ) . the vvsg are a set of technical standards for voting systems that use computers to assist in recording or counting votes . the 2005 vvsg provide a set of specifications and requirements to be used in the development of computer - assisted voting systems and their certification - testing by independent laboratories . systems covered include most used in the united states — not only dres ( direct recording electronic systems ) such as touchscreen voting machines , but also optical scan and punch card systems . funding has also been an issue . some also believe that the added provisions are inadequate to meet accessibility , alternative language , and security needs and that broader and more stringent requirements are required . the decision to limit the scope of revision resulted from a desire to meet urgent needs while creating a version that could be used in preparation for the 2006 election cycle . it went into effect in december 2007 . major revision focused on usability , accessibility for persons with disabilities , and security ; those sections were completely rewritten . that absence has raised concerns about adequate state implementation of the requirement . a draft of the completely rewritten second version was made available for public comment on october 31 , 2007 , at http: / / www.eac.gov / vvsg . others believe that the limited changes in the 2005 vvsg are more likely to be implementable in the short term . the vss , which remained in effect until the end of 2007 , were developed in response to concerns raised in the 1970s and 1980s about the then largely unregulated voting technology industry . hava also provided an administrative structure under the eac for promulgating the guidelines and certifying systems , and also directed nist to assist in the certification process . enacted in october 2002 , hava provided a statutory basis for the vss , which the act renamed guidelines , to distinguish them from the act's voting system requirements , which it called standards . the vvsg replaced the federal voluntary vss originally developed under the auspices of the federal election commission ( fec ) . the first version of the vvsg was approved in 2005 and is therefore called the 2005 vvsg in this report . the 2005 version of the guidelines partially revised the vss , and some observers believe that the revisions should have been more comprehensive to address perceived shortcomings of the vss .
the origins of affirmative action law may be traced to the early 1960s as first the warren , and then the burger , court grappled with the seemingly intractable problem of racial segregation in the nation's public schools . judicial rulings from this period recognized an affirmative duty , cast upon local school boards by the equal protection clause , to desegregate formerly dual - school systems and to eliminate the last vestiges of state - enforced segregation . these holdings ushered in a two - decade era of massive desegregation — first in the south , and later the urban north — marked by federal desegregation orders frequently requiring drastic reconfiguration of school attendance patterns along racial lines and extensive student transportation schemes . following the court's lead , congress and the executive approved a panoply of laws and regulations authorizing , either directly or by judicial or administrative interpretation , race - conscious strategies to promote minority opportunity in jobs , education , and governmental contracting . official approval of affirmative action remedies was further codified by federal regulations construing the 1964 act's title vi , which prohibits racial or ethnic discrimination in all federally assisted programs and activities , including public or private educational institutions . except as may be imposed by court order or consent decree to remedy past discrimination , however , there is no general statutory obligation on employers to adopt affirmative action remedies . school districts across the nation operating under these decrees later sought to be declared in compliance with constitutional requirements in order to gain release from federal intervention . the basic statutory framework for affirmative action in employment and education derives from the civil rights act of 1964 . the office of civil rights of the department of education interpreted title vi to require schools and colleges to take affirmative action to overcome the effects of past discrimination and to encourage affirmative action "[e]ven in the absence of such prior discrimination ... to overcome the effects of conditions which resulted in limiting participation by persons of a particular race , color , or national origin. . since the early 1960s , minority participation goals have also been integral to executive branch enforcement of minority hiring and employment standards on federally financed construction projects and in connection with other large federal contracts . these must include minority and female hiring goals and timetables to which the contractor must commit its good - faith efforts . the supreme court eventually responded by holding that judicial control of a school system previously found guilty of intentional segregation should be relinquished if , looking to all aspects of school operations , it appears that the district has complied with desegregation requirements in "good faith" for a "reasonable period of time" and has eliminated "vestiges" of past discrimination "to the extent practicable. . public and private employers with 15 or more employees are subject to a comprehensive code of equal employment opportunity regulations under title vii of the 1964 act . executive order 11246 , as presently administered by the office of federal contract compliance programs , requires that all employers with 50 or more employees and federal contracts in excess of $50,000 file written affirmative action plans with the government .
the bush administration had initially made the end of the u.s. occupation contingent on the completion of a new constitution andthe holding of national elections for a new government , tasks to be completed by 2005 . its major provisions are the following: after the handover , u.s. officials no longer have final authority on non - security related issues . those rights include peaceful assembly ; free expression ; equality of men and women before the law ; and the right to strike and demonstrate . the u.s. administrator in iraq , l. paul bremer ( head of the u.s. - led occupation authority , the coalitionprovisionalauthority or cpa ) , in consultation with iraqis appointed to a 25-seat "iraq governing council ( igc ) ," agreed toa plan that wouldlead to sovereignty for iraq by june 30 , 2004 . two sources of international lawhave governed the occupation of iraq: u.n. security council resolutions ( in particular resolution 1483 of may 22,and resolution1511 of october 16 , 2003 ) and international treaties such as the hague regulations of 1907 and the fourth genevaconvention of1949 .  ( 5 ) u.s. officials say that,largely because of ongoing violence , u.s. forces will number about 140,000 into 2005 and possibly beyond . the actual extent of the interim government's sovereignty - - or its lawful control overits own territory to the general exclusion of other states - - is unclear , as are the continuing coalition responsibilities . rs21820 - - iraq: transition to sovereignty updated july 21 , 200 . however , politicalinfighting among iraq'svarious ethnic and political factions , coupled with a persistent insurgency , slowed progress on setting up an electedpoliticalstructure . many of the powers and responsibilities of the interim government are spelled out in u.n. security council resolution 1546 , adopted unanimously on june 8 , 2004 , whichendorsed thehandover of sovereignty . interim ( post - june 30 ) government . under the plan , announced november 15 , 2003 , a transitionaladministrative law ( tal ) - - a provisional constitution - - was to be signed by february 29 , 2004 , followed by the holding of local"caucuses" in eachprovince to select a national assembly ( by may 31 , 2004 ) . the unitedstates and united nations intend that the interim government not make any long - term laws or decisions - - itsprimary function is torun the ministries and prepare for national elections . one of the major debates in the adoption of resolution 1546 was on security issues , particularly the relationship between coalition forces and the iraqi interim government . resolution 1546 gives the interim government control over iraq's oil revenues and the development fund foriraq ( dfi ) , subject to monitoring for at least one year by the u.n. - mandated international advisory and monitoringboard . 17 , which has been extended for the duration of the mnf's presence . the upsurge of violence since earlyapril 2004 hasreportedly slowed obligation of reconstruction funds ; as of july 2004 , about $8 billion of $23 billion in appropriatedreconstructionfunds had been obligated . the transition government ( post - january 31 , 2005 ) is to draft a constitution ( by august 15 , 2005 ) and put it to anational vote ( by october 15 , 2005 ) .
estimates of the number of muslims in europe vary widely , depending on the methodology and definitions used , and the geographical limits imposed . in recent years , there have been influxes of muslim migrants and political refugees from other regions and countries , including the balkans , iraq , somalia , and the west bank and gaza strip . excluding turkey and the balkans , researchers estimate that as many as 15 to 20 million muslims live on the european continent . many muslim communities have their roots in western european labor shortages and immigration policies of the 1950s and 1960s that attracted large numbers of north africans , turks , and pakistanis especially . europe's muslim population is ethnically and linguistically diverse ; muslim immigrants hail from middle eastern , african , and asian countries , as well as turkey . also notable are european union ( eu ) efforts to boost police and judicial cooperation , enhance intelligence - sharing , and strengthen external eu border controls . substantial muslim populations exist in western european countries , including france , germany , the united kingdom , spain , italy , the netherlands , and belgium . the united states and the eu have been placing increasing emphasis on cooperation in the areas of intelligence - sharing , border control , and transport security . nor has france's assimilation policy prevented the segregation of its muslim communities , as seen most vividly in the riots that erupted throughout france in the fall of 2005 in working class suburbs populated largely by north africans . long - standing traditions against intelligence - sharing , rivalries among the various local and national security services , and different national laws continue to impede more robust eu cooperation . historically , european countries have pursued somewhat different policies with respect to managing their immigrant and minority populations . the united states has captured or identified several u.s. citizens with similar views in the course of the fight against terrorism . the bush administration and members of congress have welcomed european initiatives to curtail islamist extremism and improve u.s. - eu counterterrorism cooperation in the hopes that such efforts will ultimately help root out terrorist cells in europe and beyond . however , none has been completely successful . some terrorism experts and members of congress remain concerned about the u.s. visa waiver program ( vwp ) , despite steps taken to tighten passport requirements for participating countries . a disproportionately large number of muslims in europe are poor , unemployed , or imprisoned , and many feel a sense of cultural alienation and discrimination . the vwp has become a sticking point in u.s. - eu relations ; the eu would like the vwp to be extended to all eu members ( currently 12 are excluded due to problems meeting u.s. immigration laws ) . for example , full implementation of the eu - wide arrest warrant has been slowed in poland and cyprus because of court rulings that found the warrant incompatible with constitutional bans on extraditing their own nationals . muslims are the largest religious minority in europe , and islam is the continent's fastest growing religion . in addition , the eu has been working to encourage good integration practices among its 27 member states and prevent radicalization .
from fiscal years 1998 through 2000 , the district budgeted over $300 million , $33 million of which was federal appropriations , to fund these initiatives . included in the district's budgets for this period were projected savings of about $200 million , including $17 million in management reform productivity savings . begun in fiscal year 1998,management reform was seen as a way to transform the district's operations to provide quality services to its citizens , businesses , and visitors . neither the district of columbia financial responsibility and management assistance authority ( the authority ) nor the district could provide adequate details on the goals achieved for all of the projects that had been reported as completed or in various stages of completion . however , as of june 1 , 2000 , the district had only reported savings of about $1.5 million related to these initiatives and had not consistently tracked the status of these projects . in summary , over the past 3 fiscal years , the district government has proposed hundreds of management reform initiatives that were estimated to save millions of dollars as well as improve government services . because of your concern that little information was available regarding the results achieved from these initiatives , you asked us to provide information on the status of the over 250management reform initiatives ; estimated $10 million in management reform productivity savings resulting from these initiatives contained in the fiscal year 1999 budget ; estimated $41 million in management savings outlined in the fiscal year $152.4 million in estimated cost savings initiatives contained in the fiscal year 1998 budget as proposed in the previous mayor's plan , atransformed governmentofthepeopleofwashington,d.c . the district does not currently have a systematic process to monitor these management reform projects and determine where savings or customer service improvements have been realized . consequently , the district cannot say for certain how funds designated for management reform have been spent or whether the key goals of these initiatives have been realized . a chronology of key events related to management reform in the district is included as an attachment to the testimony . i am pleased to be here today to provide you with information on the district of columbia's management reform initiatives . before discussing these matters in more detail , i will provide some background information to the subcommittee regarding management reform in the district . the national capital revitalization and self - government improvement act , public law 105-33 ( the revitalization act ) , approved august 5 , 1997 , directed the authority and the district of columbia government to develop and implement management reform plans for nine major city agencies and four citywide functionsduring fiscal years 1998 and 1999 . the $41 million in projected savings was comprised of the following: $7 million in management reform productivity savings ; $14 million in savings resulting from the implementation of the district of columbia supply schedule ; and $20 million in productivity banksavings . to date , only $1.5 million of management reform savings have been documented . for fiscal year 1999 , the investment in management reform of $36.2 million included $30.9 million of operating funds and $5.3 million of capital funds .
the single audit is an important means by which the congress , federal oversight officials , and program managers obtain information on whether the recipients of federal assistance properly account for the federal funds they receive , maintain adequate internal controls over those funds , and comply with program requirements . the single audit , which has gained widespread acceptance throughout the country , has helped foster fundamental financial management improvements and strengthened accountability at state and local governments and nonprofit organizations receiving federal assistance . the 12 years of experience with the single audit act have shown that refinements can be made to strengthen the usefulness of single audits while at the same time reducing the burden on state and local governments and nonprofit organizations . today , i would like to provide some perspective on the importance of the single audit act , highlight the results of our most recent assessment of the act's implementation which recommended ways to improve the single audit process , and address the specific amendments that are now being considered . the proposed amendments , which we strongly support , address these refinements . this has resulted in the state and local governments institutionalizing fundamental reforms , such as ( 1 ) preparing annual financial statements in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles , ( 2 ) obtaining annual independent comprehensive audits , ( 3 ) strengthening internal controls over federal funds and compliance with laws and regulations , ( 4 ) installing new accounting systems or enhancing old ones , ( 5 ) implementing subrecipient monitoring systems that have greatly improved oversight of entities to whom they have distributed federal funds , ( 6 ) improving systems for tracking federal funds , and ( 7 ) resolving audit findings . during the 1970s , the poor accounting practices of state and local governments put into question the security of federal funds provided to those governments . i am pleased to be here today to discuss proposed amendments to the single audit act of 1984 . the audits usually did not address financial controls and were , therefore , unlikely to find systemic problems with an entity's management of its funds . moreover , particularly in the case of block grants — where the federal financial role diminishes and management and outcomes of federal assistance programs depend heavily on the overall state or local government controls — the single audit process provides accountability by focusing the auditor on the controls affecting the integrated federal and state funding streams . second , entities now have 13 months from the end of the fiscal year to submit their single audit reports to the federal government . the 1975 new york city financial crisis focused increased attention on this problem . these audits focused on whether the transactions of specific grants complied with their program requirements . the assistance grew from 132 programs costing $7 billion in 1960 to over 500 programs costing nearly $95 billion by 1981 . before passage of the act , the federal government relied on audits of individual grants to help gain assurance that state and local governments and nonprofit organizations were properly spending federal assistance . it was found that new york city consistently overestimated its revenues , underestimated its expenses , never knew how much cash it had on hand , and borrowed repeatedly to finance its deficit spending .
china has made clear advances in space capabilities over the past decade . the country has launched over 100 orbital missions since 1970 , including a string of 50 consecutive successful long march rocket launches from 1996 to 2006 , after overcoming technical problems with the help of u.s. companies in the mid - 1990s . china's space program was initially institutionalized under the people's liberation army ( pla ) . china's space activities and intentions are not transparent ; the dual - use nature of most space technology compounds the uncertainties of interpreting chinese decision making . in a series of government reforms in the 1990s , the china national space administration ( cnsa ) — roughly equivalent to the u.s. national aeronautics and space administration ( nasa ) — was created under the civilian commission of science , technology and industry for national defense . china sent humans into space in 2003 and 2005 , and orbited a lunar explorer in october 2007 that is paving the way for additional moon exploration . china is now a world leader in yearly space launches , yet remains notably less active than russia or the united states , as shown in table 1 . the pla continues to play a role in china's overall space activities , managing both manned civilian and military efforts , while cnsa handles unmanned scientific projects and international collaboration . china has been a strong proponent of an arms control regime in space and has argued for the peaceful use of outer space in the united nations' conference on disarmament and at the prevention of an arms race in outer space dialogue . china's space white paper of 2006 states that chinese space activities are subservient to domestic social and economic development goals , which include national security . some claim that china takes this stand in order to prevent further progress by the united states in space while allowing it to covertly catch up . china's spending on space is growing , although details are often not available . this includes cooperation on the eu - led galileo satellite positioning system , but progress on this has been slow and sometimes controversial . competition in space also exists among china , india , japan , and south korea . chinese budget opacity , the dual - use nature of most space technology , and currency conversion difficulties make direct comparisons uncertain . currently , china collaborates with russia , the european union ( eu ) , brazil , canada , nigeria , and others . a china - eu collaborative framework on space has been in place since 1998 . the potential benefits of expanded cooperation and dialogue with china include: improved transparency . the cnsa reports to have a budget about one - tenth the size of nasa's . western experts estimate chinese space spending at $1.4-2.2 billion per year , on par with france and japan . the russian partnership is probably the most active and has benefitted china's manned space effort significantly . china collaborates with other countries on civilian space activities , but it is not considered a key member of the international space community . on january 11 , 2007 , china conducted its first successful anti - satellite ( asat ) weapons test , destroying one of its inactive weather satellites .
the british house of commons in stituted it in 1660 and free mail was available to many officials under the colonial postal system . the franking privilege , which allows members of congress to transmit mail matter under their signature without postage , has its roots in 17 th century great britain . in the senate , the allocation process is administered by the committee on rules and administration ; in the house , by the committee on house administration . congress continues to use the franking privilege to satisfy an articulated public interest in facilitating official communications from elected officials to the citizens whom they represent . in 1775 , the first continental congress passed legislation giving members mailing privileges so they could communicate with their constituents , as well as giving free mailing privileges to soldiers . house official mail costs ( $15.1 million ) were 89% of the total , whereas senate official mail costs ( $1.8 million ) were 11% of the total . house official mail costs ( $6.8 million ) were 82% of the total , whereas senate official mail costs ( $1.5 million ) were 18% of the total . the communications may include letters in response to constituent requests for information , newsletters regarding legislation and member votes , press releases about official member activities , copies of the congressional record and government reports , and notices about upcoming town meetings organized by members . official funds must be used in the preparation of materials sent under the frank ; no private funds may supplement printing , production , or other costs . house official mail costs ( $6.2 million ) were 82% of the total , whereas senate official mail costs ( $1.4 million ) were 18% of the total . the franking privilege is regulated by federal law , house and senate rules , orders of the committee on house administration and senate rules and administration committee , and regulations of the senate select committee on ethics and the house commission on congressional mailing standards . congress pays the u.s . house official mail costs ( $23.3 million ) were 94% of the total , whereas senate official mail costs ( $1.5 million ) were 6% of the total . senators are , however , limited to $50,000 for mass mailings ( defined as 500 or more identical pieces of unsolicited mail ) in any fiscal year . the senate has dramatically reduced its costs , from $43.6 million in fy1984 to $1.5 million in fy2015 . currently , former speakers are authorized to use the frank for a period of five years after they leave congress . senate costs appear in the biannual report of the secretary of the senate . in the house , costs are reported quarterly in the statement of disbursements of the house as part of a total mass communications cost . current law allows members to send mass mailings in various forms ( newsletters , questionnaires , press releases , notices ) on a variety of topics , including but not limited to the impact of laws and decisions , public and official actions taken by members of congress , proposed or pending legislation or governmental actions , the positions of the members of congress on legislation or other public issues , and other related matters of public concern or public service .
iran's ballistic missile program dates to the late 1970s after the shah was overthrown and the islamic republic of iran established . this is because there is little transparency in iran's ballistic missile programs , which has led to some degree of a lack of confidence in iran's public assertions of its activities . the new iranian government embarked on a ballistic missile program marked by considerable secrecy . iranian ballistic missile proliferation has been a matter of u.s. and international concern . many consider that iran's ballistic missile development was in full force by the mid - 1980s during its protracted war against iraq , during which iran reportedly launched more than 600 ballistic missiles . ballistic missile defense ( bmd ) program in general and the u.s. proposed missile defense system in europe specifically , as well as u.s. diplomatic efforts to curb iranian long - range ballistic missile programs . because of the secrecy inherent in the development of weapon systems , especially in less open societies , open - source analyses reflect a wide - range of technical views and assessments . finally , details about iranian ballistic missile programs remain classified in the united states . today , there is little disagreement among most experts that iran has acquired some number of ballistic missiles from other countries and has developed other ballistic missiles indigenously or in cooperation with others . this report first examines iran's long - range ballistic missile programs because those efforts generally drive the greatest concerns within the united states , especially when coupled with concern over the development of iran's nuclear capabilities . at the same time , however , there has been considerable public disagreement over precisely what kinds of ballistic missile systems iran has or is developing itself or in cooperation with others . traditionally , the united states has defined long - range or intercontinental ballistic missiles ( icbms ) as those ballistic missiles capable of ranges greater than 5,500 kilometers ( about 3,400 miles ) . this report provides a brief description of what is publicly discussed regarding iran's ballistic missile programs ; it does not discuss iranian cruise missiles or rockets . to date , five countries have deployed operational icbms ( all with nuclear weapons ) : the united states , russia , china , france , and britain . some reports suggest that iran has already deployed a number of medium - range ballistic missiles ( mrbms ) . in early february 2009 , iran successfully launched its omid ( hope ) satellite on a safir - 2 ( or ambassador - 2 ) rocket , which has a range of about 155 miles . these latter weapons were a source of concern when some reportedly iranian - made rockets and other missiles may have been used by hezbollah against israel in 2006 . these assessments drive u.s. military efforts designed to respond to such threats , such as the u.s . a brief overview of iran's medium and short - range ballistic missile programs then follows . these assessments , in conjunction with official u.s. assessments of iranian nuclear weapons development , contribute significantly to ongoing u.s. concerns over iranian threats to u.s. and international security . bush administration officials said iran did not test new technologies or capabilities , but said the missile launches were evidence of the need for its proposed missile defense system in europe .
the same is true in most if not all of the states . although subject to intermittent criticism , it has been so at least from the beginning of the republic . witnesses in a federal criminal case may find themselves arrested , held for bail , and in some cases imprisoned until they are called upon to testify . 3199 ( s. 1389 ) as approved in the senate or in the conference bill sent to the president . in spite of the concerns of some that the authority can be used as a means to jail a suspect while authorities seek to discover probable cause sufficient to support a criminal accusation or as a preventive detention measure , the lower courts have denied that the federal material witness statute can be used as a substitute for a criminal arrest warrant . the supreme court has never squarely considered the constitutionality of the federal statute or any of its predecessors , but it has observed in passing that , "[t]he duty to disclose knowledge of crime ... is so vital that one known to be innocent may be detained in the absence of bail , as a material witness" and that , "[t]he constitutionality of this [federal material witness] statute apparently has never been doubted. . particularly in the early stages of an investigation , however , an individual's proximity to a crime may make him both a legitimate witness and a legitimate suspect . in its original form section 1001 instructs the justice department inspector general to designate an official who is ( 1 ) to receive and review complaints of alleged justice department civil rights and civil liberties violations , ( 2 ) to widely advertise his availability to receive such complaints , and ( 3 ) to report to the house and senate judiciary committees twice a year on implementation of that requirement , p.l . the case law and statistical information suggest that the federal statute is used with surprising regularity and most often in the prosecution of immigration offenses involving material witnesses who are foreign nationals . critics , however , contend that since september 11 , 2001 , seventy individuals , mostly muslims , have been arrested and detained in abuse of the statute's authority . in its recast form , section 3144 , among other things , would establish a preference for postponing arrest until after a material witness has been served with a summons or subpoena and failed or refused to appear , unless the court finds by clear and convincing evidence that service is likely to result in flight or otherwise unlikely to secure the witness' attendance ; make it clear that the provision applies to grand jury proceedings ; explicitly permit arrest by officers who are not in physical possession of the warrant ; require an initial judicial appearance without unnecessary delay in the district of the arrest or in an adjacent district if more expedient , or if the warrant was issued there and the appearance occurs on the day of arrest ; limit detention to five day increments for a maximum of 30 days ( 10 days in the case of grand jury witness ) ; require the attorney general to file an annual report to the judiciary committees on the number of material witness warrants sought , granted and denied within the year ; the number of material witnesses arrested who were not deposed or did not appear before judicial proceedings ; and the average number of days arrested material witnesses were detained .
in the wake of the september 2001 terrorist attacks on the united states , president george w. bush launched major military operations as part of a global u.s. - led anti - terrorism effort . operation enduring freedom in afghanistan has realized major successes with the vital assistance of neighboring pakistan . yet a resurgent taliban today operates in southern and eastern afghanistan with the benefit of apparent sanctuary in parts of western pakistan . as more evidence arises exposing al qaeda's deadly new alliance with indigenous pakistani militantsâand related conflict continues to cause death and disruption in pakistan's western regionsâconcern about pakistan's fundamental political and social stability has increased . the united states is increasingly concerned that members of al qaeda , its taliban supporters , and other islamist militants find safe haven in pakistani cities such as quetta and peshawar , as well as in the rugged pakistan - afghanistan border region . 1 , the implementing the 9 / 11 commission recommendations act of 2007 ) was passed in january 2007 . al qaeda militants also reportedly have made alliances with indigenous pakistani terrorist groups that have been implicated in both anti - western attacks in pakistan and terrorism in india . congress also has appropriated billions of dollars to reimburse pakistan for its support of u.s. - led counterterrorism operations . yet many observers warn that an american preoccupation with iraq has contributed to allowing the emergence of new al qaeda safe havens in western pakistan . in the years since september 2001 , pakistan has received nearly $1.5 billion in direct u.s. security - related assistance ( foreign military financing totaling $970 million plus about $516 million for other programs ) . the commission identified the government of president musharraf as the best hope for stability in pakistan and afghanistan , and recommended that the united states make a long - term commitment to provide comprehensive support for islamabad so long as pakistan itself is committed to combating extremism and to a policy of "enlightened moderation. . this latter area is inhabited by ethnic pashtuns who express solidarity with anti - u.s. forces . 108-458 ) , the 108 th congress broadly endorsed the recommendations of the 9 / 11 commission report by calling for u.s. aid to pakistan to be sustained at a minimum of fy2005 levels and requiring the president to report to congress a description of long - term u.s. strategy to engage with and support pakistan . in january 2007 senate testimony assessing global threats , the outgoing director of national intelligence , john negroponte , captured in two sentences the dilemma pakistan now poses for u.s. policy makers: "pakistan is a frontline partner in the war on terror . these groups seek to oust the islamabad government of president gen. pervez musharraf and have been implicated in assassination attempts that were only narrowly survived by the pakistani leader and other top officials . in the intelligence reform and terrorism prevention act of 2004 ( p.l . the 9 / 11 commission report emphasized that mounting large - scale international terrorist attacks appears to require sanctuaries in which terrorist groups can plan and operate with impunity . doubts are widely held by western experts , many of whom express concerns about the implications of maintaining present u.s. policies toward the region , and about the efficacy of islamabad's latest strategy , which appears to seek reconciliation with pro - taliban militants .
the federal reserve ( fed ) is mandated to keep inflation low and stable , and alters interest rates in order to do so . first , rising inflation is unpopular with the public , in part because some households are more adversely affected by inflation than others . in recent years , the fed has focused attention on the core rate of inflation , a measure of inflation that excludes food and energy prices , in explanations of its policy decisions . second , high or rising inflation can reduce productivity by distorting price signals , so that it is hard for businesses to tell if prices are changing in relative terms , and by individuals wasting resources in order to maintain the purchasing power of their wealth . inflation , the general rise in the prices of goods and services , is important to policymakers for several reasons . changes in inflation often indicate changes in the business cycle — rising inflation is often a sign that the economy is overheating and falling inflation is a sign that the economy is sluggish . finally , inflation plays a key role in macroeonomic stabilization policy . in fed chairman ben bernanke's july 2007 testimony to congress , he stated that "food and energy prices tend to be quite volatile , so that , looking forward , core inflation...may be a better gauge than overall inflation of underlying inflation trends. . for example , in july 2007 , the third sentence of the 10-sentence federal open market committee statement summarizing the committee's policy decision read , "readings on core inflation have improved modestly in recent months. . the most commonly cited measure of inflation is the percent change in the consumer price index ( cpi ) . inflation is measured as the percent change in a price index . the fed's task is to counteract this by raising interest rates in order to reduce the growth rate of interest - sensitive spending . theoretically , short - term changes in inflation can be caused by the supply - side or demand - side of the economy . when core inflation approached 3% in 2006 , chairman bernanke said that it had "reached a level that , if sustained , would be at or above the upper end of the range that many economists , including myself , would consider consistent with price stability...." this report defines core inflation , reviews recent trends , and analyzes the advantages and drawbacks of using core inflation . comparisons over time of wages , wealth , rates of return , government transfers such as social security payments , and so on should all use a headline measure of inflation , because all of these concepts depend on a broad measure of inflation . considering that the fed judges 2% inflation to be on the low side and 3% inflation on the high side , the definition used in these years would have arguably strongly colored their policy stance . policymakers are concerned with future inflation because of lags between a change in policy and its effect on the economy . there is no inherent reason that changes in food and energy prices cannot be caused by changes in aggregate demand .
it generally entails an agreement ( via formal contract or otherwise ) between a manufacturer and a retailer that the dealer will charge some specific price for the manufacturer's products . the practice , particularly when a floor has been set under permissible resale prices ( minimum rpm ) , has been considered a per se violation of the antitrust laws since 1911 , when the court decided in dr . in apparent anticipation of its decision to overrule dr . significant inroads in the law of vertical restraints generally were made by three cases decided in the 1970s and 1980s . fifth , both the department of justice and the federal trade commission ( ftc ) — "the antitrust enforcement agencies with the ability to assess the long - term impacts of resale price maintenance" — have urged that the distinctions between classes of rpm be abandoned . miles medical company v. john d. park & sons company that such imposition and agreement was not analytically different from an agreement among the dealers themselves to fix their prices , thus depriving consumers of the advantages of competition . resale price maintenance has been called "vertical price fixing" because it involves entities at different levels of the supply / marketing chain . imposition of maximum resale prices ( a "ceiling" on permissible resale prices , as opposed to a "floor" below which a price is not permissible ) or some other agreement which may affect price but does not require any specific level or term , on the other hand , has more recently been analyzed under the more lenient rule of reason standard . second , the sherman act has been considered and approached as a common - law statute , and , just as the common law adapts to modern understanding and greater experience , so too does the sherman act's prohibition on 'restraint ( s ) of trade' evolve to meet the dynamics of present economic conditions . as such , the agreement is considered a "conspiracy in restraint of trade" in violation of section 1 of the sherman act . the sylvania court concluded that it was "appropriate," given the "complex" market impact of non - price vertical restraints , to return to the rule of reason analysis for evaluating them ( 433 u.s. at 51 , 52 , 59 ) . first , in continental t.v. , inc. v. gte sylvania inc. , the court distinguished between vertically imposed price and non - price restraints , specifically overruling a barely 10-year - old , and very contentious case . continuing the erosion of its precedents in the law of vertical restraints / rpm , a divided ( 5-4 ) court overruled dr . finally , in business electronics corp. v. sharp electronics corp. the court determined that neither ( 1 ) all of those agreements which affect price ( because nearly all vertical agreements do ) , nor ( 2 ) all of those which contain the word "price" should be treated as per se violations . such rules can be counterproductive , increasing the antitrust system's total cost by prohibiting procompetitive conduct the antitrust laws should encourage .
fsis rules prohibit most nonambulatory cattle because they are more likely to have bovine spongiform encephalopathy ( bse ) . on february 17 , 2008 , usda announced that hallmark / westland meat packing co. of california was recalling 143 million pounds of fresh and frozen beef products dating to february 1 , 2006 . about 50 million pounds were distributed to the school lunch and other federal nutrition programs in at least 45 states . this largest u.s. meat recall ever came after usda's food safety and inspection service ( fsis ) found that the facility did not always notify it about cattle that had become nonambulatory after they had been inspected , but before slaughter for food . usda inspectors reportedly had failed to detect that these animals became nonambulatory after they received antemortem inspection — causing some to question the use or effectiveness of recent increased appropriations from congress for more aggressive enforcement of the federal humane methods of slaughter act ( hmsa ; 7 u.s.c . the provision ( section 104 ) in the senate - passed version of the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 ( h.r . officials asserted , however , that findings of bse are extremely rare in the united states and cited the effectiveness of other bse safeguards — including a ban on feeding most cattle parts back to cattle , and the removal of potentially infectious material from all older animals .  ( most large recalls have been class i , with a reasonable probability of serious health consequences or death. ) . the agency suspended inspection at the plant , which was not expected to reopen , on february 4 , 2008 , three days after it voluntarily ceased operations . in early may 2008 , hsus notified the secretary of agriculture that it had collected new evidence of abuse of nonambulatory cows and pigs at livestock auction markets in maryland , pennsylvania , new mexico , and texas . the matter came to light when the humane society of the united states ( hsus ) released videotapes of what it described as employees inhumanely handling downer cattle before slaughter . 107 - 20 ) , directed usda to spend not less than $1 million to enforce the act . the recall was so - called class ii , indicating a remote possibility that the products could cause adverse health effects , but usda said the recall was necessary because its rules deem the animals unfit for human food . they said most of the recalled beef likely had been consumed , and that school and other domestic feeding sites had been instructed to hold and destroy all remaining products . hsus asserted that mistreatment of so - called downers is "systemic" and not limited to slaughterhouses . lawmakers next included , in the 2002 farm law ( in § 10305 ) , a resolution urging usda to fully enforce the act and to report the number of violations to congress annually . 1 ) , but it was removed by conferees on the measure . 1 ) would have permanently prohibited the use of federal funds to pass through usda inspection any nonambulatory disabled cattle for use as human food , regardless of the reason or time the animal became nonambulatory .
within the department of homeland security ( dhs ) , aerial assets are operated by the u.s. customs and border protection's ( cbp's ) office of air & marine ( a&m ) . cbp utilizes advanced technology to augment its u.s. border patrol ( usbp ) agents' ability to patrol the border . increasingly , dhs has explored the use of uavs by a&m in support of usbp's mission to augment usbp agents' ability to patrol the border . 109-295 ) urged dhs to work with the federal aviation administration ( faa ) to implement a pilot program for the use of uavs to surveil the northern border . the technologies used include , but are not limited to , sensors , light towers , mobile night vision scopes , remote video surveillance systems , directional listening devices , various database systems , and unmanned aerial vehicles ( uavs ) . the uavs utilized by cbp are rpvs , and the current fleet consists of six low - to - medium altitude predator b uavs . 4899 ) would include $32 million for the acquisition of two additional uavs by a&m . there are two different types of uavs: drones and remotely piloted vehicles ( rpvs ) . 108-90 ) provided $35.2 million to establish a northern border air wing and tasked the dhs under secretary of border and transportation security to devise a report outlining operational plans by which the air and marine operations center ( amoc ) would eliminate surveillance gaps affecting the northern border and western united states . these so - called "force multipliers" allow the usbp to deploy fewer agents in a specific area while maintaining the ability to detect and counter intrusions and are increasingly becoming a part of the usbp's day - to - day operations . the 2003 dod authorization act ( p.l . congress has directed dhs to study the feasibility of using uavs and to implement the technology to surveil the border on numerous occasions . on june 23 , 2010 , the federal aviation administration ( faa ) granted a certificate of authorization requested by cbp , clearing the uav flights along the texas border and gulf region . despite safety concerns raised by such incidents , some policymakers continue to call for the increased domestic use of uavs . the law also required dhs to present a plan within six months of enactment to comprehensively monitor the southwest border with uavs , and to implement the plan as a pilot program as soon as funds are appropriated for that purpose . 110-161 ) directed dhs to explore the use of uavs in the marine environment in addition to the border , and appropriated $15 million for dhs's uav program , resulting in the modified "guardian" predator b uav . 108-458 ) included provisions calling for a pilot program to study the use of these technologies , including uavs , along the northern border . in the 108 th congress , the intelligence reform and terrorism prevention act ( p.l . 108-136 ) required the president to issue a report "on the use of unmanned aerial vehicles for support of homeland security missions. .
medicaid is a means - tested entitlement program that finances the delivery of primary and acute medical services as well as long - term services and supports . each state designs and administers its own version of medicaid under broad federal rules , and medicaid is jointly financed by the federal government and the states . participation in medicaid is voluntary for states , though all states , the district of columbia , and five territories choose to participate . the federal government's share of a state's expenditures for most medicaid services is called the federal medical assistance percentage ( fmap ) . states incur medicaid costs by making payments to service providers ( e.g. , for beneficiaries' doctor visits ) and performing administrative activities ( e.g. , making eligibility determinations ) , and the federal government reimburses states for a share of these costs . states also use provider tax revenue to fund other medicaid or non - medicaid purposes . the report explains how states use provider taxes to help finance medicaid and provides information regarding the extent to which states currently use such taxes . this financing strategy allows states to fund increases to medicaid payment rates without the use of state funds because the increased medicaid payment rates are funded with provider tax revenue and federal medicaid matching funds . in state fiscal year ( sfy ) 2014 , states reported that about 74% of the state share of medicaid costs was financed by state general funds ( most of which are raised from personal income , sales , and corporate income taxes ) . the remaining 26% was financed by other funds ( including local government funds , provider taxes , fees , donations , assessments , and tobacco settlement funds ) . federal statute and regulations define a provider tax as a health care - related fee , assessment , or other mandatory payment for which at least 85% of the burden of the tax revenue falls on health care providers . at least 40% of each state's share of medicaid expenditures must be financed by the state , and up to 60% of the state's share may come from local governments . currently , many states use provider taxes to finance a portion of their state share of medicaid expenditures . in order for states to be able to draw down federal medicaid matching funds , the provider tax must be both broad - based ( i.e. , imposed on all providers within a specified class of providers ) and uniform ( i.e. , the same tax for all providers within a specified class of providers ) . the report ends with a discussion of the provider tax provisions in past and present proposals that would impact medicaid provider taxes . many of these states use the provider tax revenue to increase medicaid payment rates for the class of providers , such as hospitals , responsible for paying the provider tax . this report provides background regarding states' use of provider taxes in the 1980s and describes the relevant federal statutes and regulations , which were mostly established in the early 1990s . states are not allowed to hold the providers harmless for the cost of the provider tax ( i.e. , they cannot guarantee that providers receive their money back ) .
waivers were issued for the community development block grant ( cdbg ) program , the home investments partnerships program ( home ) , the emergency shelter grants program ( esg ) , and the housing for persons with aids program ( hopwa ) . as in past disasters , the secretary of hud issued a number of waivers to permit local communities to redirect their existing hud housing and community development grant funds to meet their emergency needs shortly after the storm . hud also issued $2 million in base program funding as "imminent threat" funding to indian community development block grant recipient communities affected by the storm . waivers issued ranged from extensions in the amount of time grantees had to spend their funds to easing of benefit eligibility requirements . the administration was proactive in making existing housing programs and assistance available to victims of katrina . immediately after the storm , hud created a toll - free number that allowed displaced hud - assisted families ( e.g. , public housing residents and section 8 rental housing voucher holders ) to reestablish their benefits . second , in november 2007 congress provided another $3 billion in emergency supplemental cdbg funding to louisiana for its recovery needs ( p.l . first , in july 2007 , fema announced it would transfer responsibility for ongoing housing assistance for families displaced by the 2005 hurricanes to hud , noting hud's expertise in assisting families with long - term housing needs through its existing infrastructure of phas . on september 24 , 2005 , the secretaries of hud and homeland security announced a joint transitional housing assistance initiative for hurricane katrina evacuees . 109-148 , as well as provisions that required that at least $1 billion of the cdbg amount be used for repair and reconstruction of affordable rental housing in the impacted areas ; ensured that each state's plan gives priority to activities that support infrastructure development and affordable rental housing activities ; required each state to file quarterly reports with house and senate appropriations committees detailing the use of funds ; required hud to file quarterly reports with the house and senate appropriations committees identifying actions by the department to prevent fraud and abuse , including the duplication of benefits ; and prohibited the use of cdbg funds to meet matching fund requirements of other federal programs . the act allowed the affected states to use up to 5% for administrative costs ; hud to grant waivers of program requirements ( except those relating to fair housing , nondiscrimination , labor standards , and the environment ) ; mississippi and louisiana , the most affected states , to use up to $20 million for local community development corporations ; and the governor of each state to designate multiple entities to administer either a portion or all of a state's share of the $11.5 billion . on july 11 , 2006 , hud announced that $4.2 billion of the $5.2 billion supplemental appropriation for cdbg would be allocated to louisiana , and on august 18 , it announced how funds would be distributed to the remaining states ( see table 1 ) . the streamline ( k ) program is not directed specifically at properties damaged by katrina , but could facilitate the purchase and repair of such properties that meet program requirements .
by a vote of 5-4 , the court held that the environmental protection agency ( epa ) in 2003 had improperly denied a petition asking the agency to regulate greenhouse gas ( ghg ) emissions from new motor vehicles under the clean air act ( caa ) . i n 2007 , the supreme court issued its decision in massachusetts v. epa , its first pronouncement on climate change and still one of the most important environmental law decisions in the past decade . the supreme court decision did not compel epa to regulate greenhouse gas ( ghg ) emissions from new motor vehicles , but it did limit the range of options available to the agency so that doing so was its most defensible course of action . circuit majority had not ruled on the key issue of whether caa section 202 ( a ) ( 1 ) authorizes regulation of ghg emissions . this report confines itself to the massachusetts v. epa litigation and leaves to other crs reports the numerous epa actions taken as a result of the supreme court decision . contrary to epa's position , the court said that the caa definition of "air pollutant" was unambiguously broad enough to include ghgs . the report traces the events leading up to the court's decision , describes the decision itself , notes some general implications , and then comments on the decision's continuing force . on the merits , he found that epa has authority under section 202 ( a ) ( 1 ) to regulate ghg emissions . accordingly , the court reversed the lower court decision upholding the petition denial . the availability of state common law claims for reducing ghg emissions remains an open question . petitioners were 12 states ( california , connecticut , illinois , massachusetts , maine , new jersey , new mexico , new york , oregon , rhode island , vermont , and washington ) ; three cities ( new york , baltimore , and washington , dc ) ; two u.s. territories ( american samoa and northern mariana islands ) ; and several environmental groups . the holding of massachusetts was used by a 2011 supreme court decision to bar federal common law claims ( such as nuisance ) against entities on the basis of their contribution to climate change . in that year , 19 environmental and energy organizations petitioned epa to regulate emissions of ghgs ( carbon dioxide [co 2 ] , methane , nitrous oxide , and hydrofluorocarbons ) from new motor vehicles . he further concluded that epa's 202 ( a ) ( 1 ) discretion does not extend to policy considerations , as judge randolph held , but relates exclusively to whether the emissions cause harmful air pollution . the court's decision left epa with three options for responding to the petition: ( 1 ) find that new motor vehicle ghg emissions may "endanger public health or welfare," the prerequisite to limiting them under section 202 , then issue emission standards ; ( 2 ) find that they do not satisfy that prerequisite , or ( 3 ) decide that climate change science is so uncertain as to preclude making either finding ( 1 ) or ( 2 ) .
economic conditions in china are of considerable concern to u.s. policymakers , given the potential impact of china's economy on the global and u.s. economy . analysts point to two key factors: ( 1 ) the relative interest rates in china and the united states ; and ( 2 ) expectations of the future appreciation in the value of china's currency , the renminbi ( rmb ) . the recent large inflow of financial capital into china , commonly referred to as "hot money," has led some economists to warn that such flows may have a destabilizing effect on china's economy . there is no formal definition of "hot money," but the term is most commonly used in financial markets to refer to the flow of funds ( or capital ) from one country to another in order to earn a short - term profit on interest rate differences and / or anticipated exchange rate shifts . in addition , china might reduce its purchases of u.s. treasury securities ( used to help fund the federal deficit ) , which could push up u.s. interest rates . in 2007 , china surpassed japan to become the 3 rd largest u.s. export market , and thus a chinese slowdown could reduce its demand for u.s. goods and services . the issues concerning the potential dangers of "hot money" flows to china reinforces the u.s. argument ( and has been acknowledged by the chinese government as a long term goal ) , that china needs to do more to implement policies to encourage domestic demand and lessen its dependence on exporting and fixed investment for its economic growth . other economists have expressed concerns that efforts by the chinese government to control "hot money" inflows could have significant negative consequences for the u.s. and global economy in the form of slower growth , greater inflation , or both . one common way of approximating the flow of "hot money" is to subtract a nation's trade surplus ( or deficit ) and its net flow of foreign direct investment ( fdi ) from the change in the nation's foreign reserves . over the past few years , china has been one of the fastest growing economies , which has made it a major market for u.s. exports . the u.s. federal reserve lowered the federal funds rate nine times over the last year from a high of 5.25% in june 2007 to its current low of 2.00% . additionally , inflationary problems or an economic slowdown could cause chinese officials to delay economic reforms , particularly to its financial system and currency policy . there are also indications that "hot money" flows have played a role in the recent rise and fall of china's stock and real estate markets . for the first half of 2008 , china's foreign reserves increased by $280.6 billion . over the same time period , china's accumulated trade surplus was $99.0 billion and its fdi inflow was $52.0 billion . in an op - ed column in the financial times , two china experts wrote of hot money's "ensuing money creation is fueling rising inflation , systemic overinvestment , and an overextended banking system. .
the supreme court has twice struck down attempted global asbestos settlements , in both instances inviting congress to craft a legislative solution . in an attempt to resolve this problem , senator arlen specter introduced s. 852 , the fairness in asbestos injury resolution ( fair ) act . claims of asbestos - related injury have flooded the courts since the 1970s , but litigation has proven to be an inadequate means to resolving all the claims . the bill was reported out of the senate judiciary committee on june 16 ( s.rept . the bill would establish within the department of labor the office of asbestos disease compensation , which would award damages to claimants on a no - fault basis according to their respective levels of injury and asbestos exposure . the comparable time period for all other asbestos claims ( with the exception of the least serious claims ) would be two years . the office would be headed by an administrator , who would be appointed by the president — with the advice and consent of the senate — to a five - year term and report directly to the assistant secretary of labor for the employment standards administration . this scheme would set medical criteria and awards for nine levels of asbestos - related injury , with awards ranging from medical monitoring for claimants in level i ( asbestos - related non - malignant disease and five years occupational exposure to asbestos ) to $1.1 million for claimants in level ix ( mesothelioma ) . for claimants who have asbestos claims pending in court , the statute of limitations would be five years from enactment of the bill . new asbestos claims — and most pending ones — could no longer be pursued in federal or state court . one of the more controversial aspects of the effort to reach a legislative solution to the asbestos problem has been the question of smoking . upon enactment of s. 852 , all pending asbestos claims ( other than some individual actions at the evidentiary stage and actions with final verdicts , judgments , or orders ) would be stayed . the bill would specifically exempt from the prohibition: ( 1 ) asbestos - containing products necessary to the "critical functions" of the defense department or nasa ; ( 2 ) asbestos diaphragms used in the manufacture of chlor - alkali and its derivatives ; and ( 3 ) roofing cements , coatings , and mastics containing asbestos that is totally encapsulated by asphalt . if , after nine months , the administrative process outlined in the bill is not up and running so that it can review and pay "exigent health claims" — i.e. , claims by those suffering from mesothelioma or having a life expectancy of less than one year , or claims by relatives of those who died from asbestos - related conditions after enactment of the bill — at a reasonable rate , then those claims could be maintained in the same courts in which the claims were pending when the act was enacted . the office would pay awards from the privately funded asbestos injury claims resolution fund ( "the fund" ) , discussed in greater detail below .
109-73 , provides tax relief that is intended to assist the victims of hurricane katrina . the katrina emergency tax relief act of 2005 , p.l . for loans made between september 23 , 2005 , and january 1 , 2007 , the act increases this to the lesser of ( 1 ) $100,000 , reduced by certain outstanding loans , or ( 2 ) the greater of $10,000 or 100% of the present value of the employee's nonforfeitable accrued benefits . some of its provisions distinguish between the "hurricane katrina disaster area," which is the presidentially declared disaster area , and the "core disaster area," which is the portion of the disaster area determined by president bush to warrant individual or individual and public assistance under the stafford act . the provision applies to individuals whose principal place of abode on august 28 , 2005 , was in the hurricane katrina disaster area and who sustained an economic loss due to the hurricane . section 101 waives the 10% penalty tax that would otherwise apply on an early withdrawal from a retirement plan if the individual's principal place of abode on august 28 , 2005 , was in the hurricane katrina disaster area and the individual sustained an economic loss due to the hurricane . the funds may be re - contributed to a qualified plan over a three - year period and receive tax - free rollover treatment . under current law , the maximum amount that may be borrowed without being treated as a taxable distribution is the lesser of ( a ) $50,000 , reduced by certain outstanding loans or ( b ) the greater of $10,000 or 50% of the present value of the employee's nonforfeitable accrued benefits . section 102 allows individuals to re - contribute , without tax consequences , distributions that were made between february 28 , 2005 , and august 29 , 2005 , to purchase or construct a principal residence in the hurricane katrina disaster area and were not used because of the hurricane . section 103 increases the amount that hurricane katrina victims may borrow from their retirement plans without immediate tax consequences . the section also extends repayment due dates by one year if the original date fell between august 24 , 2005 , and january 1 , 2007 . additionally , with respect to the taxable portion of the distribution , the individual may include one third of such amount in his or her income for three years rather than the entire amount in the year of distribution . the section applies to distributions made between august 24 , 2005 , and january 1 , 2007 , and the maximum amount that be withdrawn without penalty is $100,000 . the contributions must be made between august 24 , 2005 , and march 1 , 2006 . section 407 allows the treasury secretary to make adjustments in the application of the tax laws for tax years 2005 and 2006 so that temporary relocations due to hurricane katrina or the receipt of relief does not cause taxpayers to lose dependency exemptions or child credits or to have a change of filing status . the amount of the loss is the lesser of ( 1 ) the decrease in the property's fair market value due to the casualty or ( 2 ) the taxpayer's adjusted basis in the property ( i.e. , the cost of the property with certain adjustments ) .
it provides federal funding for the education of children with disabilities and requires , as a condition for the receipt of such funds , the provision of a free appropriate public education ( fape ) . the individuals with disabilities education act is both a grants statute and a civil rights statute . originally enacted in 1975 , the act responded to increased awareness of the need to educate children with disabilities , and to judicial decisions requiring that states provide an education for children with disabilities if they provided an education for children without disabilities . the statute contains detailed due process provisions , including the right to bring suit in order to ensure the provision of fape . whether the parents are parties aggrieved turns in large part on whether the rights guaranteed under idea are guaranteed for the child with a disability , for the parent of such a child , or both . idea states in part "[a]ny party aggrieved by the findings and decision ... made under this subsection , shall have the right to bring a civil action with respect to the complaint presented pursuant to this section ...." the judicial decisions concerning the rights of non attorney parents of children with disabilities to bring suit without an attorney have raised issues concerning whether the parents of a child with a disability are "part[ies] aggrieved" under idea . courts have varied in their views on this issue and therefore on the issue of whether non - attorney parents have the ability to pursue an idea case pro se . jacob winkelman has autistic spectrum disorder and , in accordance with an individualized education program ( iep ) , was placed in a preschool with the concurrence of both his parents and the parma city school district . in addition , the court observed that the intended beneficiary of idea is the child with a disability , not the parents , and that although idea does grant parents some procedural rights , these only serve to ensure the child's substantive right and do not provide the parents with substantive rights . currently , there is a three way split in their determinations of this issue with some circuits finding that non - attorney parents may not proceed pro se , another circuit holding that non - attorney parents have no limitations on their ability to proceed , and other courts of appeals holding that parents can proceed on procedural claims but must use a lawyer for substantive claims . the parents and the child were thus found to possess different idea rights: the parents "possess explicit rights in the form of procedural safeguards" while the child possesses both procedural and substantive rights . they noted that parents are often the only available advocates for their child and that attorneys are often unwilling to take idea cases due to their specialized and complicated nature and since the cases often lack significant retainers . in addition , pro se litigants were seen as imposing burdens on the courts and schools districts due to poorly drafted or vexatious claims . in addition to the court of appeals decisions in winkelman v. parma city school district and cavanaugh ex rel .
most federal offshore oil and gas production leases contain royalty provisions that require the lessee to pay a certain percentage of revenue on the value of oil and natural gas production to the federal government as the lessor . in 1995 , congress passed the deep water royalty relief act ( dwrra ) , which provides an incentive for exploration of oil and natural gas reserves in "deep water," which might otherwise be uneconomic , by providing that a certain initial volume of production from deep water wells would be exempt from royalty obligations . as a result , holders of these 1998 and 1999 deepwater leases have no obligations to make royalty payments up to the suspension volumes , regardless of the market price of oil or natural gas ; the leases do not contain a price threshold on royalty relief . any holder of a "covered lease" is forced to decide between three options: ( 1 ) the lessee can keep the lease under its current terms ( i.e. , without a price threshold ) and lose the right to bid on future offshore lease sales in the gulf of mexico ; ( 2 ) the lessee can pay a newly created "conservation of resources" fee , as established elsewhere in the proposed act ; or ( 3 ) the lessee can renegotiate the covered lease to include royalty relief price thresholds . included in this omnibus energy bill is the proposed royalty relief for american consumers act of 2007 . in 1998 and 1999 , mms issued deepwater offshore leases that were eligible for royalty suspension but did not include a price - based limitation on that eligibility . while section 302 of the dwrra addresses royalty relief for holders of leases in existence at the time of the enactment of the act , sections 303 and 304 address post - enactment lease sales . section 302 of the dwrra provides a mechanism by which holders of existing leases can apply for royalty relief , which is to be granted by the secretary of the interior if the lease would otherwise be uneconomic . as discussed above , section 7504 requires that persons who hold "covered leases" either: ( 1 ) renegotiate their leases to include price thresholds ; ( 2 ) pay a "conservation of resources" fee as set forth in the section ; or ( 3 ) forfeit eligibility for future oil or gas production leases in the gulf of mexico . however , section 302 also provides that these lessees will not be eligible for royalty relief if the price of oil or natural gas exceeds a certain threshold level . around the same time that the perceived oversight in the 1998 and 1999 leases described above was brought to the public's attention , kerr - mcgee oil & gas corp. ( kerr - mcgee ) initiated litigation that challenged the authority of the department of the interior ( doi ) to impose price thresholds on leases sold between 1996 and 2000 ( i.e. , the effective period of section 304 of the dwrra ) . pursuant to section 304 , the standard royalty requirement is to be suspended for lessees holding these leases until a certain volume of oil or natural gas is produced by the lessee .
the railroad retirement board ( rrb ) , an independent federal agency , administers these benefits . the railroad retirement act authorizes retirement , survivor , and disability benefits for railroad workers and their families . these benefits are earned by railroad workers and their families in lieu of social security . workers covered by the rrb include those employed by railroads engaged in interstate commerce and related subsidiaries , railroad associations , and railroad labor organizations . the tier i railroad retirement benefit that is equivalent to social security benefits is mainly finance by tier i payroll taxes ( typically the same rate as the 12.4% social security payroll tax ) and social security's financial interchange transfers . tier ii benefits , tier i benefits in excess of social security benefits , and supplemental annuities are mainly financed by tier ii payroll taxes ( currently 13.1% on employers and 4.9% on employees ) and transfers from the national railroad retirement investment trust ( nrrit ; hereinafter , the trust ) . for example , rrb beneficiaries may receive unreduced tier i retirement benefits as early as aged 60 if they have at least 30 years of railroad service ; social security beneficiaries may receive unreduced retirement benefits only when they reach their full retirement ages , currently rising from aged 65 to 67 . rrb tier ii benefits are similar to private pension benefits and are based only on railroad work . railroad retirement benefits are divided into two tiers . prior to the railroad retirement and survivors' improvement act of 2001 ( rrsia ; p.l . in fy2017 , the trust's rate of return of 13.4% ( net of fees ) exceeded the benchmark of 12.3% . tier i benefits are generally computed using the social security benefit formula , on the basis of earnings covered by either the railroad retirement or social security programs . from its inception to the end of fy2017 , the trust has earned a total of $26.3 billion . the trust then had negative rates of return in fy2008 ( - 19.1% ) and fy2009 ( - 0.7% ) but rebounded with an 11.2% rate of return in fy2010 followed by a slightly negative rate of return of - 0.1% in fy2011 . at the end of fy2017 , the market value of the trust's managed assets was $26.5 billion . for the first half of the trust's existence , its returns largely exceeded expectations . since february 2002 when railroad retirement funds were first invested through the trust , a total of $21.3 billion has been transferred to the trust from the rrb , and $21.1 billion in earnings have been transferred from the trust to the rrb to pay railroad benefits and administrative expenses . in some cases , rrb tier i benefits can be higher than comparable social security benefits . as shown in figure 3 , in the majority of years between fy2003 and fy2017 , trust performances exceeded its strategic policy benchmarks . the rrsia established the trust to manage and invest assets in the railroad retirement account in much the same way that the assets of private - sector retirement plans are invested .
concern is twofold: ( 1 ) widespread termination of account relationships could result in the loss of access to financial services and products by the significant market segment currently served by check cashers and ( 2 ) if these businesses are consequently forced "underground" the potential loss of transparency could damage ongoing efforts to safeguard the u.s. financial system . the bank secrecy act regulations define check cashers as money services businesses ( msbs ) . the office of the comptroller of currency ( occ ) a federal bank regulatory agency included check cashers and other msbs in a list of inherently high - risk businesses in its bank secrecy act / anti - money laundering manual . both banks and nonbank msbs must have written anti - money laundering programs , file currency transaction reports ( crts ) and supicious activity reports ( sars ) , and maintain certain records . on june 21 , 2006 , the subcommittee on financial institutions and consumer credit of the house financial services committee held an oversight hearing to assess the impact of the bsa obligations on check cashers and other msbs . on june 21 , 2006 , the subcommittee on financial institutions and consumer credit of the house committee on financial services held an oversight hearing on the bank secrecy act's impact on money services businesses . the difficulties involve how to minimize the resources and costs borne by financial institutions while ensuring the effective administration of the anti - terrorism financing and anti - money laundering programs . the following developments created difficulties to obtaining and maintaining access to banking services . check cashing businesses may offer additional fee - based products and services including money orders , processing utility bill payments , pre - paid phone cards , and funds transfers . to provide these services , a check cashing enterprise establishes a business relationship with a bank to clear checks , transfer funds , and open lines of credit for liquidity purposes . in march 2006 , a fincen news release acknowledged the ongoing concerns of both the banking industry and money service businesses relating to bsa regulations despite the previous steps taken ( including the april 2005 guidance ) to address the issues . in april 2005 , bank regulators issued interagency guidance in response to concerns over the loss of access to banking services by check cashers and other msbs . the goal was to clarify the regulatory expectations for banking institutions providing services to domestic businesses . there was general agreement that banks were re - evaluating their businesses strategies in light of bsa due diligence costs . fincen strengthened bsa enforcement after the enactment of the usa patriot act and with the increased focus on terrorism financing after 9 / 11 . check cashers provide access to financial services for individuals without accounts at conventional banks . the news release announced an advanced notice of proposed rulemaking seeking input on what additional guidance or regulatory action would be appropriate to address the ongoing concerns about check casher's and other msb's access to banking services . the news release emphasized the important role of msbs and the negative effect on the health and safety of the u.s. financial system if these businesses are driven underground .
since its inception , its has assembled archives of some 50 million holocaust - and post - war - era documents in bad arolsen , germany relating to approximately 17.5 million civilian victims of germany's national socialist ( nazi ) regime . following the end of the second world war , the allied powers established the international tracing service ( its ) in 1947 "for the purpose of tracing missing persons and collecting , classifying , preserving and rendering accessible to governments and interested individuals the documents relating to germans and non - germans who were interned in national - socialist concentration camps or to non - germans who were displaced as a result of the second world war. . after the 1954 repeal of the occupation statute in germany , an international commission of nine member states ( belgium , the federal republic of germany , france , israel , italy , luxembourg , the netherlands , the united kingdom , and the united states ) charged the its with continuing its mission as a missing persons tracing service and caretaker of the archives in bad arolsen under the neutral auspices of the international committee of the red cross ( icrc ) . 1746 requiring the disclosure of holocaust - era policies by insurers and establishing a federal cause of action for claims arising out of a covered policy . several members have also expressed an interest in ensuring the timely digitization and transfer of its collections , and in exploring the possibility that opening the archives could reveal documentation to substantiate additional claims on world - war ii era insurance policies . after the may 2006 agreement to open the archives , both the house and senate passed resolutions urging international commission member states to expedite approval of the agreement . in the so - called bonn accords of 1955 , the international commission established the oversight and administrative structure under which its continues to function today: a swiss delegate of the icrc , accountable both to the icrc and the eleven - member international commission , oversees its's day - to - day operations and reports to the commission at its annual meetings ; germany has provided and continues to provide its's operating budget . its claims to have provided approximately 11 million written responses to individual requests for information since its inception . on the other hand , while the evidence is by no means conclusive , its officials and some historians indicate it is unlikely that the archives contain definitive evidence of such policies . holocaust memorial museum highlight several priorities and concerns relating to the future of the archives , including ensuring prompt digitization and transfer of the files to research institutions in commission member states ; designing and implementing a classification system to allow for more efficient searches of archived and digitized documents ; continuing to reduce the backlog of requests for information from the archives , and training and hiring staff to better assist researchers in navigating the archives ; and , in the long term , contemplating reform of what many consider a cumbersome administrative and oversight structure . 1746 would have no direct effect on the bad arolsen archives , some assert that improved access to the archives may reveal documentation relating to unpaid holocaust - era insurance policies .
under current law , two departments — the department of state ( dos ) and the department of homeland security ( dhs ) — each play key roles in administering the law and policies on the admission of aliens . dhs's immigration and customs enforcement ( ice ) is the lead agency on enforcing immigration law in the interior of the united states . citizenship and immigration services ( uscis ) is charged with approving immigrant petitions , and dhs's customs and border protection ( cbp ) is tasked with inspecting all people who enter the united states . this issue is not new ; indeed , congress has been grappling with options to address it over the past two decades . at that time , nearly 2.7 million aliens had established legal status through the provisions of the immigration reform and control act ( irca ) of 1986 ( p.l . as congress debates comprehensive immigration reform and its component parts of immigration control ( i.e. , border security and interior enforcement ) , legal reform ( i.e. , temporary and permanent admissions ) , and the resolution of unauthorized alien residents , concerns arise over the capacity of the department of homeland security to identify and remove temporary aliens who fail to depart when their visas expire . foreign nationals not legally residing in the united states who wish to come to the united states generally must obtain a visa to be admitted . dos's bureau of consular affairs ( consular affairs ) is the agency responsible for issuing visas , dhs's u.s . in 1981 , the select commission on immigration and refugee policy ( scirp ) cited nonimmigrant visa abuse and document control as concerns and included the establishment of a "fully automated system" to track nonimmigrant arrivals and departures from the united states among its recommendations to the president and the congress . 99-603 ) — a law which also significantly strengthened border and interior immigration enforcement provisions . the phenomenon of foreign nationals who enter legally on a temporary basis and continue to stay after their visas expire is a fundamental problem of immigration control . this unanimous recommendation for an automated entry / exit system to monitor nonimmigrant overstays was part of a comprehensive set of proposals that scirp offered as part of its statutory mandate to evaluate the existing laws , policies and procedures governing the admission of immigrants and refugees to the united states . by 1996 , the estimated number of unauthorized alien residents was 5.8 million , with about 2.1 million ( 41% ) estimated to have overstayed their nonimmigrant visas . in 1996 , congress put this recommendation into law ; nonetheless , the issue of nonimmigrant overstays has remained a congressional concern . nonetheless , demographers at the former immigration and naturalization service ( ins ) estimated that 3.5 million unauthorized aliens were residing in the united states in 1990 . statutorily , the immigration and nationality act ( ina ) provides the elements to control the entry and exit of foreign nationals . recent estimates indicate that the unauthorized resident alien population ( commonly referred to as illegal aliens ) rose from 3.2 million in 1986 to 12.4 million in 2007 , before leveling off at 11.7 million in 2012 .
an antitrust suit ( originally a class action ) was filed by a group of ipo purchasers against the underwriters of those issues ( 10 major investment banks ) alleging conspiracy , price fixing - related , and tying violations of § 1 of the sherman act . the particular , allegedly harmful practices included ( 1 ) required investor promises to place bids in the aftermarket at prices above the initial public offering price , referred to as "laddering" ; ( 2 ) required investor commitments to purchase other , less attractive securities , a kind of tying arrangement ; and ( 3 ) investor payment of excessive commissions . given ( 1 ) congress's expressed concern that securities markets become and remain stable , ( 2 ) the continued oversight and actions of a single expert regulatory agency versus the probability of diverse and possibly conflicting decisions by nonexpert judges in the event of securities / antitrust lawsuits , and ( 3 ) the likelihood of conflict between the mandates of antitrust law and allowable activities under the securities laws , the court found that "the securities laws are 'clearly incompatible' with the application of the antitrust laws. . the securities and exchange commission has traditionally recognized certain types of manipulative activities , considered "stabilizing" activities , as permissible under § 9 ( a ) ( 6 ) of the securities exchange act and sec rule 10b - 1 . further , the sec has , and has exercised , its specific authority to supervise those activities . credit suisse gave the court the opportunity — not exercised since 1981 — to reiterate and apply its previously stated standards for granting implied antitrust immunity . at first glance , this system of agreement by the issuer and all of the major underwriters of size and pricing of the offering does appear , in fact , to be antitrust - violative price manipulation . in fact , the court itself indicated that the complaint was an attack not on the existence of the sec - approved joint ipo activity , but rather , the abuse of that activity . a "little price manipulation" has been permitted in order to further appropriate market goals . the court , in an opinion authored by justice breyer , began its analysis of the availability of implied antitrust immunity in this instance by noting that all of the challenged activities meet the basic prerequisite for implied antitrust immunity in the regulated securities industry: they are "central to the proper functioning of well - regulated capital markets. . in my view , agreements among underwriters on how best to market ipos , including agreements on price and other terms of sale to initial investors , should be treated as procompetitive joint ventures for purposes of antitrust analysis . these requirements , according to the investors , artificially inflated the share prices of the securities and constituted per se price fixing . however , not all underwriter manipulations have been prohibited . he noted that both the securities act of 1933 and the securities and exchange act of 1934 state , in "savings clauses," that their remedies "shall be in addition to any and all other rights and remedies that may exist at law or in equity": therefore , both statutes explicitly save the very remedies the court holds to be impliedly precluded .
this law vacated previous rules promulgated by the federal communications commission ( fcc ) in july 2003 relating to unsolicited facsimile ( fax ) advertising ; those rules amended section 227 of the communications act of 1934 ( 47 u.s.c . president bush signed s. 714 , the junk fax prevention act ( "the act" or jfpa ) , on july 9 , 2005 . 227 ) . the jfpa also directed the fcc to conduct a rulemaking to implement certain portions of the act ( see below , " fcc activity " ) and the government accountability office ( gao ) to issue a report on the effectiveness of the fcc's junk fax enforcement policies by april 5 , 2006 ( see below , " gao activity " ) . the strengths and weaknesses of fcc's procedures . without analysis , the fcc cannot assess whether it needs to change its rules , procedures , or consumer guidance guidelines . as required under the jfpa , on april 5 , 2006 , the gao submitted its report to congress on the fcc's enforcement of the junk fax law . provides an "established business relationship" ( ebr ) exemption , allowing businesses , political organizations , and trade associations to send advertisements and solicitations to persons with whom they have an existing relationship . further , the gao stated that the fcc does not provide consumers with adequate guidance or information to support the fcc's enforcement efforts . most importantly , the gao found that without performance goals and measures and without analysis of complaint and enforcement data , it was not possible to explore the effectiveness of current enforcement measures . the fcc has no clearly articulated long - term or annual goals for junk fax monitoring and enforcement , and it is not analyzing the data it collects . the jfpa required the fcc to adopt rules concerning unsolicited fax advertising as well as issue an annual report on its enforcement activities . with respect to strengths and weaknesses in the fcc's procedures , the gao determined that an emphasis on customer service , an effort to document consumers' complaints , and an attempt to target enforcement resources efficiently were strengths in fcc's procedures ; however , inefficient data management , resulting in time - consuming manual data entry , data errors , and — most importantly — the exclusion of the majority of complaints from decisions about investigations and enforcement , continue to be weaknesses . the jfpa contains the following specific provisions relating to fax advertising . finally , the gao stated that fcc faces management challenges in carrying out its junk fax responsibilities . the gao also stated that fcc officials cited competing demands , resource constraints , and the rising sophistication of violators in hiding their identities as hindrances to enforcement . requires that businesses be able to accept opt - out requests 24-hours a day , seven days a week . the fcc's junk fax procedures and outcomes . further , the gao discovered that although the bureau had ordered six companies to pay forfeitures totaling over $6.9 million for continuing to violate the junk fax rules after receiving warnings , none of that total had been collected by the department of justice .
in response to the april 19 , 1995 , bombing of the murrah federal building in oklahoma city , the president directed the department of justice ( doj ) to assess the vulnerability of federal office buildings , particularly to acts of terrorism and other forms of violence . a doj - directed interagency working group issued a report in june 1995 recommending specific minimum security standards for federal buildings and criteria , guidance , and timetables for evaluating the security needs of federal buildings and estimating the cost of needed upgrades . the president directed executive departments and agencies to upgrade the security of their facilities to the extent feasible based on the doj report's recommendations , and he gave the general services administration ( gsa ) this responsibility for the buildings it controls . in july 1995 , gsa initiated a multimillion - dollar security enhancement program for its 8,300 buildings . available for the building security program ; and develop outcome - oriented program goals , measures , and evaluations so that it can better manage the program and work toward mitigating security threats in its buildings . gsa's computer - based upgrade tracking system showed that about 7,000 upgrades were completed between october 1 , 1995 , and march 31 , 1998 , and based on data from gsa's accounting system , we estimated that gsa obligated roughly $353 million from the federal buildings fund ( fbf ) for these upgrades . using the criteria , guidance , and timetables recommended in the doj report , gsa has made progress in assessing risks , setting priorities , and completing thousands of upgrades in its buildings , particularly the high - risk ones . however , because of erroneous and incomplete data in these systems , we were unable to reliably determine the exact status or costs of the program . specifically , we were to determine ( 1 ) what criteria gsa used to assess security risks and prioritize security upgrades for its buildings , ( 2 ) the implementation and operational status of gsa's security upgrade program and the costs gsa has incurred by both funding source and type of security upgrade , and ( 3 ) whether any problems have hindered gsa's implementation of the security upgrade program . these included ( 1 ) funding source uncertainties ; ( 2 ) mistakes made to meet deadlines by a downsized staff , as well as a sense of urgency to rapidly complete as many security upgrades as possible ; and ( 3 ) unreliable upgrade cost estimates . specifically , you asked that we determine ( 1 ) what criteria gsa used to assess security risks and prioritize security upgrades for its buildings , ( 2 ) the implementation and operational status of gsa's security upgrade program and the costs gsa has incurred by both funding source and type of security upgrade ( such as x - ray machines and security guards ) , and ( 3 ) whether any problems have hindered gsa's implementation of the security upgrade program . in addition to the unreliable nature of the data in the upgrade tracking and accounting systems , several other problems have hindered and slowed gsa's implementation of the security upgrade program .
specifically , you asked us to review hcfa's progress in ( 1 ) addressing its most immediate priorities and ( 2 ) strengthening its internal management to effectively discharge its major implementation and oversight responsibilities . this legislation also established the bipartisan commission on the future of medicare to develop more long - term solutions for further ensuring medicare's integrity and solvency . we are pleased to be here today to discuss the health care financing administration's ( hcfa ) ability to meet its new and growing responsibilities . two of the programs hcfa administers cost federal and state taxpayers about $370 billion in fiscal year 1998 — $193 billion for medicare and $177 billion for medicaid — and represent an ever growing proportion of the federal budget — currently about 18 percent . the balanced budget act of 1997 ( bba ) and the health insurance portability and accountability act of 1996 ( hipaa ) were designed , with considerable input from the administration , to strengthen hcfa's ability to prevent fraud and abuse and constrain spending growth in the medicare program . the long - term financial condition of medicare is now one of the nation's most pressing problems . hcfa pays for health care coverage for nearly a quarter of the population . recent legislation gave hcfa substantial new authorities and responsibilities for reforming medicare in order to extend the solvency of medicare's hospital insurance trust fund beyond 2008 . because of your concern about hcfa's preparedness to implement these new authorities and administer its programs , you asked us to review hcfa's management capacity and to testify before this subcommittee last january . we have also reported on management problems that have led to poor - quality care provided to vulnerable beneficiaries . because of the size and complexity of its programs , we have been reviewing hcfa's operations since the agency was created more than 20 years ago . it has also slowed efforts to improve the oversight of ongoing operations , such as financial management and medicare fee - for - service claims administration , which desperately need attention . for example , it has delayed needed systems modernization and computer changes that implement new payment systems intended to slow program cost growth . these laws added substantial new authorities and programmatic responsibilities to hcfa's ongoing management of medicare and medicaid . you asked us to report today on our updated assessment of hcfa's progress — focusing on the agency's ability to meet its increasing workload in the short term . over the years , we have reported on problems in hcfa's management that weakened the fiscal integrity of these programs — leading to increased monetary loss from fraud , abuse , and erroneous payments . in 1990 , we developed a list of agencies and programs that were “high risk” because of their vulnerability to waste , fraud , abuse , and mismanagement . however , measured against the magnitude of challenges it faces , hcfa's progress seems more modest . to further strengthen hcfa's ability to effectively manage its employees and programs , the administration has proposed new authorities for contracting and new flexibility in hiring in the president's budget for fiscal year 2000 .
with a staff of 64,000 , ssa administers the nation's largest federal program — social security — as well as the largest cash welfare program , supplemental security income ( ssi ) . in that report , we highlighted the challenges that ssa would face as an independent agency: the shortfall in funds to pay future social security benefits , growing and changing disability caseloads , and public concerns about ssi program growth . i am pleased to be here today to provide our assessment of the social security administration's ( ssa ) efforts to address policy and program issues and to prepare for managing the challenges it faces in the 21st century . ssa's expenditures totaled $363 billion in fiscal year 1995 , nearly one - fourth of this nation's $1.5 trillion federal budget . today , i will describe these policy and program challenges and assess ssa's progress in addressing them and in preparing to manage its future challenges . yet as ssa acknowledges , public confidence in its programs is low and has been low for some time . although much of this lack of confidence stems from concerns about the future solvency of the social security system , public confidence is also eroded by reports of fraud and abuse . in establishing ssa's independence , the congress recognized the importance of strong and stable leadership for the agency . as we noted in our february 1995 report on ssa's transition to independence , independence heightens the importance of ssa's playing a strong leadership role in addressing long - standing problems and preparing for future challenges . has not sufficiently promoted return - to - work efforts in the administration and design of its disability programs . i will also assess what additional actions are needed to help ssa meet these challenges . social security provides benefits to retired and disabled workers and their dependents and survivors ; ssi provides assistance to the needy aged , blind , and disabled . any failure to do so seriously undermines the public's confidence in government and its ability to efficiently and cost - effectively administer programs and protect taxpayer dollars . at this critical juncture , effective leadership is needed so the agency can take the following actions to better ensure its success in the 21st century: inform the national debate on social security financing issues , complete its redesign of the disability claims process and promote return to work in its disability programs , enhance efforts to ensure program integrity , and make the technology enhancements and workforce decisions needed to meet increasing workloads with fewer resources . in addition , ssa has not done enough to combat fraud and abuse in the ssi program and address program weaknesses . these observations are drawn from completed and ongoing gao work on social security issues . ssa faces significant challenges , however , in modernizing its information systems — a complex , multiyear effort that could easily cost billions of dollars . we also spoke with ssa officials , selected officials of the social security advisory council and advisory board , and other experts to determine ssa's progress so far , what problems remain , and what else is needed to make ssa a premier agency .
in 1990 , we began a special effort to review and report on such activities , and yesterday we issued a series of reports providing the current status of the 20 high - risk areas we have been monitoring since our last major progress report 2 years ago . landmark legislation passed by the congress in the 1990s has established broad management reforms , which , with successful implementation , will help resolve high - risk problems and provide greater accountability in many government programs and operations: the expanded chief financial officers ( cfo ) act of 1990 requires agencies to prepare financial statements that can pass the test of an independent audit and provide decisionmakers reliable financial information . over the past 7 years , we have called attention to critical government operations that are high risk . we are pleased to be here today to discuss major government programs and operations we have identified as high risk because of vulnerabilities to waste , fraud , abuse , and mismanagement . such actions have established a solid foundation to help ensure greater progress , but much remains to be done to fully implement the corrective actions needed to remove the high - risk designation from these areas . to help improve this situation , we have made hundreds of recommendations to get at the heart of these problem areas , which have at their core a lack of fundamental accountability . without additional attention to resolve problems in the 25 areas that are the current focus of our high - risk initiative , the government will continue to miss huge opportunities to save billions of dollars , make better investments to reap the benefits of information technology , improve performance and provide better service , and more effectively manage the cost of government programs . the debt collection improvement act of 1996 strengthens federal agencies' debt collection practices and authorities . continued oversight by the congress , such as this hearing by the subcommittee , will add essential impetus to ensuring progress as well . effective and sustained follow - through by agency managers is essential to make further headway and achieve greater benefits . the 1993 government performance and results act requires agencies to measure performance and focus on results . these new areas have been added because they are serious , growing problems and provide opportunities to achieve significant savings and better service to the public . today , we will highlight the legislative and agency actions that have resulted in progress toward fixing these problems . in addition , we will discuss five new areas that we have just designated as high risk . the 1995 paperwork reduction act and the 1996 clinger - cohen act provide a basis for agencies to make wiser investments in information technology . the congress has also acted to address several problems affecting these high - risk areas through oversight hearings and specific legislative initiatives . full and effective implementation of legislative mandates , our suggestions , and corrective measures by agencies , however , has not yet been achieved because the high - risk areas involve long - standing problems that are difficult to correct . first , dod's lingering financial management problems are among the most severe in government .
we are pleased to be here today to discuss medicare's skilled nursing facility ( snf ) , home health care , and inpatient rehabilitation benefits and the administration's forthcoming legislative proposals related to them . the information presented today is based on our previous work and the most recent data on the benefits available from the health care financing administration ( hcfa ) , which manages medicare . after relatively modest growth during the 1980s , medicare's expenditures for snfs and home health care have grown rapidly in the 1990s . snf payments rose from $2.8 billion in 1989 to $11.3 billion in 1996 , while home health care costs grew from $2.4 billion to $17.7 billion over the same period . rehabilitation facility payments increased from $1.4 billion in 1989 to $3.9 billion in 1994 . administration officials also have discussed their intention to propose in the future a coordinated payment system for all post - acute care as a method to give providers efficiency incentives . the administration's major proposals for both snfs and home health care are designed to give the providers of these services increased incentives to operate efficiently by moving them from a cost reimbursement to a prospective payment system . my comments today will focus on the reasons for cost growth and the administration's announced legislative proposals for these three medicare benefits . earlier discharges from hospitals led to the substitution of days spent in snfs for what in the past would have been the last few days of hospital care ; use of ancillary services , such as physical therapy , in snfs has increased , and specific controls for these services have not been implemented ; rapid growth in the number of inpatient rehabilitation beds available and use of these beds by beneficiaries , as well as the likelihood of some substitution of rehabilitation days for general hospital days , led to higher expenditures for inpatient rehabilitation ; and a diminution of administrative controls over the benefits , resulting at least in part from fewer resources being available for such controls , reduced the likelihood of inappropriately submitted claims being denied . expenditures for inpatient rehabilitation facilities have grown rapidly since the mid - 1980s . over those periods , annual growth averaged 22 percent for snfs , 33 percent for home health care , and 23 percent for rehabilitation facilities . what remains unclear about these proposals is whether an appropriate unit of service can be defined for calculating prospective payments and whether hcfa's databases are adequate for it to set reasonable rates . because the legislative proposals were only recently released by the administration , our analysis was primarily based on summaries of them that were publicly released earlier in the year and our discussions with hcfa officials about the proposals . finally , the administration is proposing that snfs be required to bill for all services provided to their medicare residents rather than allowing outside suppliers to bill . this concept has appeal , but we have concerns about it similar to those we have for snf and home health prospective payments . this latter proposal has merit because it would make control over the use of ancillary services significantly easier .
our work did not specifically address the veteran's gulf war illness issue ; however , we did address some issues common to those contained in your february 15 , 1996 , interim report such as inadequate detection equipment , and problems of transitioning from investigational new drug vaccine status to food and drug administration approved vaccines . we appreciate the opportunity to provide our assessment of the capability of u.s. forces to fight and survive while under attack by chemical and biological agents . as you know , during the persian gulf conflict ( 1 ) many units arrived in the persian gulf without needed protective equipment and adequate training , ( 2 ) plans to vaccinate personnel to protect them from the effects of biological agents were inadequate , and ( 3 ) medical units lacked the ability to treat casualties in a chemically or biologically contaminated environment . u.s. forces still lack the ability to defend adequately against chemical and / or biological agents and a degraded war - fighting capability could still result from persistent equipment , training , and medical shortcomings . u.s. forces would have been highly vulnerable to chemical or biological attack had they not had 6 months after arrival in the gulf to deal with these shortcomings before offensive operations began . although the department of defense ( dod ) is taking steps to improve the readiness of u.s. ground forces to conduct operations in a chemical or biological environment , units designated for early deployment today face many of the same problems that were experienced during the persian gulf conflict in 1990 and 1991 . today u.s. forces face a continually increasing threat of chemical and biological warfare . dod has spent less than 1 percent of its budget on chemical and biological warfare defense , and over the period 1992-1995 , funding in real terms decreased by 30 percent . a steadily increasing number of potential enemies now possess the technologies and capabilities to produce and deliver a wide range of chemical and biological agents . this situation is a result of the inconsistent but generally lower priority dod — especially the joint chiefs of staff ( jcs ) and the war - fighting commanders in chief ( cinc ) — assigns chemical and biological defense compared to other high priority activities , such as performing traditional operational mission tasks . this is evidenced by the limited funding , staffing , and mission priority chemical and biological defense activities receive . the salient details on past and present problems in the u.s. defense against chemical and biological warfare are discussed below . it is unclear whether or when dod will approve these plans . shortcomings in chemical and biological defense are likely to continue unless the secretary of defense and the jcs chairman specifically assign a higher priority to this area . our work gives us no reason to expect dod to place greater emphasis on this area in the future . new and improved equipment for chemical and biological defense is needed to overcome some shortfalls , and dod is having difficulty meeting all of its planned chemical and biological defense research goals . only a few biological agent vaccines have been approved by the food and drug administration ( fda ) .
taxpayers and congress have expressed concerns with how the internal revenue service ( irs ) treats taxpayers in audits and whether audits are too burdensome . based on its ongoing and previous work , gao makes the following points on these issues: irs has limited data on both the treatment of taxpayers and the burdens imposed on them during audits . similarly , irs has no comprehensive definition of , and little data on , the burden its audits impose on taxpayers . gao also found that irs' use of financial status techniques has not increased in recent years . irs recently created a system to track taxpayers' complaints about improper treatment but irs does not solicit input on all improper treatment . one measure of audit performance is how much additional tax is recommended . irs has recently developed a survey that will ask individual taxpayers about their satisfaction with various parts of the audit process but results will not be available until 1998 . irs has various indicators and standards on audit performance . irs subsequently abandoned that approach due to concerns about its costs and to concerns from the public and congress about the taxpayer burden involved with those audits . to ensure adherence to the standards , irs relies on oversight by the auditors' managers . the standards focus on the efficient use of auditors' time and not on when they should use particular audit techniques . irs does not have a corresponding measure on how much of the recommended tax is ultimately collected after taxpayer appeals . regarding revenue impact , gao found that in about 16 percent of the cases where they were used , these techniques did help to identify significant amounts of unreported income — $10,000 or more . irs' concern arises because it has not been able to rely on its past approach for developing statistically valid research data that allowed irs to create and periodically update formulas to target the returns with the most potential for noncompliance . however , in over three - quarters of the total audits in which these techniques were used , no changes resulting from the use of these techniques were made to the income reported . in about one - quarter of the audits in which financial status techniques were used , irs did not have to contact the taxpayer to obtain information on the taxpayer's financial status beyond what was reported on the tax return . without an indicator to balance taxes recommended against those collected , irs auditors could have an incentive to recommend taxes that would be unlikely to withstand a taxpayer challenge . data are not available to permit gao or irs to determine the additional burden imposed on taxpayers from the use of the techniques in audits . • gao's work on one set of irs audit techniques — those used in analyzing taxpayers' financial status to identify unreported income — showed that irs used these techniques in less than a quarter of the audits completed in the time periods covered by gao's review . however , their workload limits their time for doing oversight . irs has nine audit standards . irs is concerned that its ability to target the potentially most noncompliant taxpayers for audits is deteriorating .
in july 1997 , we reported on operational and safety trends in the rail industry over the past 20 years and how the federal railroad administration ( fra ) has revised its rail safety program to address these trends . the increased concentration of larger railroads , as well as the service problems occurring in the western half of the united states , have heightened concern about the safety of freight railroads . we appreciate the opportunity to testify on rail safety as the subcommittee considers legislation to reauthorize rail safety programs . currently , there are 10 class i railroads — the nation's largest railroads — amtrak and 9 freight railroads . in summary , we found the following: the railroad industry has changed significantly since the staggers rail act of 1980 made it federal policy that railroads would rely , where possible , on competition and the demand for services rather than on regulation to establish reasonable rates . these larger railroads have cut costs , increased the tonnage their trains carry , downsized their workforce , and eliminated , sold , or abandoned thousands of miles of unprofitable or little - used track . rather than continuing to use violations and civil penalties as the primary means to obtain compliance with railroad safety regulations , fra decided to emphasize cooperative partnerships with other federal agencies , railroad management , labor unions , and the states . because of data limitations , our report provided information on safety trends for the entire railroad industry — not just the largest railroads — and operational trends for class i freight railroads . fra instituted an important shift in its safety program in 1993 to address safety problems in the rail industry . while 1996 and preliminary 1997 data , the latest data available , show improvements in safety , it is too early to determine if fra's new approach will sustain a long - term decline in accidents and fatalities . in addition , fra's new partnering efforts do not systematically respond to concerns about the level of workplace injuries for railroad employees and about the safety of railroad bridges . from 1976 to 1998 , mergers and acquisitions have significantly reduced the number of class i freight railroads . the partnering efforts generally focus on the nation's larger railroads and have resulted in fra inspectors' conducting fewer site - specific inspections of the railroad industry overall . during this same period , overall railroad safety has improved . despite this progress , each year about 1,000 people die as a result of grade - crossing accidents and trespassing , at least 9,000 railroad employees are injured , and thousands of people are evacuated from their homes because of hazardous materials released during train accidents . reported accident and fatality rates are down 75 and 36 percent , respectively , from 1976 levels . efforts to reduce injuries to workers must rely on the combined efforts of fra and the occupational safety and health administration ( osha ) . fra's efforts to increase cooperation with the railroad industry add new responsibilities for its 270 inspectors . to successfully implement the plan , fra is working with other federal agencies , the states , and the railroads to strengthen education and research activities ; enhance federal , state , and local enforcement efforts ; and increase or preserve federal rail - highway crossing safety funds .
export assistance centers ( useac ) . i am pleased to be here today to testify before this subcommittee on our work regarding efforts by the department of commerce , the u.s. export - import bank ( eximbank ) , and the small business administration ( sba ) to create a nationwide network of “one - stop shops,” called u.s . my testimony will address both the benefits realized at the first four useacs established as well as opportunities for improving their operations . as part of our review , we visited each of the four original useacs for a period of 1 week during may - june 1995 and obtained information , using interviews and surveys , from useac staff members , selected customers , and officials of nonfederal partner organizations that work closely with them .  ( see the appendix for more detailed information on our surveys. ) . this legislation also directed the u.s. & foreign commercial service — the commerce department agency responsible for managing its domestic field network — to utilize its district offices as “one - stop - shops.” these shops would be able to ( 1 ) provide exporters with information on all u.s. government export promotion and export finance services , ( 2 ) assist exporters in identifying which federal programs may be of greatest assistance , and ( 3 ) help exporters make contact with those federal programs . creation of the useac network can be best understood in the context of sweeping efforts made during this decade to strengthen federal delivery of export promotion services . partially in response to our work , congress enacted the export enhancement act of 1992 ( public law 102-429 , oct. 21 , 1992 ) , which created in statute the interagency trade promotion coordinating committee ( tpcc ) and tasked it with developing a strategic plan for strengthening federal export promotion services . tpcc , on september 30 , 1993 , issued its first national export strategy report , which contained 65 recommendations for federal action to help u.s. exporters . we then reported on a governmentwide effort that cost over $2.7 billion and that was fragmented among several agencies with no overarching strategy or explicit set of priorities . some useac directors also saw the need for ( 1 ) adequate authority over useac expenditures and ( 2 ) a useac - wide accounting system that would permit useacs to accurately identify and allocate costs and better manage expenditures . based on our review , we recommend that the secretary of commerce , working with the chairman of the eximbank and the administrator of sba give all useac directors the authority to contribute to the performance appraisals of all useac staff with regard to intra - useac cooperation and teamwork ( including development of an appropriate performance factor for staff appraisals and performance measures ) , establish a useac - specific customer tracking system that contains information on clients and services provided to them , and set up an accounting system that accurately tracks the full costs of creating and operating the useac network and , as part of that process , incorporate ways to give useac directors greater authority over useac expenditures . with respect to other factors , useac staff believed the useacs had ( 1 ) improved the quality of services they personally deliver ( 63 percent ) , ( 2 ) increased export - ready customers' ability to export ( 58 percent ) , and ( 3 ) improved cooperation with nonfederal partners ( 50 percent ) .
the health insurance portability and accountability act ( hipaa ) of 1996 ( p.l . as you know , the increased use of information technology in the health care system and the number of parties with routine access to personally identifiable medical data have raised concerns about the potential misuse of these data and the adequacy of the current system of protections . one of the principal mechanisms for overseeing research is the institutional review board ( irb ) system . the food and drug administration ( fda ) has regulations nearly identical for oversight of research conducted for drug or medical device approvals . as the congress continues to consider legislation , one concern is to provide access to medical records for the purposes of research while also offering privacy protections . if federal legislation is not enacted by august 1999 , the secretary must promulgate regulations setting privacy standards within 6 months . at the same time , the availability of these data is important for research that can improve the understanding of diseases and treatments across broad populations . under the current federal policy for the protection of human subjects — which was adopted in 1991 and is known as the common rule — research conducted by academic medical centers , pharmaceutical companies , and other organizations that are supported or regulated by any of 17 federal agencies is subject to review by local boards . 104-191 ) called for protections for the privacy of medical information . in light of these considerations , we examined issues related to the use of medical records for research . we are pleased to be here today to discuss our report on the privacy of medical records used for health research , which was released today . pursuant to hipaa , the secretary of health and human services recommended standards with respect to the privacy of personally identifiable information in september 1997 . as you know , a number of bills addressing privacy standards were introduced in the 105th and 106th congresses , although none has been enacted . while some of this research is subject to irb review — either because it is federally supported or regulated research or because the organization voluntarily applies federal rules to all of its research — some of the organizations conduct records - based research that is not reviewed by an irb . when appropriate , irbs are also supposed to consider whether the research projects under their review will protect the privacy of subjects and inform subjects of the extent to which their data will be kept confidential . in any case , the process of irb review does not ensure the confidentiality of medical information used in research — primarily because the provisions of the common rule related to confidentiality are limited . i will also discuss the safeguards health care organizations have in place to protect the confidentiality of health information used in research . in my remarks today , i will describe to what extent medical information used for research depends on personally identifiable information , research that is and is not subject to current federal oversight requirements , and how irbs ensure the confidentiality of health information used in research . we relied extensively on information we collected from 7 irbs and 12 organizations that conduct health research , including managed care , pharmacy benefit management , pharmaceutical , biotechnology , and health information organizations and integrated health systems .
i am pleased to be here today to discuss the challenges that face the national archives and records administration ( nara ) and federal agencies in their efforts to manage the rapidly increasing volume of electronic records . consistent , sustained oversight from congress – through avenues such as today's hearing - - is needed to ensure that records management policies and practices keep pace with today's environment . records generated electronically , such as electronic mail ( e - mail ) messages , word processing documents , cd roms , and world wide web site pages , present special archival challenges for nara and the agencies because these technologies are new and constantly changing . also , because of the wide variance in electronic records management ( erm ) policies and practices at four agencies we visited , we recommended that nara conduct a baseline survey of all agencies as a part of its planned business process reengineering ( bpr ) effort . in that report , we noted that nara and the agencies must address several hardware and software issues to ensure that electronic records are properly created , permanently maintained , secured , and retrievable in the future . nara had earlier planned to do such a survey but has decided to postpone it because the archivist gave higher priority to such activities as bpr . such oversight is essential to help nara ensure that the official records of our country are properly maintained and preserved . we continue to believe nara's bpr effort would benefit from a complete baseline assessment survey of all agencies' records management capabilities . some of nara's actions have been taken as a result of a court decision , which held that nara's guidance for the deletion of electronic records exceeded statutory authority . nara has taken actions to address the agencies' immediate needs for erm guidance and direction - - revising its bulletins and other guidance as well as forming a new group to help answer agencies' questions on erm issues . the survey would have identified best practices at agencies and collected data on ( 1 ) program management and records management infrastructure , ( 2 ) guidance and training , ( 3 ) scheduling and implementation , and ( 4 ) electronic recordkeeping . however , there has been no recent governmentwide survey to determine the extent of agencies' erm programs and capabilities or their compliance with the federal records act . my testimony today centers on our report to the senate governmental affairs committee in july 1999 . scheduled to take 18 to 24 months - - is completed . nara would also be in a better position in later years to assess the impacts of its bpr effort . instead , nara plans to collect information from a small , judgmentally selected sample of agencies . nara must provide guidance and assistance to federal agencies on the creation , maintenance , use , and disposition of government records . agencies must incorporate nara's guidance into their own recordkeeping systems . for example , australia has strong central authority and decentralized custody of records , and it maintains a governmentwide locator system . nara's bpr will address its internal processes as well as guidance and interactions with agencies .
the information in this statement is based primarily on our march 1996 report entitled , drug control: u.s. heroin program encounters many obstacles in southeast asia , which was initiated at the request of this subcommittee.the statement covers ( 1 ) the extent and nature of the heroin threat to the united states , ( 2 ) impediments to successful heroin control efforts in southeast asia , and ( 3 ) the efforts of the united nations drug control program ( undcp ) in burma . i am pleased to be able to provide this statement for the record on the results of our review of the production and trafficking of heroin from southeast asia to the united states and current efforts to stop it . according to recent u.s. government reports , the u.s. heroin addict population , which had remained stable at about 500,000 persons for nearly two decades , has risen and is now about 600,000 or higher . the lack of law enforcement cooperation between the united states and china continues to impede interdiction of key heroin - trafficking routes . u.s. policy restricts direct counternarcotics assistance until the burmese government improves its human rights stance and recognizes the democratic process . however , we found that the projects have not significantly reduced opium production because ( 1 ) the scope of the projects has been too small , ( 2 ) the burmese government has not provided sufficient support to ensure project success , and ( 3 ) inadequate planning has reduced project effectiveness . the impact of u.s. regional interdiction efforts to date has been limited by the ability of traffickers to shift their routes into countries with inadequate law enforcement capability and by poor law enforcement cooperation between the united states and china . the office of national drug control policy ( ondcp ) estimates that americans now consume 10 to 15 metric tons of heroin annually , an increase from the estimated 5 tons consumed during the mid - 1980s . the bulk of the remaining cultivation and production occurred in the southwest asia region ( primarily afghanistan ) , accounting for about 20 percent of worldwide opium poppy cultivation and over 35 percent of opium production . the united states does not have a significant counternarcotics program in burma because of u.s. concerns over human rights violations by the burmese government and the unwillingness of the burmese government to yield control of the country to a democratically elected government . however , the united states faces the following significant obstacles in implementing this approach: since 1988 , the united states has not provided direct counternarcotics assistance to burma because of its record of human rights abuses and its refusal to yield control of the country to a democratically elected government . cultivation in the region comprised of mexico and south america accounted for only about 5 percent of worldwide opium poppy cultivation and 3 percent of opium production . although the u.s. international heroin strategy was signed by the president in november 1995 , guidelines to u.s. counternarcotics agencies for implementing the strategy are still under review . the burmese government commitment to controlling opium production and trafficking within its borders is questionable . in addition , there is a reported increase in the number of multiple - drug users who are using both heroin and crack cocaine .
in its october 1995 report , smithsonian institution: better care needed for national air and space museum aircraft ( gao / ggd - 96-9 , october 19 , 1995 ) , gao found that nasm committed relatively few resources to aircraft restoration , compared to other museum activities . at the request of senator kay bailey hutchison , gao last year reviewed the care of the aircraft collection of the smithsonian's national air and space museum ( nasm ) . as currently structured , the smithsonian will have to raise at least $100 million in private funds for its construction . to be successful , the smithsonian will have to carry through on its initiated actions to develop a more clearly defined mission , collection priorities , and plans for the care of aircraft . gao made several recommendations to address the care of the collection . further , it remains to be seen how successful the smithsonian will be in raising private funds for the dulles extension and how long this effort will take . further , in september 1996 , the smithsonian board of regents approved a resolution encouraging the formation of partnerships with other museums that could care for smithsonian artifacts as a means of reducing storage problems . however , even if nasm restored more aircraft , the museum lacked adequate storage facilities to protect them from deterioration . nasm has consistently requested increased funding for collections management and for storage facilities repairs in recent years , but nasm must compete with other smithsonian museums for limited resources and had been unable to obtain needed funding . nasm's storage facilities , located mainly in suitland , maryland , consisted of buildings lacking humidity controls or air - conditioning , some buildings had leaking roofs , and only some were heated . it appears that the smithsonian is taking steps in the right direction to improve the care of aircraft in the nasm collection . nasm officials cited plans for a new extension facility at dulles airport , virginia , as the solution . as a result , the aircraft in storage were deteriorating , including previously restored aircraft . in august 1996 , nasm's director said actions were underway that addressed the gao recommendations . senator hutchison asked us to review whether nasm restored a sufficient number of aircraft to prevent deterioration of its collection . also , nasm had plans to acquire 80 aircraft over the next 30 years , which would have exacerbated its storage problems . to be successful , the smithsonian will have to carry through on its initiated actions to develop a more clearly defined mission , collection priorities , and plans for the care of aircraft . further , it remains to be seen how successful the smithsonian will be in raising private funds for the dulles extension and how long this effort will take . mr. chairman and members of the subcommittee: we are pleased to be here today to discuss the report that we issued last october to senator kay bailey hutchison on matters relating to aircraft restoration at the smithsonian institution's national air and space museum ( nasm ) . but we also found that even if nasm increased its restoration efforts , the museum would not have enough space with environmental controls to properly store or display the restored aircraft .
our report discussed three main issues: ( 1 ) the practice of using individual inspectors in repair station inspections ; ( 2 ) the condition of inspection documentation ; and ( 3 ) current faa actions to improve the inspection process . we appreciate the opportunity to testify on the federal aviation administration's ( faa ) oversight of repair stations that maintain and repair aircraft and aircraft components . in recent years , faa's oversight of repair stations has become a matter of concern , in part because the work performed by repair stations has been identified as a factor in several aircraft accidents . since the may 1996 crash of a valujet dc - 9 in the florida everglades , faa has announced new initiatives to upgrade the oversight of repair stations . we also found that while faa typically relies on individual inspectors , the use of teams of inspectors , particularly at large or complex repair stations , may be more effective at identifying problems and are more liable to uncover systemic and long - standing deficiencies . because faa does not tell its inspectors what documentation to keep , the agency's ability to identify and react to trends is hampered . faa is spending more than $30 million to develop a reporting system that , among other things , is designed to enable the agency to apply its inspection resources to address those areas that pose the greatest risk to aviation safety . we also surveyed inspectors responsible for repair stations to obtain their views on how faa's oversight could be improved . finally , faa has recently announced a major overhaul of its entire inspection process . it is designed to systematize the process and ensure consistency in inspections and in reporting the results of these inspections so as to allow more efficient targeting of inspection resources . for example , the national transportation safety board determined that a fatigue fracture from corrosion pits that were not discovered or properly repaired by a repair station was the probable cause of a propeller loss on an atlantic southeast airlines embraer - 120 in august 1995 . these initiatives were directed at clarifying and augmenting air carriers' oversight of repair stations , not at ways in which faa's own inspection resources could be better utilized . however , faa has several other efforts under way that would have a more direct bearing on its own inspection activities at repair stations . however , the revision of the regulations began in 1989 and has been repeatedly delayed . this effort is scheduled to be implemented in the fall of 1998 . the propeller loss occurred at 18,000 feet , and the plane crashed during an emergency landing , killing 8 and injuring 21 others on board . however , more than half of the inspectors said that there were areas of compliance that repair stations could improve , such as ensuring that their personnel receive training from all airlines for which they perform work and have current maintenance manuals . last year , at the request of the ranking minority member of this subcommittee and senator ron wyden , we reported on faa's oversight of repair stations . faa was meeting its goal of inspecting every repair station at least once a year and 84 percent of the inspectors believed that the overall compliance of repair stations was good or excellent .