as we reported , lr2000 does not track the critical information needed to effectively manage and oversee financial assurances , including the operation's basic status , such as whether the operation is ongoing or has ceased and should be reclaimed ; some types of financial assurances being used , such as corporate guarantees , bond pools , and trust funds ; and the adequacy of financial assurances to pay the cost of required reclamation .
as a result , funds are not available to pay at least $56.4 million in reclamation costs for operations that had ceased and not been reclaimed since blm began requiring financial assurances .
until blm establishes monitoring and accountability mechanisms to ensure that all operations have required financial assurances — based on sound reclamation plans and current cost estimate — and improves the information it collects to effectively manage financial assurances , these problems will continue .
to ensure that hardrock operations on blm land have adequate financial assurances , we recommend that the secretary of the interior direct the director of blm to take the following two actions: require the blm state office directors to establish an action plan for ensuring that operators of hardrock operations have required financial assurances and that the financial assurances are based on sound reclamation plans and current cost estimates , so that they are adequate to pay all of the estimated costs of required reclamation if operators fail to complete the reclamation , and modify lr2000 to ensure that it tracks critical information on hardrock operations and associated financial assurances so that blm headquarters and state offices can effectively manage financial assurances nationwide to ensure regulatory requirements are met .
because blm does not have an effective management process and critical management information , it has not ensured that some current and previous operators have adequate financial assurances , as required by federal regulations and / or blm guidance .
furthermore , some operations either do not have any , or have outdated reclamation plans and / or cost estimates .
however , some operators did not reclaim blm land disturbed by hardrock operations related to exploration , mining , and mineral processing when their operations ceased .
however , we continue to believe that until blm timely enters , tracks , and uses this critical information it will not be able to effectively manage financial assurances to ensure that federal regulations and blm guidance are followed .
blm has developed and revised regulations and issued policy under this provision .
in particular , financial assurances were not adequate to pay all estimated costs for required reclamation for 25 of the 48 operations because ( 1 ) some operations had no assurances , ( 2 ) some operations' assurances were less than the most recent reclamation cost estimates , and ( 3 ) some financial assurance providers declared bankruptcy and could not pay .
we continue to believe that this evidence clearly calls for a plan of action that includes monitoring and accountability mechanisms to ensure that the requirements in the federal regulations and blm guidance to have adequate financial assurances are met .
since then , thousands of operators have extracted billions of dollars worth of hardrock minerals from land now managed by the department of the interior's bureau of land management ( blm ) — the agency that manages the largest amount of federal land .