for example , in 2003 , congress required the secretary of veterans affairs to study the feasibility of coordinating health care services with representatives of va's academic affiliate , the medical university of south carolina ( musc ) in charleston , and , in 2006 , congress authorized va to collaborate with its academic affiliate , louisiana state university ( lsu ) , on rebuilding the two new orleans medical centers destroyed during hurricane katrina . for decades , va has also developed and maintained partnerships , or affiliations , with university medical schools to provide health care to veterans . officials from va and dod and representatives from academic affiliates identified a number of potential benefits and concerns associated with joint ventures , but have not used performance measures to routinely or comprehensively document and assess the outcomes of the joint ventures . the most commonly cited potential benefits of joint ventures include improved access to care , cost savings and avoidances , and improved training opportunities . different organizations also have different cultures , which can lead to conflicts . although officials at some of the va - dod sites said that the integrated operations of the joint venture helped mitigate concerns about the potential impact of deployment , va officials in albuquerque said that they decided to mitigate these concerns by eliminating the joint staffing model and moving to an arrangement under which dod purchases care from va. joint ventures may result in a loss of identity or control: a joint venture could diminish va's identity by changing a va medical center from a facility that treats only veterans to a facility with a mixed patient population that is served by providers from different health care systems . however , officials do not use the information to routinely or comprehensively document and measure the results of the joint ventures for a number of reasons , including the following: the va - dod sites have competing priorities for the limited resources that would be required to conduct such assessments , according to officials from several sites . however , va does not use performance measures at the department level to determine what is being achieved through its joint ventures and how well va succeeds in reaching the goals and achieving the desired outcomes . these lessons included establishing joint committees to work through issues , communicating frequently with their partner , securing leadership buy - in and support at all levels , developing contingency plans , allowing adequate time to implement change , and establishing clear roles and responsibilities . for example , va established working groups in charleston and new orleans to examine joint venture proposals with academic affiliates . in addition , in response to our previous recommendations , va developed and issued criteria for evaluating joint venture proposals in november 2007 . however , va's evaluation criteria are not sufficiently specific to ensure consistent evaluations of proposals , and are not sufficiently tailored to ensure the appropriate level of review . the handbook represents an important step toward better assessing proposed joint ventures and managing existing joint ventures in that , among other things , it details departmental policy on joint ventures , defines joint ventures , identifies the process for reviewing and approving joint venture proposals , and outlines criteria for use in evaluating joint venture proposals — none of which had previously been developed , documented , or shared with joint venture partners . revise the evaluation criteria for joint venture proposals to ensure they are measurable and specific — both in terms of definition and application . this report discusses the ( 1 ) potential benefits and concerns associated with joint ventures and the extent to which they are documented and measured , ( 2 ) lessons learned from existing and proposed department of veterans affairs ( va ) joint ventures with academic affiliates and the department of defense ( dod ) , and ( 3 ) steps va has taken to better evaluate proposed joint ventures . to address these objectives , we used a combination of site visits and semistructured interviews to obtain information for all eight existing va - dod joint ventures and for the three proposed joint ventures between va and academic affiliates .