the james webb space telescope ( jwst ) is one of the national aeronautics and space administration's ( nasa ) most complex projects and top priorities . this represents a total of 95 percent of cost growth and 81 months of schedule delays since the project's cost and schedule baselines were first established in 2009 . conference report no . this report is our seventh in response to that provision . for this report , we assessed ( 1 ) the considerations that nasa took into account when updating the jwst project's cost and schedule commitments , ( 2 ) the technical and integration challenges , if any , that are affecting the execution of the jwst project , and ( 3 ) the extent to which nasa has taken steps to improve oversight and performance of the jwst project . in addition , we compared the process the project used to update cost and schedule estimates with nasa guidance and policies on updating cost and schedule estimates and best practices identified in gao's cost estimating and assessment guide . for example , the irb recommended that the project: conduct an audit to identify potential embedded design flaws — problems that have not been detected through analysis , inspection , or test activities and pose a significant risk to jwst schedule , cost , and mission success ; establish corrective actions to detect and correct human mistakes during integration and test ; establish a coherent , agreed - upon , and factual narrative on project status and communicate that status regularly across to all relevant stakeholders ; and augment integration and test staff to ensure adequate long - term staffing and improve employee morale . schedule: jwst's revised launch readiness date of march 2021 reflects a consideration of the hardware integration and test challenges the project has experienced , including adding time to: add snag guards for the membrane tensioning system — which helps deploy the sunshield and maintain its correct shape — to prevent excess cable from snagging , repair tears of the sunshield membrane , deploy , fold , and stow the sunshield , and mitigate contractor schedule threats . the project determined that the repairs would take approximately 5.5 months . as part of its may 2018 study , the irb reviewed the project's schedule and recommended a launch date of march 2021 , which was subsequently reflected in nasa's new schedule for the program . cost: the project's new $9.7 billion life - cycle cost estimate is principally driven by the schedule extension , which requires keeping the contractor's workforce to complete integration and test longer than expected . in june 2018 , the nasa associate administrator — who is the project's decision authority — approved the project to proceed with its replan with a march 2021 launch date and $9.7 billion in life - cycle costs based on the agency program management council review and replan documents . project and northrop grumman officials provided an example of these changes working . the first phase of the audit was completed in september 2018 and found no major design issues or hardware rework required . the project manager's continued focus on these efforts will be important because: the project is implementing a wide span of improvement efforts , ranging from more on - site coverage at the contractor facility to cultural improvements , which will now need to be sustained for an additional 29 months . given the project is now on its third iteration of cost and schedule commitments , conducting a jcl is a small step that nasa can take to demonstrate it is on track to meet these new commitments . nasa also provided technical comments , which have been addressed in the report , as appropriate .