these committees report to the leadership of the joint venture . in new orleans , va and lsu formed a joint venture coordinating committee whose responsibilities include identifying opportunities for sharing information technologies and ensuring the availability of appropriate staffing for all aspects of the joint venture . our previous work on organizational transformation cites such benefits of establishing jointly staffed teams as creating opportunities for employees from the merging organizations to interact with each other , helping accelerate the merger or transformation process by allowing the parties to learn more about each other , and breaking down organizational silos . teams composed of a cross - section of individual members can also assist in integrating different perspectives , flattening organizational structure , streamlining operations , and making it easier to work together on future projects . frequent communication between partners is important: officials at most va and dod sites with whom we spoke said that frequent communication between partners helps reduce confusion , fosters a better work environment , helps ensure that vital information is shared with affected staff , and provides opportunities for each partner to learn from the other . for example , at one site , officials said that frequent meetings between va and dod leadership provide a convenient platform for the leaders to discuss joint venture issues , resolve problems , and evaluate a joint strategy or vision for going forward . the same would be true for the dod and academic affiliate partners . since the identity of a va medical center as a veteran's hospital is important to veterans , initial construction proposals for joint ventures between va and its academic affiliates in charleston , denver , and new orleans included options to construct separate bed towers for va and the academic affiliate . to mitigate this concern , joint venture partners recommended having governance and contingency plans that delineate roles and responsibilities , establish lines of authority , and identify work - arounds , among other things . joint ventures may create dependencies: when partners enter into a joint venture , a concern exists that they may become dependent on each other for equipment and services and not have immediate access to necessary equipment or services if the joint venture arrangement is disrupted or dissolved . for example , va officials in el paso said one of their primary concerns is that va patients will become dependent on services provided by dod , which could be interrupted or discontinued in the event of a military realignment or deployment . to handle this uncertainty , va officials said that it is important to have back - up plans for the provision of health care and to maintain relationships with other health care providers in the community . also , as we have previously noted , va officials said the el paso va office has developed contingency plans , which are reviewed daily , to ensure that care is not delayed or denied to any veteran . lsu representatives also stated that in addition to considering what services and equipment can be shared in a proposed joint venture with va , it is important to consider how the partners would separate or discontinue such sharing , if necessary , in the future .