the department of defense ( dod ) and the department of veterans affairs ( va ) have been working for over a decade on initiatives to share data between their health information systems .
as agreed with the committees of jurisdiction , our objectives for this third report are to ( 1 ) evaluate the departments' progress and plans toward developing electronic health record systems or capabilities that allow for full interoperability and comply with applicable federal interoperability standards and ( 2 ) determine whether the interagency program office established by the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2008 is positioned to function as a single point of accountability for developing and implementing electronic health records .
to evaluate the department of defense's ( dod ) and veterans affairs' ( va ) progress toward developing electronic health record systems or capabilities that allow for full interoperability of personal health care information , we reviewed our previous work on dod and va efforts to develop health information systems , interoperable health records , and interoperability standards to be implemented in federal health care programs .
in an effort to expedite the exchange of electronic health information between the two departments , the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2008 included provisions directing dod and va to jointly develop and implement , by september 30 , 2009 , fully interoperable electronic health record systems or capabilities that are compliant with applicable federal interoperability standards .
further , the act directed us to assess dod's and va's progress in implementing the electronic health record systems and to report semiannually our results to the appropriate congressional committees .
to better improve management of dod's and va's efforts to achieve fully interoperable electronic health record systems , including satisfaction of the departments' interoperability objectives , we recommend that the secretaries of defense and veterans affairs direct the director of the dod / va interagency program office to establish a project plan and a complete and detailed integrated master schedule .
however , while they have taken important steps , questions have continued to be raised about when and to what extent the departments' intended electronic sharing capabilities will be fully achieved .
without these important tools , the office is limited in its ability to effectively manage and provide meaningful progress reporting on the delivery of interoperable capabilities that are intended to improve the quality of health care provided to our nation's veterans .
dod and va have continued to increase electronic health information interoperability .
such systems and capabilities are important for making patient information more readily available to health care providers in both departments , reducing medical errors , and streamlining administrative functions .
accordingly , on july 28 , 2008 , and january 28 , 2009 , we issued reports in response to the act .
in addition , the act established an interagency program office to be a single point of accountability for the departments' efforts .
if the recommendation is properly implemented , it should better position dod and va to effectively measure and report progress in achieving full interoperability .
our prior reports on dod's and va's efforts to develop fully interoperable electronic health records noted their progress and highlighted issues that they needed to address to achieve electronic health record interoperability .