specifically , my comments will focus on ( 1 ) the extent to which db plans have invested in hedge funds and private equity , ( 2 ) challenges that such plans face in investing in hedge funds and private equity , ( 3 ) steps that plan sponsors can take to address these challenges , and ( 4 ) the implications of these challenges for plan sponsors and the federal government .
much has happened in the financial markets since we issued three reports in 2008 — one that addressed defined benefit ( db ) pension plan investments in hedge funds and private equity , another that addressed federal oversight and other issues regarding hedge funds exclusively , and a third that addressed private equity funds .
specifically , this project — being conducted for the ranking member of the subcommittee on health , employment , labor and pensions of the house committee on education and the workforce — seeks to assess the extent to which db plans have realized desired benefits from investing in hedge funds and private equity , and what actions they may have taken in response to lessons learned over the last 5 years .
as you know , millions of americans rely on retirement savings plans for their financial well - being in retirement .
according to a 2009 industry survey , most hedge fund strategies produced double - digit losses in 2008 , and hedge funds saw approximately $70 billion in redemptions between june and november 2008 .
hedge funds were deeply affected by the financial market events of 2008 .
nevertheless , many of these investments have rebounded , and a 2010 industry survey of institutional investors suggests that these investors continue to be committed to investing in hedge funds , but with a shifting set of objectives and criteria .
my statement today is based primarily on findings from our 2008 report on private and public sector db pension plan investments in hedge funds and private equity , and a subsequent 2010 testimony that we have updated to reflect more recent data .
we obtained and analyzed data on the extent of pension plan investments in hedge funds and private equity from private organizations such as greenwich associates and pensions & investments .
in conducting our prior work , we reviewed relevant literature and survey data and conducted in - depth interviews with pension plan representatives and industry experts .
in light of these challenges , and as predecessors to this 2011 erisa advisory council have concluded , the department of labor ( labor ) can play a role in helping to ensure that plans fulfill their employee retirement income security act of 1974 ( erisa ) fiduciary duties when investing in hedge funds and private equity .
these plans were selected based on several criteria , including the range of investment in hedge funds and private equity and the amount of total plan assets .
in addition , we currently have work under way examining db plans' recent experiences investing in these vehicles .
we expect to issue a report on this work early next year .
for example , we stated that labor's employee benefits security administration ( ebsa ) could outline the implications of a hedge fund's or fund of funds' limited transparency on the fiduciary duty of prudent oversight .