the house of representatives resolves into the committee of the whole , a parliamentary device designed to allow greater participation by members in debate , to consider most major measures . various rules and procedures govern how and when members can engage in debate , offer amendments , make motions and requests , and take other actions in the committee of the whole . in addition , measures considered in the committee of the whole typically are subject to conditions governing debate and amendments that are specified by a special rule or a unanimous consent agreement . time during general debate is controlled by the chair and ranking member of the committee that reported the measure under consideration . these members , called floor managers , determine who may speak , for how long , and in what order . time during the amendment process is sometimes controlled in a similar way under the terms of a special rule . alternatively , the amending process might proceed under the `` five - minute rule , '' whereby the proponent and an opponent of an amendment are recognized by the chair of the committee of the whole for five minutes each . additional members may offer `` pro forma amendments '' solely for the purpose of gaining recognition to speak for five minutes . in some circumstances , members might make motions to close or limit five - minute debate . if a member believes a pending matter violates a house rule , he or she may make a point of order against it ; a member may also reserve a point of order to be made later against an amendment . a ruling by the chair as to whether a matter violates a house rule may be appealed . a member might also make a parliamentary inquiry to ask a question about a procedural situation . some actions can be taken in the committee of the whole by unanimous consent ; however , a member can not ask unanimous consent to take actions in committee of the whole that are properly performed by the house or that substantially modify conditions established by a special order agreed to by the house . the committee of the whole resolves back into the house proper by `` rising . . members might make a motion simply to rise , when the committee of the whole has not concluded consideration of a measure , or to rise and report , when consideration has concluded . special rules usually include language that makes a motion to rise and report unnecessary . members occasionally make the motion to rise and report with the recommendation to strike the enacting clause . a quorum for conducting business in the committee of the whole is 100 members , but a quorum is presumed to be present unless it is otherwise demonstrated through a process that begins when a member makes a point of order on the floor . three kinds of votes can take place in the committee of the whole : voice , division , and recorded .