the house can agree to resolve itself into the committee of the whole in one of three ways: by a special rule , by unanimous consent , or by motion . the consideration of a measure in the committee of the whole and in the house can be divided into five stages: ( 1 ) the house resolves itself into the committee of the whole ; ( 2 ) members engage in general debate on the measure ; ( 3 ) members offer , consider , and vote on amendments to the measure ; ( 4 ) the committee of the whole rises and reports back to the house with a recommendation ; and ( 5 ) the house votes on the recommendation and then on the measure itself . various rules and procedures , discussed in this report , govern how and when members can participate in debate , offer amendments , make motions and requests , and take other actions in the committee of the whole . measures considered in the committee of the whole typically are subject to conditions governing debate and amendments that are specified by a special rule from the committee on rules or a unanimous consent agreement . the committee of the whole , even by unanimous consent , may not set aside or substantially modify those conditions . under controlled time , a member is granted a block of time from a member , called a "manager," who determines which members may speak , for how long , and in what order . during the amendment process , the chair would distribute time in five - minute portions as described in the " debate under the five - minute rule " section , below . during the consideration of a measure in the committee of the whole , a number of motions and requests can be made by members to raise questions about the method of proceeding , obtain additional time for debate , or advance a measure closer to a final vote . a quorum is always presumed to be present unless it is otherwise demonstrated through a process that begins when a member makes a point of order on the floor . generally , however , the only time that members can make the point of order that a quorum is not present is when a vote is about to take place . in most circumstances , the chair is required to allow a minimum of 15 minutes for a recorded vote ( house rule xx , clause 2 ( a ) ) . when a member requests a recorded vote on an amendment , the chair might state that further proceedings on the amendment are postponed . alternatively , if the chair determines that a quorum is not present , he or she can immediately order a quorum call in response to the member's request and point of order . members then usually have approximately 15 minutes to reach the floor and record their presence by electronic device .