before according recognition . measures considered in the committee of the whole typically are subject to conditions governing debate and amendments that are specified by a special rule from the committee on rules or a unanimous consent agreement . in either case , the house sets the procedural conditions under which the particular measure is considered in the committee of the whole . the committee of the whole , even by unanimous consent , may not set aside or substantially modify those conditions . under those conditions , a member may be prohibited from gaining recognition to debate or make a certain motion or request in the committee of the whole . members are always limited in the amount of time they can spend speaking on the floor . the manner in which time is obtained , restricted , and distributed in the committee of the whole depends on the stage of consideration of the measure and the terms of any special rule or unanimous consent agreement governing the consideration of the measure . after the house resolves itself into the committee of the whole to consider a particular bill or resolution , members engage in general debate on the measure . during the general debate stage , members discuss the bill and may discuss any amendments they plan to offer , but they may not offer amendments during this time . the next stage of consideration is the amendment process . during this stage , members seek recognition to offer amendments and to debate their merits . along with these two distinct stages of debate , there are two different methods by which time is distributed in the committee of the whole . time for debate is either "controlled" or it is not . under controlled time , a member is granted a block of time from a member , called a "manager," who determines which members may speak , for how long , and in what order . controlled time is generally divided equally between two managers . if time is not controlled , then a member gains time to speak by seeking recognition from the chair of the committee of the whole . absent any order of the house governing consideration of a measure , time in the committee of the whole would be controlled only during general debate . during the amendment process , the chair would distribute time in five - minute portions as described in the " debate under the five - minute rule " section , below . the house usually resolves into the committee of the whole under a special rule , however , and these orders of the house always provide for controlled time during general debate and often during the amendment process . during the consideration of a measure in the committee of the whole , a number of motions and requests can be made by members to raise questions about the method of proceeding , obtain additional time for debate , or advance a measure closer to a final vote . not all motions and requests available in the committee of the whole are listed below , although an effort has been made to include those most likely to be used by members in the contemporary congress .