this is referred to as a retrospective payment system . if a beneficiary dies late in the month , family members or the executor of the estate may not notify the social security administration ( ssa ) in time to stop the payment . if the policy was intended to reduce the cost of the system , they see it as a "poor" device to do so . they argue that the policy discredits the system by creating the impression that it is arbitrary , unbending , and thoughtlessly bureaucratic . they maintain that benefits should be paid at least for the part of the month that the beneficiary was alive . supporters of the current policy argue that paying benefits for the month of death would be costly . ssa estimates that paying full benefits for the month of death would cost $1.6 billion annually . alternatively , paying 50% of the benefit if the beneficiary dies in the first half of the month , and a full benefit if the beneficiary dies in the second half of the month , would cost an estimated $1.2 billion annually . pro - rating the benefit based on the number of days the beneficiary was alive during the final month would cost an estimated $800 million annually . ssa also estimated the increase in benefit payments under a proposal in which ( 1 ) a full benefit for the month of death would be payable to a surviving spouse ( the surviving spouse would not be required to have been living with the beneficiary when the death occurred or to be entitled to benefits ) , or ( 2 ) if there is no surviving spouse , a pro - rated benefit based on the number of days the beneficiary was alive during the final month would be payable . ssa estimated that the proposal would increase benefit payments by $13.2 billion over 10 years ( 2004-2013 ) . supporters of the current policy also point out that the system pays benefits to an individual beginning with his or her first month of entitlement , regardless of when entitlement began during the month , and that this provides rough balance in the system for not paying benefits for the month of death . moreover , survivor benefits are payable to eligible family members beginning with the deceased beneficiary's month of death , regardless of when the death occurred during the month . in addition , the spouse who was living with the worker , or a spouse or child eligible for survivor benefits , may receive a social security lump - sum death payment of $255 . they contend that there is little appreciation for the administrative difficulties ( and potential costs ) involved in determining who should receive the deceased beneficiary's benefit for the month of death . because ssa cannot simply mail a check to the deceased beneficiary , ssa would have to determine who should receive the payment . given that more than 2 million beneficiaries die each year , this would require a labor - intensive process , similar to the taking of regular benefit applications .