it just does not mean anything . it means what you might call just a slap on the wrist . it does not carry any weight . *** we looked and looked and looked , and we feel certain that our research was complete , and therefore we totally rejected , for the reason i have given , the mild legislative word "reprimand," which has no meaning or means nothing more than just a disapproval , and put in the word "censure," which we thought was the mildest of the words that have a legislative meaning , and would carry the idea of the senate taking a stand with reference to the matter . in the case of senators tillman and mclaurin who were "censured" by the full senate in 1902 for fighting on the floor of the senate , the committee to whom the matter was referred considered the options for the senate , including a "reprimand" of the members which it considered "only a more formal reiteration [of an earlier contempt vote and] .. not sufficiently severe," found that the conduct should be "condemned" by the senate and recommended a resolution which "censured" the members . the committee explained: the senate may punish the senators from south carolina by fine , by reprimand , by imprisonment , by suspension by majority vote , or by expulsion with the concurrence of two - thirds of its members . the offense is well stated in the majority report . it is not grave enough to require expulsion . a reprimand would be too slight a punishment . the senate by a yea - and - nay vote has unanimously resolved that the said senators are in contempt . a reprimand is in effect only a more formal reiteration of that vote . it is not sufficiently severe upon consideration of the facts . prior to the 1970s in the house of representatives , although there were some inconsistencies , the terms "reprimand" and "censure" were often considered synonymous and used together in a resolution . in 1921 , for example , a resolution adopted by the house instructed the speaker to summon representative blanton of texas to the bar of the house "and deliver to him its reprimand and censure" . more recently , however , there has come to be a distinction in the house whereby it is considered that a "reprimand" involves a lesser level of disapproval of the conduct of a member than that of a "censure" , and is thus a less severe rebuke by the institution . procedurally in the house , a "censure" resolution will generally instruct the member to go to the well of the house and for the speaker of the house to read the resolution as a verbal castigation of the member . in the case of a "reprimand," however , the resolution is merely adopted by a vote of the house . such procedures are not relevant to the senate which merely adopts a censure resolution and does not require a member to "go to the well" for a verbal rebuke .