no further disclosures should be authorized . responding to the commission's recommendations , on april 23 , 1996 president clinton authorized congress to make public the total appropriation for intelligence at the time the appropriations conference report was approved . such action was not , however , taken by the legislative branch . in october 1997 , dci tenet announced that president clinton had authorized him to release the aggregate amount appropriated for intelligence and intelligence - related activities for fy1997 ( $26.6 billion ) . his press release indicated that the decision was based on two important points: first , disclosure of future aggregate figures will be considered only after determining whether such disclosures could cause harm to the national security by showing trends over time . second , we will continue to protect from disclosure any and all subsidiary information concerning the intelligence budget: whether the information concerns particular intelligence agencies or particular intelligence programs . in other words , the administration intends to draw a firm line at this top - line , aggregate figure . beyond this figure , there will be no other disclosures of currently classified budget information because such disclosures could harm national security . the press release took note of the lawsuit filed earlier under the freedom of information act and indicated that the president had preferred to take action concerning the declassification of the intelligence budget "in concert with the congress," but "the present circumstances related to this lawsuit do not allow for joint action. the following march , tenet announced that the aggregate amount appropriated for intelligence and intelligence - related activities for fy1998 was $26.7 billion . in the announcement tenet stated that the determination that "this release will not harm national security or otherwise harm intelligence sources and methods. the release of the figure for fy1998 was , however , the final such release . after litigants had sought to require the release of the amount requested for intelligence ( in addition to the amount appropriated which had been made public ) , tenet declined to make public the amount appropriated for fy1999 . some observers speculate tenet may have been reluctant to address the substantial additional intelligence funds that were reportedly incorporated in the supplemental appropriation act ( p.l . 105-277 ) , enacted on october 21 , 1998 . in any event , no such releases have been made subsequently . after decades of debate , the issues surrounding the question of public disclosure of the intelligence budget have not changed . there is a question of the degree to which the constitution requires such budgetary information to be made public . another question centers on whether limited budgetary data can be made public without leading to detailed revelations of properly classified programs and whether information might be made available to adversaries who will use it against the u.s . beyond these questions , there is an issue of how to frame an informed public debate on the extent of intelligence spending . how do you provide a sense of how the complex and disparate u.s. intelligence community fits together without revealing the extensive detail that almost all observers would consider unwise .