first . some perceive a gradual weakening of the trade union movement , both in actual membership and in political influence . this could translate into a diminished public and congressional support for davis - bacon . and , if that perception is accurate , it could result in some refocusing of labor's legislative priorities . should truck drivers be davis - bacon covered ? might elimination of davis - bacon adversely impact industry , producing uncertainties with respect to wages as an element of the bidding process , alter manpower utilization patterns , increase the risk of accidents in the workplace , or render less effective skill development and transfer now commonly resolved through apprenticeship programs where there is davis - bacon coverage ? second . there has been a gradual change , over time , in demographics . members of congress , policy analysts , trade union leaders , with others , may no longer fully share or appreciate the experience of the pre - world war ii era . is there sufficient objective information concerning the act to allow for fair assessment of the statute and its impact ? this report examines policy issues the act has sparked through the years and which remain a part of the davis - bacon debate into the 21 st century . these include such questions as: wage rate determination procedures , reporting requirements under the copeland act , an appropriate threshold for activation of the statute , interagency relationships with respect to davis - bacon enforcement and compliance activity , administrative or judicial appeals procedures , the use of "helpers" and other low - skilled workers on covered projects , and the right of a president to suspend the statute as well as the conditions under which such a suspension may occur . that the fundamental premise of the act remains in contention after 75 years may be , itself , part of the public policy debate . historically , the act has enjoyed strong bipartisan support ; but , at the same time , especially since the middle 1950s , it has provoked militant criticism . federal agencies have disagreed , publicly , concerning the usefulness and administration of the act . it has been subjected to judicial review and interpretation , each new application becoming , in turn , a matter for further examination . although the department of labor ( dol ) has made certain changes in the act's administration , the statute itself has remained largely unchanged since 1935 . through the years , however , congress has extended the act's provisions to cover an ever wider segment of federal and federally assisted construction ; and , at least during the past several decades , such extensions of coverage have provided an opportunity for renewed debate concerning the act and its impact . prevailing wage protection , under public contracts , seems to have commenced at the state level and , later , to have been adopted by the federal government . dissatisfaction with the act was soon rife , both with labor and contractors . the initial enactment had been a brief and relatively simple statement of policy .