in most cases an ssi recipient is eligible for medicaid . the ssi program generally counts all types of income in determining eligibility and payment amounts . in some cases , the income and resources of non - recipients are counted in determining ssi eligibility and benefit amounts . this process is called "deeming" and is applied in cases in which an eligible child lives with an ineligible parent , an eligible individual lives with an ineligible spouse , or an eligible non - citizen has a sponsor . in general , an ssi recipient can have assets , with the exception of a home , car , and household items , worth no more than $2,000 and beneficiary - couples can have countable assets worth no more than $3,000 . a child under the age of 18 may qualify as disabled if he or she has an impairment that results in "marked and severe" functional limitations . adults aged 65 or older may qualify for ssi benefits without being disabled . ssi is administered by the social security administration ( ssa ) and operates in the 50 states , the district of columbia , and the commonwealth of the northern mariana islands . to qualify for ssi , a person must be a citizen of the united states or a "qualified alien" and either a resident of the united states or the northern mariana islands , a child of a person in the military stationed outside the united states , or a student temporarily abroad . other requirements related to residence in certain public institutions , absence from the united states , filing for other potential benefits , and fugitive felon and probation / parole violator status also apply . in december 2013 , the ssi program had more than 8.3 million recipients , who received over $4.6 billion in benefit payments . of these recipients , more than 1.3 million were children under the age of 18 , almost 5.0 million were adults between the ages of 18 and 64 , and just over 2.1 million were adults aged 65 or older . the maximum federal ssi payment , referred to as the federal benefit rate , is $721 per month for an individual living independently and $1,082 for a couple living independently in 2014 . all but six states and the commonwealth of the northern mariana islands supplement the federal ssi benefit with additional payments . fourteen states and the district of columbia have state supplements that are either partially or wholly administered by the ssa , and 34 states self - administer their supplements . federal ssi benefit maximums are adjusted annually using the consumer price index for urban wage earners and clerical workers ( cpi - w ) to reflect changes in the cost of living . after a 1.7% increase in 2013 , a 1.5% cola was applied for 2014 . most ssi recipients have other income ; their countable income is subtracted from the federal benefit rate to determine their ssi eligibility and payment amount . in calculating countable income , ssi provides for certain income exclusions ( eg , the first $20 of monthly unearned income ; the first $65 plus one - half of remaining monthly earned income ) .