encouragement . the united states did not assume a responsibility to "build democracy," and u.s. officials did not devote significant efforts towards the encouragement of local self - government . prior to the occupation , the haitiangovernment had beenlargely the province of a narrow elite consisting of about 5 percent of the population . the haitian presidents whoserved during most of the occupation , dartiguenave ( 1915-1922 ) , louis borno ( 1922-1930 ) , and eugene roy , whoserved astemporary president from may - november 1930 , were elected by the council of state at the instigation of u.s.authorities . they , in turn , appointed members of the council of state . there were no national elections held untiloctober1930 , and local elections that produced unsuitable winners were invalidated . newspapers were censored , andoffending editors jailed . inattention to efforts to promote democracy stemmed , in part , from a knowledge that any election might produce results hostile to u.s. interests and probably from racial attitudes that considered haitians unsuited forself - government . theyears of the haitian occupation coincided with widespread racial segregation in the united states and oppositionby a majority of u.s. whites to a political role for blacks . these attitudes , brought to haiti by the occupation , ledto social aswell as political discrimination against haitians , even the educated and politically active elite , that was bitterlyresented and undercut well - intentioned development projects . to a large extent , u.s. racial attitudes ensured thatthere was nosignificant element of the haitian populace that supported the u.s. presence . ( 7 ) education was also largely neglected during the occupation . schooling in haiti had been traditionally divided between francophone instruction for the elite and a very few rudimentary elementary schools for others . little effortto changethis situation was undertaken . the mass of the population remained illiterate , and the elite continued to seek aneducation that did not lead to careers in commerce and industry . efforts to provide technical training to developtheagricultural and industrial potential of the country ( the service technique ) were not warmly receivedand did not reach a large number of students . the complete haitianization of the garde was completed . president franklinroosevelt paid an official visit to cap - haitien in july 1934 and the last marines departed the following month . nonetheless , au.s . financial adviser would remain until 1941 to oversee payments on the haitian debt . the u.s. occupation in large measure accomplished its goals of stabilizing haitian finances . security for investors was a key concern of the u.s. government and to a large extent became the justification for the occupationonce thepotential threat of european intervention disappeared with the conclusion of world war i . a $16-million u.s. loanwas negotiated in 1922 to consolidate haiti's outstanding foreign debts . efficient collection of duties and prompt,evenadvance , payment of debts owed to u.s. banks soon restored the country's financial standing . eventually , some 60% of haitian revenues were expended under u.s. supervision , the greatest percentage going to debt repayment . some critics , including the forbes commission , argued that monies used for advance repaymentof debtscould have been more usefully allocated to domestic projects .