the senate did not act on the bill . in the 111 th congress , h.r . 711 ( representatives capuano and castle ) would remove the exemption in the investment advisers act for firms with fewer than 15 clients , which was the figure at the center of the 2006 goldstein decision . why was government intervention needed ? the fed cited concerns about systemic risk to the world's financial markets — while ltcm's capital was a relatively modest $3-$4 billion ( during the first half of 1998 ) , it had borrowed extensively from a broad range of financial institutions , domestic and foreign , so that the total value of its securities holdings was estimated to be about $80-$100 billion . in addition , the fund supplemented its holdings of stocks and bonds with complex and extensive derivatives positions , magnifying the total exposure of the fund's creditors and counterparties , and making the effect of a general collapse and default difficult to gauge . if the fund ( or its creditors ) had tried to liquidate its assets and unwind its derivative positions in the troubled market conditions that prevailed , the result might have been extreme price drops and high volatility , with a negative impact on firms not directly involved with ltcm . critics of the fed's action expressed concerns about moral hazard — if market participants believe they will be rescued from their mistakes ( because they are "too big to fail" ) , they may take imprudent risks . to the fed , however , the immediate dangers of system - wide damage to financial markets , and possibly to the real economy as well , clearly outweighed the risks of creating perceptions of an expanded federal safety net . in the wake of the long - term capital management episode , systemic risk emerged as the major policy issue raised by hedge funds . the funds had demonstrated an ability to raise large sums of money from wealthy individuals and institutions , and to leverage those sums , by borrowing and through the use of derivatives , until they become so large that even u.s. financial markets may be at risk if they fail . not all hedge funds borrow heavily and not all follow high - risk strategies . but many do , and there is no reason to think that other hedge funds will not amass positions as large and complex as ltcm's . in time , some of them can be expected to suffer equally spectacular losses .