id . under these exceptions , a federal court ( and sometimes a federal agency ) may order the losing party to a lawsuit to pay the winning party's attorneys' fees . although "attorney's fees generally are not a recoverable cost of litigation 'absent explicit congressional authorization,' ... [t]he absence of specific reference to attorney's fees is not dispositive if the statute otherwise evinces an intent to provide for such fees. fee - shifting has been proposed , not only to encourage lawsuits , but to discourage them , especially tort suits . the court found no answer in the statute or in its legislative history . it ruled against the attorney in an effort to create an incentive for attorneys not to represent themselves , because an attorney who represents himself "is deprived of the judgment of an independent third party. id . it concluded that its decision would serve "[t]he statutory policy of furthering the successful prosecution of meritorious claims. id . kay v. ehrler has been applied to other fee - shifting statutes , including the equal access to justice act , the freedom of information act , the individuals with disabilities education act , the fair debt collection practices act , and title vii of the civil rights act of 1964 . title vii of the civil rights act of 1964 , 42 u.s.c . ยง 2000e - 5 ( k ) , provides , in pertinent part: in any action or proceeding under this subchapter the court , in its discretion , may allow the prevailing party ... a reasonable attorney's fee as part of the costs . in new york gaslight club v. carey , 447 u.s. 54 ( 1980 ) , the plaintiff sought relief for an alleged violation of title vii of the civil rights act of 1964 , and filed a state administrative proceeding , as required by the act , and a federal court suit . she won the state proceeding and agreed to a dismissal of the federal court suit , except for her request for attorneys' fees . the supreme court upheld her right to an award by the court of attorneys' fees incurred at the administrative level . the court noted "congress's use of the broadly inclusive disjunctive phrase 'action or proceeding'" ( id . at 61 ) and added that it found nothing to indicate that "proceeding" was intended to apply only to federal agency proceedings . in dicta , the court added that , for purposes of a fee award , it did not matter whether the plaintiff had lost at the administrative level and prevailed in court on the merits , or had prevailed at the administrative level and sued in court solely to recover attorneys' fees incurred at the administrative level . the court wrote: it would be anomalous to award fees to the complainant who is unsuccessful or only partially successful in obtaining state or local remedies , but to deny an award to the complainant who is successful in fulfilling congress' plan that federal policies be vindicated at the state or local level . id . title vii's attorneys' fees provision has been a model for others .