prior to the enactment of p.l . 113-2 , the obama administration had submitted a request to congress on december 7 , 2012 , for disaster relief to support states affected by hurricane sandy . as part of this request , the administration called for congress to provide $500 million in supplemental funding for the ssbg . on december 28 , 2012 , the senate approved this request as part of a disaster supplemental package ( introduced as an amendment to h.r . 1 ) , with some special provisions not included in the president's request . however , the house took no action on this bill . fy2008 supplemental: major disasters of 2008 ( and hurricanes katrina and rita ) the first fy2009 cr ( p.l . 110-329 ) included , as division b , the disaster relief and recovery supplemental appropriations act of 2008 . the committee report accompanying h.r . 5652 also included a summary of dissenting views , which focused largely on how the elimination of the ssbg might affect the vulnerable individuals served by these funds . similar concerns were raised by other critics of the proposal to eliminate the ssbg , such as the national conference of state legislatures ( ncsl ) . the ncsl argued that the flexible nature of the ssbg allows states to address the needs of vulnerable populations and respond to local concerns , arguing that eliminating the ssbg might shift costs of such services directly to states . on march 23 , 2010 , president obama signed into law a comprehensive health care reform bill , the patient protection and affordable care act ( aca ; p.l . this law included three provisions that amended the ssbg's authorizing legislation , title xx of the ssa . these provisions , discussed briefly below , created new programs related to elder justice , the health care workforce , and environmental health hazards . notably , these changes were primarily of technical importance with respect to the ssbg . that is , they affected statutory citations for the ssbg , but they did not substantively amend the provisions within title xx that govern the ssbg itself . the health reform law re - titled title xx as block grants to states for social services and elder justice ( formerly , title xx was entitled block grants to states for social services ) . the law also divided title xx into two subtitles: subtitle a retained provisions related to the ssbg , while subtitle b comprised a series of new provisions related to elder justice . the elder justice provisions established ( 1 ) an elder justice coordinating council ; ( 2 ) an advisory board on elder abuse , neglect , and exploitation ; ( 3 ) a new grant program for stationary and mobile forensic centers to develop forensic expertise pertaining to elder abuse , neglect , and exploitation ; and ( 4 ) several new grant programs ( and other activities ) to promote elder justice . the health care reform law ( p.l . 111-148 ) also included provisions establishing two new sections within subtitle a of title xx . the first created two demonstration projects related to the health care workforce .