only vested benefits are insured . the average monthly benefit received by retirees in fy2015 was $606 . in a study released in 2008 , pbgc indicated that more than 80% of pbgc recipients in single - employer plans trusteed by pbgc received their full benefits . among participants whose benefits were reduced , the average reduction was 28% . assets of a terminated plan are allocated to pay benefits according to a priority schedule established by statute . under this schedule , some nonguaranteed benefits are payable from plan assets before certain guaranteed benefits . for example , benefits of participants who have been receiving pension payments for more than three years have priority over guaranteed benefits of participants not yet receiving payments . pbgc also is required to pay participants a portion of their unfunded , nonguaranteed benefits based on a ratio of assets recovered from the employer to the amount of pbgc's claim on employer assets ( called section 4022 ( c ) benefits ) . in the case of multiemployer plans , pbgc insures plan insolvency , rather than plan termination . accordingly , a multiemployer plan need not be terminated to qualify for pbgc financial assistance . erisa authorized the creation of seven revolving funds for pbgc , although only three revolving funds have been used by pbgc . the revolving funds contain the premiums paid by single - employer and multiemployer pension plan sponsors , returns on revolving funds' investments , and transfers from the trust fund that are used to pay benefits . each year , pbgc transfers funds from the trust fund to the revolving funds to pay for a share of participants' benefits . the investments of the revolving funds are , by law , invested exclusively in u.s. treasury securities . the revolving funds' assets at the end of fy2018 were $1.8 billion for fund 1 , $2.1 billion for fund 2 , and $29.3 billion for fund 7 , for a total of $33.2 billion . the revolving funds are on - budget accounts: increases or decreases in the revolving funds appear as on - budget federal receipts and outlays . the funds' gross outlays include pbgc benefit payments and administrative expenses and receipts include premiums paid , interest on federal securities , and reimbursements from the trust fund . the secretary of commerce and the secretary of the treasury are the other members of the board of directors . the director of pbgc is appointed by the president with the advice and consent of the senate . erisa also provides for a seven - member advisory committee , appointed by the president , for staggered three - year terms . the advisory committee advises pbgc on issues , such as investment of funds , plan liquidations , and other matters . the moving ahead for progress in the 21 st century act ( map - 21 ; p.l . 112-141 ) altered some of the governance structures of pbgc .