generally it will not . the fourth amendment prohibits unreasonable governmental searches and seizures . what might be unreasonable under other circumstances , may well be considered reasonable in a grand jury environment . for example , grand jury subpoenas are not considered per se unreasonable simply because they require neither probable cause nor the filter of an approving neutral magistrate . the opportunity to be heard on a motion to quash before complying makes the grand jury subpoena in many respects less intrusive than the warrant . even "forthwith" subpoenas , where the opportunity to quash may be minimized , have generally been thought to pass constitutional muster , either because the party to whom they were address complied , i.e. , consented , or because the circumstances presented exigencies similar to those to which fourth amendment demands have traditionally yielded . the shadow of the fourth amendment is visible in rule 17 ( c ) of the federal rules of criminal procedure , which supplies the grounds most often successfully employed to quash a grand jury subpoena: a subpoena may also command the person to whom it is directed to produce the books , papers , documents or other objects designated therein . the court on motion made promptly may quash or modify the subpoena if compliance would be unreasonable or oppressive . however , a "'grand jury proceeding is accorded a presumption of regularity , which generally may be dispelled only upon particularized proof of irregularities in the grand jury process. consequently , a grand jury subpoena issued through normal channels is presumed to be reasonable. a subpoena is "unreasonable or oppressive" if ( 1 ) it commands the production of things clearly irrelevant to the investigation being pursued ; ( 2 ) it fails to specify the things to be produced with reasonable particularity ; or ( 3 ) it is unreasonable in terms of the relative extent of the effort required to comply . it is not unreasonable under the fourth amendment nor contrary to the fifth amendment privilege against self - incrimination to subpoena a witness to appear before the grand jury in order to furnish a voice exemplar , a handwriting exemplar , to sign a consent form authorizing the disclosure of bank records , or for juveniles to produce a dna sample and a complete set of fingerprints . consequently , the courts will not quash an otherwise valid subpoena issued for any those purposes . although the fifth amendment privilege against self - incrimination precludes requiring a witness to testify at his or her criminal trial , it does not "confer an absolute right to decline to respond in a grand jury inquiry. once before the grand jury , a witness may decline to present self - incriminating testimony . the right does not include the option to protect pre - existing , voluntarily prepared personal papers on the ground that they are self - incriminatory , but a witness may refused to produce that documents where the act of production ( rather than the mere content of the documents ) would itself be incriminating .