among the other issues are the following . all of the federal check - off programs and many state ones are required by law to periodically evaluate their effectiveness . the ultimate measure has been whether those who contribute to the programs gain economically . more to the point , do the economic benefits outweigh the costs of assessments ? researchers examine a variety of indicators such as changes in product sales , producer prices , market share , industry profits , and consumer awareness of the products or product attributes . examining past and projected market and related industry data is one method for making such determinations ; another method is industry and consumer surveys . however , these approaches encounter difficulties in trying to isolate the impacts of program promotion dollars from other variables , such as the relative prices and availability of competing products ( eg , poultry vs. beef and / or pork ; milk vs. juice or soft drinks ) , changes in consumer income , demographics , shopping preferences , and so forth . economists try to account for these variables through the use of increasingly sophisticated economic models . most of the studies , including those based on the models , typically have found positive ratios of benefits compared with costs—ranging from 2-1 benefits over costs to as high at 10-1 . however , even these analyses can be widely interpreted and may not answer such questions as whether a higher ratio necessarily signals a more "effective" program ; whether all types of contributors share equally in the benefits ; whether others , such as consumers and processors who do not directly contribute , gain ( or lose ) economically ; or whether investing the funds in some other way—like buying stocks—might yield higher returns . funds collected can be used by the boards , which meet regularly and submit their plans to usda - ams for review , for a wide variety of activities , with the common objective of enhancing product demand . virtually all check - off laws include language prohibiting the use of funds for any type of activity to influence government policies or actions . three cases have reached the u.s. supreme court . in the first , glickman v. wileman brothers and elliot , inc. , california peach and nectarine handlers had challenged the usda marketing order , which is not only a promotion program but also sets quality standards and other marketing rules for those fruits ( see footnote 1 ) . the 9 th circuit court of appeals had held that the order mandating the assessments violated the affected parties' first amendment rights and therefore was unconstitutional . the circuit court stated that such generic advertising had not been proven necessary or more successful than individual advertising , and also , in effect , violated the free speech of growers who would prefer to use their money to advertise in other ways . the government appealed the case to the supreme court , which on june 25 , 1997 , reversed , by a 5-4 vote , the lower court's ruling . it found that the program "should enjoy the same strong presumption of validity that we accord to other policy judgments made by congress .