sec . the provision of section 8119 shall not apply where the life of the mother would be endangered if the fetus were carried to term , or the pregnancy is the result of an act of rape or incest . on february 10 , 1996 , p.l . 104-106 was enacted . this law further limited that availability of abortion services: sec . 738 ( b ) . restriction on the use of facilities — no medical treatment facility or other facility of the department of defense may be used to perform an abortion except where the life of the mother would be endangered if the fetus were carried to term or in a case in which the pregnancy is the result of an act of rape or incest . since then , efforts to modify the law pertaining to abortions have become a routine part of the legislative process . as noted above , language has been included in the senate version of the fy2013 national defense authorization act that would expand the availability of government - funded abortion to cases where the pregnancy was the result of an act of rape or incest . in conclusion , under then - current law , 10 u.s.c. , section 1093 , performance of abortions: restrictions ( a ) restriction on use of funds. — funds available to the department of defense may not be used to perform abortions except where the life of the mother would be endangered if the fetus were carried to term . ( b ) restriction on use of facilities. — no medical treatment facility or other facility of the department of defense may be used to perform an abortion except where the life of the mother would be endangered if the fetus were carried to term or in a case in which the pregnancy is the result of an act of rape or incest . following the passage of h.r . 4310 , national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2013 ( sec . , section 1093 now reads: ( a ) restriction on use of funds. — funds available to the department of defense may not be used to perform abortions except where the life of the mother would be endangered if the fetus were carried to term or in a case in which the pregnancy is the result of an act of rape or incest . ( b ) restriction on use of facilities. — no medical treatment facility or other facility of the department of defense may be used to perform an abortion except where the life of the mother would be endangered if the fetus were carried to term or in a case in which the pregnancy is the result of an act of rape or incest . there appears to be no evidence of a formal service policy on abortions prior to 1970 . sources familiar with the issue at that time note that the availability of abortion services at military medical facilities varied by service , location , physician , and "command milieu. each of the services approached the issue differently . the air force tended to be somewhat more liberal , while the army and the navy tended to be somewhat more conservative .