the report concludes with a discussion of policy implications . before the entrance of foreign - born workers to the u.s. labor market , the amount of labor that workers are willing to supply to employers is represented by the curve labeled s 1 in figure 1 . the supply curve is upward sloping because workers are willing to offer more labor ( eg , work more hours ) in response to higher real wages . the empirical issue is how best to measure the existence and magnitude of the potential wage and employment effects of immigration that the model describes . some policymakers have proposed further strengthening the u.s. border with mexico to curtail the entrance of unauthorized aliens and improving enforcement of more stringent sanctions against employers who hire these predominantly low - skilled workers , based in part upon the belief that immigration does , in fact , have substantial adverse consequences for low - skilled native - born workers . it also has been suggested that congress address the distributional issue some empirical studies have raised by changing the composition of legal immigration . if , for example , individuals permanently admitted to the united states under the employment - based category are largely high - skilled , while those admitted under one or more of the other categories ( i.e. , family preference , immediate relatives , diversity , or refugees and asylees ) are largely low - skilled , then the current numerical limits on the latter might be lowered to mitigate immigration's presumed adverse consequences for less - skilled natives . indeed , if the skill levels of immigrants do differ by admission category , then an across - the - board cutback in the number of foreign - born persons allowed into the united states would not be an effective remedy for the poor labor market performance of low - skilled natives in recent decades . only if foreign - born workers who enter under each of the categories has roughly the same skill distribution would an untargeted reduction in the overall level of immigration assist less - skilled u.s. workers . yet , changing the composition of immigration may not be the most effective way to improve the plight of low - skilled native - born workers . as noted earlier in this report , several explanations have been offered for the increase in u.s. wage inequality . if other factors ( eg , skill - biased technological change ) have played a greater role than the inflow of low - skilled foreign - born workers , then curtailing the immigration of this group may not much affect the wage and employment outcomes of low - skilled u.s. workers . moreover , a policy that shifts the composition of foreign - born persons who legally enter the united states — through permanent admissions or temporary worker programs — toward the more skilled might have unintended consequences . an increase in the supply of foreign - born workers to high - skilled occupations might adversely affect the wage and job opportunities of native - born workers in those fields and dissuade students from majoring in them .