a direct skip is a transfer to a skip person . in the case of a taxable distribution , the tax is paid by the transferee . the tax on taxable terminations or direct skips from a trust is paid by the trustee . a grandchild of the transferor or spouse is moved up one generation if his parents are deceased at the time of the transfer . the first step in calculating the gst tax is to determine the taxable amount . for direct skips , the taxable amount is the value of the property received by the transferee . the gst tax on direct skips is tax - exclusive , meaning that the amount of tax paid is proportional to the pretax value of the transferred property . contrastingly , the taxable amount for taxable terminations and distributions is tax - inclusive . for example , the transferor , spouse , and brothers and sisters are in one generation , their children in the next , and grandchildren in the next . lineal descendants of a grandparent of the transferor or spouse are assigned to generations on the same basis . anyone ever married to a lineal descendant of the transferor's grandparent or the spouse's grandparent are assigned to the level of their spouse who was a lineal descendant . non - relatives of the transferor are assigned generations measured from the birth of the transferor . persons not more than 12½ years younger are treated as members of the same generation as the transferor . each 25-year period thereafter is treated as a new generation . the taxable amount for these property transfers is determined by including the tax value with the value of the property before applying the tax rate . the second step in calculating the gst tax is to apply the applicable rate . the applicable rate is the maximum federal estate tax rate ( 40% for 2014 ) and the inclusion ratio of the transfer . the inclusion ratio is figured by subtracting from one ( "1" ) the following fraction: the portion of the gst exemption allocated to the transfer as the numerator and the value of the property transferred as the denominator . to compute the generation - skipping tax , the value of the transfer is multiplied by the tax rate ( 40% ) and by the inclusion ratio . the irc provides several exemptions and exclusions for the gst tax . unlike the estate and gift taxes , the gst tax does not use the unified credit . instead , a $5,340,000 gst exemption is allowed to each individual for generation - skipping transfers during life or at death . the exemption is doubled for married individuals who elect to treat the transfers as made one - half by each spouse . an indirect skip property transfer automatically triggers the gst exemption . an indirect skip occurs when the generation one level below the decedent ( eg , children ) receives some beneficial interest in the property before the property passes to the generation two or more levels below ( eg , grandchildren ) . the exclusions for tuition and medical expense payments from the gift tax also apply to the generation - skipping tax .