no amendments to the report are in order . in practice , however , the house almost always considers conference reports under the terms of a special rule from the rules committee that waives all points of order against the report and its consideration . the conference report is a proposed package settlement of a number of disagreements , so the house and senate may accept it or reject it , but they may not change it . on other days of the week , the house will usually consider a major bill pursuant to a special rule reported by the house committee on rules . such a special rule would be debated in the house under the hour rule , at the end of which the majority manager of the special rule would "move the previous question," which , when adopted , brings the resolution to a vote . once adopted , the house would ordinarily consider a measure in committee of the whole pursuant to the terms for general debate and amendment established by the special rule . following consideration in the committee of the whole , the house would take the final votes on the measure after voting on the amendments recommended by the committee and on a minority motion to recommit , which would likely be made with amendatory instructions . as each item of business is completed , the speaker anticipates which member should be seeking recognition to call up the next bill or resolution . if another representative requests to be recognized instead , t he speaker may ask , "for what purpose does the gentleman seek recognition ? the speaker may decline to recognize that member if the speaker wants the house to consider another privileged measure , motion , or report . at the end of legislative business on most days , some members address the house for as much as an hour each on subjects of their choice . these "special order" speeches are arranged in advance and organized by the party leadership . in this way , representatives can comment at length on current national and international issues and discuss bills that have not yet reached the house floor . the house often adjourns by early evening , although it may remain in session later when the need arises or when the end of the annual session or some other deadline approaches . the house rules for each congress are published in a volume often called the house manual but officially entitled constitution , jefferson's manual and rules of the house of representatives . a new edition of this collection is published each congress . the precedents of the house established through 1935 have been compiled in the 11-volume set of hinds' and cannon's precedents of the house of representatives . more recent precedents are published as deschler's or deschler - brown - johnson precedents of the u.s. house of representatives ; 18 volumes of this set now are available . volume 1 of a fourth series of house precedents , precedents of the united states house of representatives , was initiated in 2017 , and additional volumes are expected in the future .