at the request of a u.s . senator serving as the counsel for a relative , the board for correction of military records recommended reinstatement of "buffalo bill" cody's medal , citing in part the award of dr. walker . in june 1989 , the u.s. army board of correction of military records restored the award , and on july 8 , 1989 , two senators announced the restoration of cody's medal . four others also had their medals reinstated by the board in june 1989: amos chapman [scout] , william dixon [scout] , james b. doshier [post guide] , and william h. woodall [scout] . throughout the years , many efforts to award or reinstate the medal of honor have proven time - consuming and difficult . for example , advocates for navy seaman doris ( a.k.a . dorie or dorrie ) miller have sought for years to have his award upgraded to the medal of honor . ( an * asterisk indicates a posthumous award. ) for citations of recent recipients , see crs report rl30011 , medal of honor recipients: 1979-2014 . coates , jefferson rank and organization: corporal , company i , 14 th michigan infantry . place and date: at gettysburg , pa , 1 july 1863 . during the japanese attack on pearl harbor on december 7 , 1941 , while serving aboard the uss west virginia as a mess attendant ( one of the few jobs available to african americans in the navy at the beginning of world war ii ) , seaman miller moved his mortally wounded captain to safety . he then proceeded to man a machine gun , successfully returning fire on the attacking japanese . his heroics were initially ignored . after strong civil rights protests , he was given a letter of commendation . the letter of commendation was upgraded to the navy cross . a destroyer escort was later named in his honor . legislative and other efforts to upgrade the navy cross to the medal of honor have proven unsuccessful . noting that , at the time , no african americans received the medal of honor during wwii , critics cite racism as a main reason for refusing seaman miller this honor . the reluctance to upgrade awards to the medal of honor or to award it outright is generally based on efforts to award the medal to those truly deserving , to maintain the integrity of the award itself and the awards process in general , and to avoid "opening the floodgates" to retroactive requests for this and other awards and decorations . this reluctance has led many to feel that the system of awarding medals is overly restrictive and that certain individuals are denied earned medals . it is noteworthy that two moh awards have gone "unclaimed. a posthumous medal awarded to navy chief peter tomich in 1942 for heroism at pearl harbor was never claimed since there were no known relatives , and according to the navy museum curator , edward m. furgol , the 20 th century produced at least one other unclaimed moh from 1904 . in the fy1996 national defense authorization act , congress enacted language that could significantly affect potential recipients .