brig . general raoul cedras , who oversaw security for the december elections and was namedcommander - in - chief by aristide , was reportedly a reluctant participant in the initial coup . but as itsspokesman , he said aristide was ousted for "meddling in army affairs," and he led the militaryregime during its three - year rule . when it first took office , the aristide government was expected to meet resistance fromthe army in its attempts to implement provisions of the haitian constitution that impose civilianauthority over the military . for example , the constitution calls for the separation of the police fromthe army , with the police under the command of the ministry of justice , not the army . the law alsomandates that cases involving military abuses against civilians be tried in civilian courts , not by themilitary . the military had resisted previous efforts to execute those laws . no military personnelwere prosecuted for human rights abuses under any of the interim governments . aristide was tryingto attack corruption , carry out reforms in the army , and create a civilian police force when he wasoverthrown . these changes were to be attempted again under the governors island agreement . many believe that it was resistance to reform , as well as suppression of resistance , that led to theupsurge in violence following the signing of the governors island accord , and contributed to thearmy's opposition to aristide's return . the u.s. policy of interdicting haitian migrants on the sea was severely criticized afterthe september 1991 coup . the interdiction policy was based on a bilateral agreement negotiatedbetween the reagan administration and the duvalier government in september 1981 that permittedthe u.s. coast guard to interdict boats on the high seas and to return undocumented passengers tohaiti . haiti was the only country with which the united states had such an agreement . fromseptember 1981 through october 1990 , the coast guard interdicted 22,651 haitians at sea . duringthose nine years , fewer than a dozen haitians were allowed into the united states to apply forasylum . the year 1990 saw the lowest level of interdictions in seven years , and the coast guardreported that , during some months of aristide's 1991 term , they did not encounter a single haitianrefugee boat . both haitian and u.s. officials reportedly attributed this to the new hope haitians hadfor improved conditions under the newly elected government . after aristide's ouster on september30 , 1991 , the exodus rose sharply . during aristide's exile , 66,954 haitians were interdicted by the u.s. coast guard . forthe first six months after the coup , the u.s. coast guard took the haitians to the u.s. naval facilityin guantanamo bay , cuba , where the u.s. immigration and naturalization service conductedpre - screening interviews . more than 10,000 of those pre - screened , or about 30% , were allowed togo to the united states to seek asylum . on may 24 , 1992 , however , president bush ordered theinterception and immediate return to haiti of all haitians in boats on the high seas withoutpre - screening them to see if they might be eligible for asylum . instead , haitians could apply forrefugee status at the u.s. embassy .