this is called the displacement effect . despite increases in h - 2a worker certifications issued by the u.s. department of labor in recent years , the number of h - 2a workers remains quite small compared to the nearly 1 million hired farm and agricultural service workers employed in 2008 . the size of the displacement effect depends on the shape of the labor demand and domestic labor supply curves . economic theory can help clarify this debate . before the entrance of foreign workers to the u.s. labor market , the amount of labor that domestic workers are willing to supply to employers is represented by the curve labeled s1 in figure 1 . it is upward sloping because workers are willing to supply more labor services in response to higher wages . employers' demand for labor is represented by the curve labeled d , which slopes downward because employers are willing to employ more workers at lower wages . equilibrium in this labor market occurs at point a , where those willing to work for wage w 1 equals employer willingness to hire at that wage . in the absence of foreign labor , then , u.s. farm employment is equal to e 1 and u.s. farm workers' wage rate is equal to w 1 . the addition of foreign workers expands the total quantity of labor at any given wage rate . this is represented by the rightward shift of the supply curve to s2 , with the additional labor represented by the difference between s1 and s2 . this increase in the labor force will only find employment if the wage falls , for only at a lower wage will employers be willing to hire more workers . thus , equilibrium after the importation of labor occurs at point b , where the wage rate of domestic and alien farm workers drops to w 2 and employment of domestic and alien farm workers expands to e 2 . in summary , the theory of supply and demand predicts that the wage rate for all workers falls from w 1 to w 2 after the entrance of foreign workers to the u.s. labor market . as a result of the drop in wages , total employment expands from e 1 to e 2 ; domestic employment contracts from e 1 to e 3 ; and alien worker employment is equal to e 2 minus e 3 . because the lower wage ( w 2 ) makes farm work less rewarding , some domestic workers likely will look for jobs outside the agricultural sector . employment of domestic farm workers accordingly will decline ( from e 1 to e 3 ) . while the total employment of foreign workers ( e 2 minus e 3 ) expands , a portion is at the expense of the farm jobs formerly held by domestic workers ( e 1 minus e 3 ) . along with lower domestic employment in agriculture , the presence of foreign farm workers reduces the amount of wages that accrues to domestic farm workers . because the addition of foreign workers also expands output , agricultural prices are expected to fall and thereby benefit u.s. consumers including domestic farm workers .