these two categories of discrimination are explored in turn . this section addresses several different types of discrimination that have been the source of a significant number of legal disputes or otherwise raise unique legal issues under the fha . the secretary of hud , the attorney general , and victims of discrimination may each take action to enforce the fha's protections against discrimination . hud has primary administrative enforcement authority of the act , which it typically fulfills through administrative adjudications . however , the department of justice may also bring actions in federal court under certain circumstances . within one year of the occurrence or end of an alleged discriminatory housing action , a harmed party may file a complaint with the secretary , or the secretary may file a complaint on his own initiative . when a complaint is filed , the secretary must , within 10 days , serve the respondent — the party charged with committing a discriminatory practice — with notice of the complaint . the respondent must then answer the complaint within 10 days . from the filing of the complaint , the secretary has 100 days , subject to extension , to complete an investigation of the alleged discriminatory actions . during this time , the secretary must , "to the extent feasible , engage in conciliation with respect to" the complaint and , as warranted , the secretary may enter into a conciliation agreement , which can include binding arbitration and the harmed party being awarded monetary damages or other relief . at the completion of the investigation , the secretary must determine whether "reasonable cause exists to believe that a discriminatory housing practice has occurred or is about to occur. if he finds no reasonable cause , then he must dismiss the complaint . if he finds reasonable cause , then he must file a charge on behalf of the harmed party in the absence of a conciliation agreement . if a charge is filed , then the secretary or any party to the dispute may elect to have the case heard in a federal district court . otherwise , the case shall be heard by an administrative law judge ( alj ) . in such a hearing , parties may appear with legal representation , have subpoenas issued , cross examine witnesses , and submit evidence . the alj must initiate a hearing within 120 days of a charge being issued , unless adhering to that time frame is impracticable . he also must "make findings of fact and conclusions of law within 60 days after the end of the hearing ... unless it is impracticable to do so. "if the [alj] finds that a respondent has engaged or is about to engage in a discriminatory housing practice," the alj is to order the harmed party relief , which can include monetary damages , civil penalties , and injunctive or other equitable relief . the alj may also impose a civil penalty of up to $10,000 for a first offense or more if it is not a first offense . the alj's orders , findings of fact , and conclusions of law may be reviewed by the secretary . parties also are authorized to appeal administrative orders to the federal courts .