id . the court also was influenced by the fact that congress has enacted laws that "provide systems of simple , certain , and uniform compensation for injuries or death of those in armed services," yet congress made no provision as to how recovery under the ftca would affect entitlement to such compensation . "the absence of any such adjustment is persuasive that there was no awareness that the act might be interpreted to permit recovery for injuries incident to military service. id . the court concluded: that the government is not liable under the federal tort claims act for injuries to servicemen where the injuries arise out of or are in the course of activity incident to service . without exception , the relationship of military personnel to the government has been governed exclusively by federal law . in wilkie v. robbins , the plaintiff had sought damages from officials of the bureau of land management , whom he "accused of harassment and intimidation aimed at extracting an easement across private property. id . the court , applying the two steps it cited , declined to allow a bivens action , finding that "[a] judicial standard to identify illegitimate pressure going beyond legitimately hard bargaining would be endlessly knotty to work out ... and would invite an onslaught of bivens actions. id . the supreme court has held that " bivens liability cannot be established solely on a theory of respondeat superior . in other words , a federal official cannot be held liable for his subordinates' wrongdoing , although he may be held liable for "his own neglect in not properly superintending the discharge of his subordinates' duties. ashcroft v. iqbal , no . 07-1015 ( u.s. may 18 , 2009 ) , slip op . according to one commentator , "[i]ndividual liability under bivens is fictional ... because the federal government in practice functions as the real party in interest , paying for representation and reimbursing the sued individuals when they settle or pay judgments. bivens has , however," the commentator continues , proved to be a surreptitiously progovernment decision . although it appears to provide a mechanism for remedying constitutional violations , its application has rarely led to damages recoveries . government figures reflect that , out of approximately 12,000 bivens claims filed between 1971 and 1985 , bivens plaintiffs actually obtained a judgment that was not reversed on appeal in only four cases . while similar figures have not been systematically kept since 1985 , recoveries from both settlements and litigated judgments continue to be extraordinarily rare . according to one estimate , plaintiffs obtain a judgment awarding them damages in a fraction of one percent of bivens cases and obtain a monetary settlement in less than one percent of such cases . having summarized the law governing federal employees' liability for constitutional torts , we return to the question of their common law immunity from liability for such torts . ( the ftca , it will be recalled , gives them immunity only from state tort law. ) such immunity is generally qualified , yet "[q]ualified immunity is undoubtedly the most significant bar to constitutional tort actions.