app . § 183 ( g ) : in a suit by any person in which the operator or owner of a vessel or employer of a crewmember is claimed to have vicarious liability for medical malpractice with regard to a crewmember occurring at a shoreside facility ... such operator , owner , or employer shall be entitled to rely upon any and all statutory limitations of liability ... in the state of the united states in which the shoreside medical care was provided . but what is the answer ? before examining some supreme court decisions that may shed light on it , we should emphasize that the question arises only if congress were to establish a federal non - article iii forum to hear traditional tort claims . if congress instead were simply to prohibit states from using jury trials in tort cases , but did not establish an article i forum for such cases , this would not raise an article iii / seventh amendment issue . this is because state courts were created pursuant to state laws or constitutions and do not exercise federal judicial power , and because the seventh amendment does not apply to them . yet , such an action by congress raises a different constitutional issue of whether congress may alter procedures that state courts use to adjudicate state causes of action . this is discussed below in " f. constitutionality of prohibiting states from using jury trials , without establishment of a federal non - article iii forum . but to what extent may congress require that tort claims be decided by an article i tribunal ? in thomas v. union carbide agricultural products co. , the supreme court noted that northern pipeline had established "that congress may not vest in a non - article iii court the power to adjudicate , render final judgment , and issue binding orders in a traditional contract action arising under state law , without consent of the litigants , and subject only to ordinary appellate review. the same undoubtedly applies to traditional tort actions arising under state law . however , this quotation suggests that congress may vest tort claims in a non - article iii forum if it does at least one of two things: ( 1 ) alters tort claims so that they are no longer traditional common law actions , or ( 2 ) allows de novo review , with the right to a jury trial , of traditional common law tort actions , rather than allow merely traditional appellate review . in other words , congress apparently may require that traditional common law tort actions initially be heard in a federal non - article iii forum , without a jury , provided it allows a dissatisfied party to then seek a jury trial . however , if congress wishes to limit judicial review of tort claims , then it apparently must alter tort claims so that they are no longer traditional common law tort actions . to what extent must congress alter tort claims in order to place them in a non - article iii forum and not provide de novo review ?