health. between 1968 and 1972 , the constitutionality of restrictive abortion statutes of many states was challenged on the grounds of vagueness , violation of the fundamental right of privacy , and denial of equal protection . these challenges met with mixed success in the lower courts . however , in 1973 , the supreme court issued its rulings in roe v. wade and doe v. bolton . in those cases the court found that texas and georgia statutes regulating abortion interfered to an unconstitutional extent with a woman's right to decide whether to terminate her pregnancy . the texas statute forbade all abortions not necessary "for the purpose of saving the life of the mother. the georgia enactment permitted abortions when continued pregnancy seriously threatened the woman's life or health , when the fetus was very likely to have severe birth defects , or when the pregnancy resulted from rape . this case can better be described as one involving a challenge to first amendment free speech rights than to the constitutionally guaranteed substantive right to an abortion ; however , following its earlier public funding cases ( maher v. roe and harris v. mcrae ) as precedent , the court did conclude that a woman's right to an abortion was not burdened by these regulations . the court reasoned that there was no such violation because the government has no duty to subsidize an activity simply because it is constitutionally protected and because a woman is "in no worse position than if congress had never enacted title x. . both webster and rust energized legislative activity , the former at both the federal and state levels , and the latter only at the federal level . some of the state legislative proposals that have become law have been challenged in the courts , eg , pennsylvania , guam , louisiana , and utah . the pennsylvania case , planned parenthood of southeastern pennsylvania v. casey , was decided by the u.s. supreme court on june 29 , 1992 . in a highly fractionated 5-4 decision , the court reaffirmed the basic constitutional right to an abortion while simultaneously allowing some new restrictions . justices o'connor , kennedy and souter wrote the plurality opinion , and they were joined in part by justices stevens and blackmun . chief justice rehnquist and justices white , scalia and thomas dissented . the court refused to overrule roe , and the plurality explained at length why it was important to follow precedent . "the constitution serves human values , and while the effect of reliance on roe cannot be exactly measured , neither can the certain cost of overruling roe for people who have ordered their thinking and living around that case be dismissed. at the same time , the plurality indicated that state laws which contained an outright ban on abortion would be unconstitutional . nevertheless , the court abandoned the trimester framework articulated in roe and the strict scrutiny standard of judicial review of abortion restrictions . instead , it adopted a new analysis , "undue burden. courts will now need to ask the question whether a state abortion restriction has the effect of imposing an "undue burden" on a woman's right to obtain an abortion .