19 , in the senate . should congress approve a proposed flag protection amendment by the required two - thirds majority of each house , the amendment would only become effective upon ratification by the legislatures of three - fourths of the states . in texas v. johnson , the majority of the court held that johnson's conviction for flag desecration , under a texas statute , was inconsistent with the first amendment and affirmed the decision of the texas court of criminal appeals that held that johnson could not be punished for burning the flag as part of a public demonstration . this report is divided into two parts . the first gives a brief history of the flag protection issue , from the enactment of the flag protection act in 1968 through current consideration of a constitutional amendment . the second part briefly summarizes the two decisions of the united states supreme court , texas v. johnson and united states v. eichman , that struck down the state and federal flag protection statutes as applied in the context punishing expressive conduct . in 1968 , in the midst of the vietnam conflict , congress enacted the first federal flag protection act of general applicability . the law was occasioned by the numerous public flag burnings in protest of the war . for the next 20 years , the lower courts upheld the constitutionality of the federal statute and the supreme court declined to review these decisions . however , during the 20-year period between enactment of the flag protection act and its johnson decision , the supreme court did visit the flag issue three times . each time the court found a way to rule in favor of the protestor and overturn a state conviction on very narrow grounds , avoiding a definitive ruling on the constitutionality of convictions for politically inspired destruction or alteration of the american flag . in street v. new york , the court overturned a state conviction for flag - burning , holding that the flag - burner was prosecuted for his words rather than his acts . in 1974 , the court overturned a prosecution by finding that the state statute was vague . in spence v. washington , the court held that the taping of a peace symbol to a flag was expressive conduct and thus protected by the first amendment . in both of these later cases the court expressly referred to the federal statute in a positive manner . it was against this background that the supreme court took the johnson case . in 1984 , during the republican national convention in dallas , tx , johnson had participated in a demonstration protesting the policies of the reagan administration . in front of the city hall , johnson unfurled an american flag , which another member of the demonstration had taken from a flag pole and had given to him , doused it with kerosene , and set it on fire . he was charged with the desecration of a venerated object in violation of a texas statute . johnson was tried , convicted , and sentenced to one year in prison and fined $2,000 .