the plurality concluded that it does not . in so concluding , the plurality found that "internet access in public libraries is neither a 'traditional' or a 'designated' public forum," and that therefore it would not be appropriate to apply strict scrutiny to determine whether the filtering requirements are constitutional . this means that the government did not have to demonstrate that cipa serves a compelling interest ( though justice kennedy in his concurrence noted that "all members of the court appear to agree" that it does ) or that cipa does so by the least restrictive means ( the district court had found "that less restrictive alternatives to filtering software would suffice to meet congress' goals" ) . the plurality acknowledged "the tendency of filtering software to 'overblock' — that is , to erroneously block access to constitutionally protected speech that falls outside the categories that software users intend to block. it found , however , that , "[a]ssuming that such erroneous blocking presents constitutional difficulties , any such concerns are dispelled by the ease with which patrons may have the filtering software disabled. could congress reenact the cda be reenacted in a narrower form that would be constitutional ? the supreme court did not say , but it did not foreclose the possibility . it wrote: the arguments in this court have referred to possible alternatives such as requiring that indecent material be "tagged" in a way that facilitates parental control of material coming into their homes , making exceptions for messages with artistic or educational value , providing some tolerance for parental choice , and regulating some portions of the internet — such as commercial web sites — differently from others , such as chat rooms . on october 21 , 1998 , president clinton signed into law the omnibus appropriations act for fy1999 ( p.l . 105 - 277 ) , title xiv of which is the child online protection act ( copa ) , 47 u.s.c . copa was an attempt to enact a constitutional version of the cda . it has never taken effect , however , because a federal district court issued a preliminary injunction against its enforcement pending trial . the preliminary injunction was affirmed on appeal , most recently by the supreme court , which , in 2004 , remanded the case for trial . in 2007 , a federal district court found copa to be unconstitutional and issued a permanent injunction against its enforcement ; in 2008 , the u.s. court of appeals for the third circuit affirmed , and , in 2009 , the supreme court declined to review the case . copa differs from the cda in two main respects: ( 1 ) it prohibits communication to minors only of material that is "harmful to minors," rather than material that is indecent , and ( 2 ) it applies only to communications for commercial purposes on publicly accessible websites .