opponents of h.r . 813 , including the department of transportation , point out that over 40 states are already surveying and designing their new projects in metric units , and that states have spent nearly $71 million to convert standard plans , specifications , and computer programs . removing the federal mandate , they argue , would create confusion in the highway construction industry , and reverse progress that most states have already made in converting to the metric system . as follow - up to p.l . 100-418 , executive order 12770 ( "metric usage in federal government programs" ) , issued in 1991 by president bush , further required federal agencies to formulate and implement metric conversion plans . federal agencies were initially slow in responding to the metric conversion mandate . a march 1990 general accounting office ( gao ) report found that most federal agencies had not shown a commitment to metric conversion . after executive order 12770 was issued , agency compliance measurably improved . a committee print issued december 1993 by the house committee on science , space and technology , reported that 29 out of 36 federal agencies had reported their metric activities to congress ( as required by p.l . the study concluded that a "general commitment toward converting to the metric system by each federal government agency reporting appears clearly evident. meanwhile , a january 1994 gao report on metric conversion found that while federal preparations for metric conversion were well underway , basic problems limited federal metric procurement ; grants and other business activities showed mixed progress ; and federal agencies indicated a need for greater support from the private sector and the public . the metric program at the department of commerce's national institute of standards and technology ( nist ) is responsible for coordinating the metric transition activities of all federal agencies . nist chairs the interagency committee on metric policy ( icmp ) and is required by executive order 12770 to report to the president annually regarding metric conversion progress made by individual federal agencies . the most recent report , the 1993 metric progress report , concluded that metric conversion progress among agencies is widely variable , and depends upon the metric readiness of the industries a particular agency's programs affect , budget limitations , and the amount of visible high level leadership within the agency . notable examples of metric conversion activities in the federal government include: the proposed metric conversion of federal highways ( discussed below ) , a requirement that all new federal building construction projects be conducted in metric units , and a federal trade commission ( ftc ) rule requiring consumer product packaging to be labeled with dual ( english and metric ) units . other agencies , however , have determined it unfeasible or unpractical to convert particular activities to metric at this time . the gao found that "[metric conversion] problems encountered by federal agencies frequently involve opposition from the private sector or the public . generally speaking , the more directly a proposed conversion affects the private sector or the public , the greater the resistance.