imprisoned . or in any other way destroyed . except by the legaljudgment of his peers or by the law of the land. ( 1 ) subsequent legislation in the reign of edward iiiexplained that this precluded punishment by the king except "in due manner . or by process madeby writ . [or] by course of the law," ( 2 ) or as latermore simply stated , except "by due process of thelaw. ( 3 ) three hundred years after the passage of theedwardian statutes , lord coke and othermembers of parliament read these due process and law of the land requirements to include a broadprohibition against the use of martial law in peacetime , an interpretation they compelled kingcharles i to acknowledge . ( 4 ) king charles i , preparing for a military expedition in france , had quartered his troops in homes along the southern english coastline . ( 5 ) riotingresulted , and the participants , both military andcivilian , were tried and punished by commissioners operating under the authority of martial law . offended by this peacetime exercise of military judicial authority over civilians , parliament soughtand was granted the petition of right of 1628 which outlawed both quartering and martial lawcommissions . ( 6 ) when , in the following century , the british responded to colonial unrest by quartering troops in boston , the colonists saw it as a breach of this fundamental promise of english law . theircircumstances , however , were not exactly identical to those surrounding the petition of right . first,the question arose in the colonies . england had stationed troops in the colonies to protect themagainst the french and indians and had opted for military governorships in other territories . second,there was no military usurpation of judicial functions . the colonists remained subject to civil ratherthan military justice , and soldiers who employed more force than civilian law permitted werethemselves subject to civilian justice as the trials of the soldiers involved in the boston massacredemonstrates . on the other hand , the troops involved in the boston massacre were stationed in massachusetts not for protection against a marauding invader as they had been in the french and indian wars , notto accomplish the transition between civil governments within a conquered territory as they had beenafter the french lost canada to the british as a consequence of those conflicts , but as an independentmilitary force quartered among a disgruntled civilian population to police it . ( 7 ) in any event , the experience was sufficiently vexing that the declaration of independence listed among our grievances against great britain that the king had "kept among us , in times of peace,standing armies without the consent of our legislatures," had "affected to render the militaryindependent of and superior to the civil power," and had "quarter[ed] large bodies of armed troopsamong us . protecting them , by a mock trial , from punishment for any murders which they shouldcommit on the inhabitants of these states.