litigation followed . portions of the proposed rule won court approval and , through the years , were implemented . the helper provision won such approval only in 1992 , a decade after it was first proposed . what distinguishes a helper from other construction workers ? on davis - bacon work , should they be integrated into the regular construction crew ? should helpers receive training to enhance their skills and , if so , how should such training be structured ? then , in april 1999 , the department of labor published a proposed rule on the use of helpers that would , essentially , revert to the 1970s practice of the department so far as the use of helpers was concerned . a comment period on the proposal closed on june 8 , 1999 . meanwhile , legislation was introduced that would have provided a statutory definition of helper — but no legislative action was taken . under date of november 17 , 2000 , the department issued a final rule on the helper issue — to take effect on january 19 , 2001 , during the closing hours of the clinton administration . in effect , the final rule reaffirmed departmental practice of the 1970s: the issue had come full circle . although the new rule ( and confirmation of ongoing practice ) is now in place , some appear to be unhappy with the outcome . thus , the issue may not yet be entirely resolved . speaking broadly of the construction industry , a helper might be viewed as a general utility employee who assists a more skilled or specialized construction worker . normally , the helper would be unskilled — though , in fact , he ( or she ) could have a wide range of skills but , not having gone through a formal training program , would not be recognized as skilled . a helper could also be a craftsman , a journeyman , down on his luck , and forced by economic necessity to accept general utility work below his level of training . normally , the helper is unlikely to be a trade union member ( or , if a member , not employed under a collectively bargained contract ) . he may usually be paid a wage lower than that of a skilled worker ; though , for particular types of work , he may perform equally as well as a skilled craftsman . because he is cheaper to employ and more flexible in the types of work he may be willing to accept ( working outside of craft ) , he can be a useful addition to a work crew . where a manager carefully supervises the work to be done , the less expensive helper can be assigned to perform narrow aspects of an otherwise complex task . ( this process has been referred to as craft fragmentation. ) at the worksite , one might expect to find , in the absence of workrules that would preclude it , a battery of helpers working under the guidance of a more highly paid journeyman .