most organizations do not make this election . a section 501 ( c ) ( 3 ) organization that conducts substantial lobbying may lose its exempt status and face possible excise taxes under sections 4911 and 4912 . notably , private foundations ( discussed in question 5 ) are taxed under irc section 4945 on any lobbying expenditures made during the year , regardless of whether such activities are substantial . this can be misleading depending on the context . the term "tax - exempt organization" generally refers to an organization that meets the criteria in federal law ( the irc ) to be exempt from federal income taxes . the term "nonprofit organization" can be used to mean a corporation that is not intended to be a profit - making corporation and is organized as such under state law . the status and privileges of the entity are determined under state law . the requirements vary by state but usually take into account the fact that nonprofit corporations typically do not have shareholders or the same business motives as for - profit corporations . a nonprofit corporation is not automatically a tax - exempt organization . because the qualifications for nonprofit status vary among states , it is possible for the term "nonprofit organization" to be broader than , narrower than , or identical to the term "tax - exempt organization. for a nonprofit organization to be exempt from federal income taxes , it must meet the statutory requirements found in the irc and , in some cases , file an application with the irs . section 501 ( c ) describes many types of organizations that qualify for tax - exempt status . when an organization applies for exemption or files an annual return with the irs , it must tell the irs under which paragraph of section 501 ( c ) it qualifies . in general , this is not difficult to determine because most paragraphs describe discrete categories — for example , section 501 ( c ) ( 8 ) describes fraternal societies and section 501 ( c ) ( 14 ) describes credit unions . however , sections 501 ( c ) ( 3 ) and 501 ( c ) ( 4 ) describe organizations with some overlapping characteristics in that both types can operate for charitable purposes . despite these similarities , section 501 ( c ) ( 3 ) and section 501 ( c ) ( 4 ) organizations differ in two significant ways . first , section 501 ( c ) ( 3 ) organizations are eligible to receive tax - deductible charitable contributions , while section 501 ( c ) ( 4 ) organizations generally are not . when a contribution is deductible , the donor may subtract it from his or her income when calculating federal income tax liability , subject to restrictions found in section 170 . ( see question 6. ) this is an important benefit for the organization because it may encourage donors to contribute to the organization in order to lower their taxable income and to make larger contributions since the after - tax cost of each contribution is reduced .