house . committee onresources . http: / / resourcescommittee.house.gov / resources / 106cong / fullcomm / sovereignty.htm . it has 30 cosponsors . the legislationamends the national historic preservation act of1980 ( p.l . 96-515 ) to require a determination by the interior department that the designation of a new site will notadversely affect private land within ten milesof the site , a report to congress on the impact of the designation on existing and future uses of the land andsurrounding private land , and specific authorization bycongress for new world heritage site designations . the bill also terminates and prohibits unauthorized designationof biosphere reserves under the unescoman and the biosphere program . foreign operations , export financing , and related appropriations act , 2001 . 106-429 , as passed bycongress , enacted by reference in h.r . section 580 of this bill states that none of the fundsappropriated or made available by this act may beprovided for the u.s. contribution to the united nations world heritage fund . 106-429 was signed by thepresident on november 6 , 2000 . although the debate on the american land sovereignty protection bill was often couched in terms which included u.n. influence over u.s. parks andmonuments , supporters of the american land sovereignty protection act were primarily concerned that a lack ofa congressional role in designating the sites anda lack of congressional oversight of implementation of the act undermines the congressional role under theconstitution to make rules governing land belongingto the united states . as the house resources committee web site on the legislation stated: "by using theseinternational designations , the executive branch isable to guide domestic land use policies without consulting congress. ( 2 ) supporters express concern that even though there may be no internationalor u.n. directcontrol of u.s. sites , federal agency managers may take into account the international rules of the world heritageprogram in making land use decisions , or usethe designation to undermine local land use decisions , often without the advice or even the knowledge of localauthorities or property owners . the world heritage convention does not give the united nations authority over u.s. sites . the department of state has testified that under the terms of theworld heritage convention , management and sovereignty over the sites remain with the country where the site islocated . supporters of the world heritagesystem note that member countries nominate sites for the world heritage list voluntarily and agree to develop lawsand procedures to protect them using theirown constitutional procedures . most of the u.s. sites named have already been accorded protection in law asnational monuments or parks . in commenting onthe bill , the clinton administration stated that the designation does not give the united nations the authority toaffect land management decisions within theunited states and has not been utilized to exclude congress from land management decisions . the department ofstate noted that the convention itself has norole or authority beyond listing sites and offering technical advice and assistance . supporters of the conventionassert that world heritage status has been theimpetus behind closer cooperation between federal agencies and state and local authorities . inclusion on the world heritage list increases knowledge and interest in sites throughout the world . many countries use the world heritage designation toincrease tourism to site areas .