implementation began in 1964 . the treaty provided for the construction and operation of three dams in canada and one dam in the united states whose reservoir extends into canada . together , these dams more than doubled the amount of reservoir storage available in the basin and provided significant flood protection benefits . in exchange for these benefits , the united states agreed to provide canada with lump - sum cash payments and a portion of downstream hydropower benefits that are attributable to canadian operations under the crt , known as the "canadian entitlement. some have estimated the canadian entitlement to be worth as much as $335 million annually . the crt has no specific end date , and most of its provisions would continue indefinitely without action by the united states or canada . beginning in september 2024 , either nation can terminate most provisions of the treaty with at least 10 years' written notice ( i.e. , starting as early as 2014 ) . to date , neither country has given notice of termination , but both countries have indicated a preliminary interest in modification of the treaty . if the crt is not terminated or modified , most of its provisions would continue , with the exception of its flood control provisions ( which are scheduled to transition automatically to "called - upon" operations at that time , meaning the united states would request and compensate canada for flood control operations as necessary ) . perspectives on the crt and its review vary . some believe the treaty should include stronger provisions related to tribal resources and flows for fisheries that are not in the treaty ; others disagree and focus on the perceived need to adjust the canadian entitlement to reflect actual hydropower benefits . the u.s. army corps of engineers and the bonneville power administration , in their joint role as the u.s . entity overseeing the treaty , undertook a review of the crt from 2009 to 2013 . based on studies and stakeholder input , they provided a regional recommendation to the state department in december 2013 . they recommended continuing the treaty with certain modifications , including rebalancing the crt's hydropower provisions , further delineating called - upon flood control operations after 2024 , and incorporating into the treaty flows to benefit columbia river fisheries . for its part , the canadian entity ( the province of british columbia ) released in march 2013 a recommendation to continue the crt with modifications "within the treaty framework. it disputed several assumptions in the u.s . entity's review process . following a two - year federal interagency review of the u.s . regional recommendation , the state department finalized its negotiating parameters and authorized talks with canada in october 2016 . the first round of negotiations took place may 29-30 , 2018 , with the next round of talks scheduled for august 2018 . the great lakes contain 85% of north america's fresh water . they serve as the primary source of drinking water for more than 40 million people , and support a wide range of economic activities , including farming , fishing , manufacturing , and tourism .