a quorum call formally begins when the clerk calls the first name . once the quorum call has begun , the senate may not resume the conduct of business until a majority of senators respond to this call , or unless the senate agrees by unanimous consent to "dispense with further proceedings under the quorum call. while the quorum call is in progress , no debate or motion is in order , nor may the senate act on any unanimous consent request except a request to dispense with the call . this report discusses how the senate now interprets and implements these two constitutional provisions . what follows focuses on the most important rules and the most common practices ; it does not attempt to cover all the precedents the senate has established or all the procedures that may be invoked . this report also assumes a familiarity with some other aspects of the senate's floor procedures . a straightforward reading of the constitution's quorum requirement would seem to require a simple majority of senators , or a minimum of 51 if there are no vacancies in the body , to be present on the floor whenever the senate conducts business . as any observer of the senate soon notices , typically only a handful of senators are present during floor debates . a senator wishing to prevent a matter from coming to a vote need not engage in extended debate . one reason is that if a quorum — 51 senators , assuming no vacancies — is not present on the floor , the opponent may instead simply take steps to trigger a live quorum call , and if a quorum does not respond , the senate can only adjourn or take steps to secure the attendance of a quorum . adjournment serves the purposes of the opponent , who is only trying to delay or prevent a final vote on the matter . as a result , if a numerical majority favoring a legislative proposal wanted an opponent to remain physically present on the senate floor engaging in a filibuster , that majority , or most of it , would itself have to remain on or near the floor to ensure that a quorum could be established at any point required . it is unusual for as many as 51 senators to be present on the floor at the same time unless a rollcall vote is in progress . as a regular practice , however , the senate presumes that it is complying with the constitution . therefore , it presumes that a quorum always is present unless and until the absence of a quorum is suggested or demonstrated: the senate operates on the presumption that a quorum is present at all times , under all circumstances , unless the question to the contrary is raised , or the absence of a quorum is officially shown , or until a point of no quorum is made even though a voice vote is taken and announced in the meantime . under the senate's standing rules , if no other senator has the floor , any senator ( including a senator who is presiding ) may "suggest the absence of a quorum.