no such motions are possible in the senate . as a result , a majority of senators does not have nearly the same control over the pace and timing of their deliberations as does a majority of the house . ( emphasis added. ) the alternative to a rollcall vote usually is a voice vote in which the senators favoring the bill or amendment ( or whatever question is to be decided ) vote "aye" in unison , followed by those voting "no. ( sometimes in relation to a voice vote — when the outcome of the vote is not in question — the presiding officer will note that "without objection , the amendment ( or bill ) is agreed to." although a voice vote does not create a public record of how each senator voted , it is an equally valid and conclusive way for the senate to reach a decision . the standing rules of the senate are published periodically in a separate senate document and in the senate manual , which contains other related documents as well . the most recent compilation of the senate's precedents is riddick's senate procedure , prepared by floyd m. riddick and alan s. frumin ( senate document no . 101-28 ; 101 st congress , second session ) . the parliamentarian and her assistants field inquiries from congressional offices about senate procedures , and offer expert assistance compatible with their other responsibilities . the congressional research service has prepared numerous other reports on the senate and its procedures , including crs report rl30788 , parliamentary reference sources: senate , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] ; crs report 98-836 , calling up business on the senate floor , by [author name scrubbed] ; crs report r43563 , "holds" in the senate , by [author name scrubbed] ; crs report rl30360 , filibusters and cloture in the senate , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] ; crs report 98-853 , the amending process in the senate , by [author name scrubbed] ; crs report 98-306 , points of order , rulings , and appeals in the senate , by [author name scrubbed] ; crs report 96-452 , voting and quorum procedures in the senate , coordinated by [author name scrubbed] , and crs report 98-696 , resolving legislative differences in congress: conference committees and amendments between the houses , by [author name scrubbed] . a large number of additional reports on specific topics related to senate procedure are also available ( categorized by subject area ) at http: / / www.crs.gov / iap / congressional - process - administration - and - elections . compromise and accommodation normally prevail . senators frequently exercise self - restraint by not taking full advantage of their rights and opportunities under the standing rules , and often by agreeing to unanimous consent requests for arrangements that may not promote their individual legislative interests . the standing rules remain available , however , for senators to invoke when , in their judgment , the costs of compromise and accommodation become too great .