conference reports are not amendable . no further debate of the motion would be in order . each house usually appoints its conferees ( also known as managers ) immediately after deciding to go to conference . the speaker appoints house conferees . the senate frequently decides , by unanimous consent , to authorize the presiding officer to appoint "the managers on the part of the senate. the senate could also empower the presiding officer to appoint conferees , or appoint conferees directly , through the motion to authorize a conference , discussed above . the chairman and ranking minority member of the committee or subcommittee that reported the bill are almost always conferees . they also play a major part in deciding who else is appointed . the committee or subcommittee leaders usually prepare a list of conferees from their chambers that the speaker normally accepts and the presiding officer of the senate always accepts . the party leaders may also become involved in selecting conferees , especially if the bill is particularly important , if it was reported by two or more committees , or if amendments to the bill from the other house touch the jurisdiction of more than one committee . most conferees are members of the committee that reported the bill . in the case of a bill that involves the jurisdiction of more than one committee , members of each committee are often appointed as conferees with authority only to negotiate an agreement with respect to the subjects or provisions of the bill that fall within the jurisdiction of their committees . it cannot be shuttled back and forth indefinitely . this process rarely results in stalemate , because the two houses either reach agreement or decide to submit their differences to a conference committee . however , an exchange of amendments sometimes takes the place of a conference . once the two houses pass their versions of the same bill , the members and staff of the house and senate committees of jurisdiction often meet informally to compare the two versions and discuss a compromise . if they reach an agreement that other concerned representatives and senators also accept , the house can , for example , concur in the senate amendment with a house amendment that embodies the negotiated agreement . if the senate then accepts ( concurs in ) this house amendment , the house and senate have resolved their differences through the informal equivalent of a conference committee . house amendments to a senate bill ( or house amendments to senate amendments to a house bill ) are privileged for floor action by the senate . this means there is no debate on whether to take up the house amendment . instead , a senator , most often the majority leader , typically requests that a house amendment be laid before the senate . motions to dispose of the house amendments — such as motions to concur or to concur with amendments — are debatable and , therefore , subject to filibusters . it is possible for the majority leader to move that the senate concur in the house amendment and then propose motions that preempt all other available motions .