, of each country of the world . the third section provides internet addresses for travel and international information . europa yearbook ( london , europa publications ) , an annual publication , is valued for its economic statistics and trade figures , as well as for its brief historical and economic background . it contains listings of cabinet members and media in each country , and a section on international organizations including the united nations . statesman ' s year - book ( new york , st. martin's press ) contains similar information in a more abbreviated form . general encyclopedias , such as encyclopedia americana ( new york , grolier ) , world book encyclopedia ( chicago , field enterprises ) , american academic encyclopedia ( danbury , ct , grolier ) and new encyclopedia britannica ( chicago , encyclopedia britannica , inc. ) , provide detailed narratives on the history , geography , culture , economics , etc. , of various nations . pictures , maps , and charts are also featured . political handbook of the world ( binghamton , ny , csa publications ) is an annual publication that contains narrative information on the government , politics , political parties , legislature , and news media of each country in the world . statistical abstract of the united states ( washington , gpo ) , an annual publication by the bureau of the census at the department of commerce , includes comparative international statistics on population , households , health , education , economic measures , and a guide to foreign statistical abstracts . world almanac and book of facts ( new york , funk & wagnalls ) and time almanac ( new york , little , brown ) are two annual publications with sections on countries of the world . they include statistics on population , geography , names of government officials , and brief historical background . world factbook ( washington , gpo ) is a popular annual publication of the central intelligence agency ( cia ) , which contains statistics and facts on the land , language , people , economy , defense , religion , literacy , etc. listed below are selected sources on the following topics: human rights , immigration , international organizations , international trade and business , maps , military strengths , people , terrorism , travel , and working / studying abroad . ( area code 202 ) afghanistan , republic of , 2341 wyoming ave. , nw , 20008 , 483-6410 albania , republic of , 2100 s st. , nw , 20008 , 223-4942 algeria , 2118 kalorama rd.