157 ( spring 1991 ) . john a. edie , foundations and lobbying: safe ways to affect public policy ( council on foundations , 1991 ) . bruce h. hopkins , the law of tax - exempt organizations , eighth edition ( 2003 ) . bruce r. hopkins , charity , advocacy and the law ( 1992 ) . bob smucker , the non - profit lobbying guide , second edition , 1999 ( charity lobbying in the public interest , independent sector ) . http: / / www.clpi.org / clpi_publications.aspx richard l. winston , "the lobbying disclosure act of 1995 and the tax code elections," tax notes , 1391-1399 ( june 3 , 1996 ) . u.s. house of representatives , office of the clerk , "guide to the lobbying disclosure act," december 2007 ( amended january 25 , 2008 ) . http: / / lobbyingdisclosure.house.gov / amended_lda_guide.htm . this report is intended to provide a brief overview of the various potential restrictions or regulations within federal law on the lobbying activities of non - profit organizations . public charities , social welfare organizations , religious groups , and other non - profit , tax - exempt organizations are not generally prohibited from engaging in all lobbying or public policy advocacy merely because of their federal tax - exempt status . there may , however , be some limitations and restrictions on lobbying by certain non - profit organizations , as well as general public disclosure and reporting requirements relative to lobbying activities of most organizations . there are , in fact , several overlapping laws , rules and regulations which may apply to various non - profits which engage in lobbying activities . in some instances , the rules and restrictions that apply may be determined by the section of the internal revenue code under which an organization holds its tax - exempt status . in other instances , certain rules and regulations may apply depending on the type of non - profit organization and whether it receives federal grants , loans or awards . finally , organizations , depending on the amount and type of lobbying in which they engage , may be required to file public registration and disclosure reports under the federal lobbying disclosure act of 1995 , as amended . it should be emphasized that the definitions of the terms "lobbying" or "advocacy," and which particular activities may be encompassed in or excluded from those terms , may vary among the different regulations , rules , and statutes . alliance for justice , worry - free lobbying for nonprofits: how to use the 501 ( h ) election to maximize effectiveness , 1999 , 2003. http: / / www.afj.org / assets / resources / resources2 / worry - free - lobbying - for - nonprofits.pdf robert a. boisture , for independent sector , "what charities need to know to comply with the lobbying disclosure act of 1995," in complying with the lobbying disclosure act of ' 95 and the new gift act restrictions , pp . 185-208 ( glasser legal works 1996 ) . comment , "guiding lobbying charities into a safe harbor: final section 501 ( h ) and 4911 regulations set limits for tax - exempt organizations," 61 miss .