other arrests have occurred . the kazakh government has argued that it has convicted some police for excesses during the riot , disciplined some government officials , given unemployed workers new jobs , and otherwise admitted that it mishandled the labor strife in zhanaozen . at a meeting with policemen on july 12 , 2012 , president nazarbayev criticized them for not taking preventive measures against terrorism , and stated that "over 100 crimes connected with terrorism were committed in kazakhstan in 2011-12 . as a result , dozens of [terrorists and policemen] have died.... and we have to admit the fact that radical and extremist groups are putting enormous pressure on the government and society. according to a kazakh security council official , over 300 individuals have been convicted in kazakhstan on charges of terrorism since 2005 . in late july 2012 , one policeman was killed and one wounded in almaty , and the alleged assailants later engaged in a gun battle with security forces and most were killed . in mid - august 2012 , a gun battle with alleged terrorists took place in almaty , reportedly resulting in the deaths of several alleged terrorists and the capture of others . authorities claimed that these terrorists were linked to an explosion at a house in a village near almaty in july and to the killing of several individuals whose bodies were found in a park near almaty . the terrorists were planning widespread operations , according to the authorities . in early september 2012 , a bomb - maker blew himself up in atyrau region , leading police to engage in a gun battle with other members of the alleged group , killing five of them . in october 2012 , three individuals were arrested in uralsk region on charges of sending funds abroad to support the islamic jihad union . some observers have warned that these recent incidents may have marked the revival of terrorist actions in kazakhstan after several months of seeming quietude . in november 2012 , nazarbayev called for tightening legislation to facilitate government efforts to combat terrorism , with the government explaining that the changes in law were necessitated by increasing radicalization of the population and growing terrorist incidents in the country . the bill was passed and signed into law in early january 2013 . the changes included an apparently expansive definition of terrorism to include an "ideology of violence" and acts or threats aimed at influencing the government , including violence and "frightening people. in february 2013 , the kazakh national security committee reported that law and security forces had prevented 35 violent extremist actions and neutralized 42 extremist groups in 2011-2012 . however , it also reported that it had failed to avert 18 extremist actions , including 7 explosions . in may 2013 , six alleged terrorists were put on trial on charges of conspiring to commit robberies , to bomb civic sites and the national security committee building in astana , and to assassinate senior officials . at the opening of the trial , the prosecutor alleged that they aimed to establish an islamic caliphate in kazakhstan .