otherwise , the u.s . trustee may appoint a disinterested individual to serve , or the u.s . a debtor may sell , use , or lease estate property: other than in the ordinary course of business , after notice and hearing ; in the ordinary course of business without a hearing so long as such use is not inconsistent with conditions imposed or relief granted under the automatic stay , and so long as the creditor's interest in the property is adequately protected ; the debtor may sell property free and clear of any creditor's interest in the property only if applicable nonbankruptcy law permits sale of such property , the creditor consents , the price at which the property is to be sold is greater than the aggregate value of all liens on the property , the interest is in a bona fide dispute or the creditor could be compelled to accept a money satisfaction of the interest ; notwithstanding any provision of a contract , a lease , or applicable law that is conditioned on the insolvency or financial condition of the debtor , or on the commencement of a case in bankruptcy . the code stipulates that a self - employed debtor who incurs trade credit in the production of income from such employment is engaged in business . because chapter 13 is limited to individuals , any business being operated can only be a sole proprietorship if the debts of the business are to be dealt with under chapter 13 . unless the court orders otherwise , a debtor engaged in business may operate the business and use , sale or lease property of the estate in the ordinary course of business without notice and hearing . the debtor may not use , sell or lease cash collateral ( i.e. , cash , negotiable instruments , documents of title , securities , deposit accounts , etc. ) unless the entity having an interest in the collateral consents or the court , after notice and hearing , authorizes the use . the more significant procedural features are examined below . in addition to the automatic stay , which operates to prevent creditors from engaging in collection activities after an order for relief is filed , chapter 13 imposes an additional stay on creditor attempts to collect on consumer debts against those who may be liable with the debtor . the purpose of this provision is to protect a chapter 13 debtor by insulating him from indirect pressures from his creditors exerted through friends or relatives that may have cosigned an obligation of the debtor and who otherwise may be subject to the creditor's collection efforts . specifically , a creditor may not act , commence , or continue any civil action to collect a consumer debt from any individual that is liable on the debt with the debtor , or that secured such debt unless ( 1 ) the individual became liable on the debt in the ordinary course of the individual's business , or ( 2 ) the case is closed , dismissed , or converted to a case under chapters 7 or 11 .