there was no jury system . some observers claimed that there were political prisoners , although the exact number was uncertain , including because some prisoners , such as former foreign minister boris shikhmuradov , have not been heard from for years . the government did not respect freedom of speech . the government financed the publication of almost all print media . the importation of foreign print media was banned . it censored newspapers and prohibited the reporting of opposition political views or criticism of the president . cases of surveillance and harassment of journalists were reported . the government also controlled radio and local television , but many citizens had access to foreign television and radio broadcasts via satellite dishes . authorities forbade academic debate and research on subjects viewed as politically sensitive , such as comparative law , history , ethnic relations , and theology . they restricted public access to much government information on the grounds that it was a state secret or they otherwise manipulated economic and financial data released to the public . the government restricted freedom of assembly by refusing to grant permits for public meetings and demonstrations . it also restricted freedom of association by limiting the registration and operation of ngos , with the result that few of the 101 registered ngos were viewed by many observers as independent . barriers to registration and operation included requirements that founders of associations be citizens and that authorities be permitted to monitor planned activities . the rights of international travel and emigration were constrained . officials reportedly often engaged in corrupt practices with impunity . the state department's trafficking in persons report 2012 reports that turkmenistan was a source , and to a lesser extent , destination , country for forced labor and sex trafficking . the turkmen government did not fully comply with the minimum standards for the elimination of trafficking , but was making significant efforts to do so , according to the state department . the turkmen government made some progress in convicting traffickers and training police , judges , and migration officials , but did not demonstrate increasing efforts to identify and protect victims , or develop a national anti - trafficking action plan , so the country remained for the second year on the "tier 2 watch list" ( in 2011 , such progress was viewed as meriting an upgrade from turkmenistan's 2010 designation as a "tier 3" country , subject to possible sanctions ) . the state department recommended that border guards and police be further trained to identify victims and refer them to protective services , rather than punishing them ; that financial or in - kind aid be given to anti - trafficking organizations that provide victim services ; that a trafficking awareness campaign be conducted ; and that a national plan of action be formulated . the state department's international religious freedom report for 201 2 avers that the turkmen government continued to restrict the religious freedom of both registered and unregistered groups . several religious groups remained unable to register . there were about 130 registered religious organizations or groups , the bulk of them islamic . others included russian orthodox , roman catholic , bahai , hare krishna , and protestant denominations .