were typical . when cases involving mere restrictions on the use of property reached the court , they were tested under due process , scope of the police power , or ultra vires theories . only if a taking is found does the question of just compensation arise . in 1922 , in the most historically important taking decision , the supreme court extended the availability of takings actions from government appropriations and physical invasions of property , as described above , to the mere regulation of property use . this critical expansion of takings jurisprudence to "regulatory takings" acknowledged that purely regulatory interferences with property rights can have economic and other consequences for property owners as significant as appropriations and physical invasions . the regulatory taking concept opened up vast new legal possibilities for property owners , and underlies many of the supreme court's takings decisions from the 1970s on . the ascendancy of the regulatory taking concept since the 1970s is hardly surprising . starting with the advent of comprehensive zoning in the early 20 th century , federal , state , and local regulation of private land use has become pervasive . beyond comprehensive zoning , the past 60 years have seen explosive growth in the use of historic preservation restrictions , open - space zoning , dedication and exaction conditions on building permits , nature preserves , wildlife habitat preservation , wetlands and coastal zone controls , mining restrictions , and so on . regulation of non - real - estate property has also proliferated . in the supreme court , the appointment of several conservative justices since the 1970s has prompted a new scrutiny of government conduct vis - à - vis the private property owner . as a result of these factors , the court since the late 1970s has turned its attention toward the takings issue with vigor . through the 1980s and 1990s , property owner plaintiffs scored several major victories ; by and large , the substantive doctrine of takings shifted to the right . in 2000-2005 , however , the court's decisions moved the analytical framework in a more government - friendly direction . in 1978 , the supreme court ushered in the modern era of regulatory takings law by attempting to inject some coherence into the ad hoc analyses that had characterized its decisions before then . in penn central transportation co. v. new york city , infra page 10 , the court declared that whether a regulatory taking has occurred in a given case is influenced by three principal factors: the economic impact of the regulation , the extent to which it interferes with distinct ( in most later decisions , "reasonable" ) investment - backed expectations , and the "character" of the government action . after penn central , ad hocery in judicial taking determinations emphatically still remains , but arguably is confined within tighter bounds . the supreme court's many takings decisions since penn central have developed the jurisprudence in each of its main areas: ripeness , takings criteria , and remedy .