no further action occurred . in response to concerns about program impacts and costs , the 107 th congress enacted legislation allowing states to use section 319 grant funds , which are used for projects to manage nonpoint sources of water pollution , for projects or activities related to developing and implementing a phase ii stormwater program ( §301 of p.l . this authority only applied to section 319 funds in fy2003 . legislation to extend this authority beyond fy2003 was introduced in the 108 th congress , but was not enacted . in 2006 epa requested the national research council of the national academy of sciences ( nrc ) to conduct a review of the existing stormwater regulatory program . the resulting report , issued in 2009 , called for major changes to epa's stormwater control program that would focus on the flow volume of stormwater runoff instead of just its pollutant load . the committee observed that — stormwater discharges would ideally be regulated through direct controls on land use , strict limits on both the quantity and quality of stormwater runoff into surface waters , and rigorous monitoring of adjacent waterbodies to ensure that they are not degraded by stormwater discharge... . presently , however , the regulation of stormwater is hampered by its association with a statute that focuses primarily on specific pollutants and ignores the volume of discharges . the nrc report recommended that epa adopt a watershed - based permitting system encompassing all discharges — stormwater and wastewater — that could affect waterways in a particular drainage basin , rather than individual permits that do not account for cumulative conditions from multiple sources in the same watershed . under the proposed watershed permitting strategy , responsibility to implement watershed - based permits and control all types of municipal , industrial , and construction stormwater discharges would reside with ms4 permittees . the report criticized epa's current approach , which leaves much discretion to regulated entities to set their own standards through stormwater management plans and to self - monitor . as a result , enforcement is difficult and variable , and information to assess the water quality benefits of the regulatory program is limited . the report also noted that adequate resources , including new levels of public funds , will likely be required to operate a more comprehensive and effective stormwater permitting program . subsequently , epa initiated information - gathering and public dialogue activities as a prelude to possible regulatory changes that would respond to the nrc's criticism of inconsistency in stormwater requirements nationally and embrace the report's recommendation to adequately control all sources of stormwater discharge that contribute to waterbody impairment . epa proposed to collect data from ms4s , states , and industry entities involved in developing or redeveloping sites on the scope of the current regulatory program and management practices , as well as information on control , pollution prevention technologies , and bmps applied to stormwater discharges from newly developed and redeveloped sites . in response to the nrc report , epa began work to develop a rule to revise the existing stormwater regulatory program .