environmental impact . the second phase in the base closure process was then initiated , with the commission holdinga number of statutorily mandated public hearings in various parts of the country . many membersof congress , as well as other witnesses , testified regarding the process , merits , and impacts of thepossible closings . press accounts of commission hearings indicated that much of the testimony bymembers of congress objected to a specific , individual closure . this met the requirement for submission of a list of candidates prior to thejanuary 3 deadline set by law , and allowed the white house and new republican majority incongress to consider other names , later . the department of defense on february 28 , 1995 released the base closure andrealignment report setting out proposed actions affecting 146 military installations for theconsideration of the brac commission . thirty - three major bases were listed for closure , and34,200 civilian jobs would be lost under the recommendations . although former secretary ofdefense les aspin had suggested that the 1995 brac round would be "the mother of all baseclosure rounds," the actual recommendations touched fewer bases than did the 1993 round . secretary perry stated in his press conference of february 28 that reduction of infrastructuresignificantly lagged personnel reduction , 21% versus 33% through the first three closure rounds . dod estimated aggregated savings of about $57 billion over 20 years , from this and the previousthree rounds . on may 10 , the commission added 31 installations to the list of bases to be considered forpossible closure or realignment . the chairman emphasized that inclusion of a base on the list didnot mean the base would close or be realigned , but would allow a fairer assessment of closurecandidates . indeed , in 1993 , the commission added 70 bases for further consideration , but , in theend , made few final recommendations that differed from the dod list . nevertheless , thecommission's views seemed somewhat different from dod's . for example , the dod list includedonly one major shipyard ( long beach , california ) for closure , but the commission added portsmouthshipyard in kittery , maine for consideration . the commission also added air force depots atmcclellan afb , california and kelly afb , texas . the latter additions would prove to be moremomentous . during may and june - - and prior to its final vote on june 22 - - the commission heldnumerous regional hearings . one of the commissioners stated that between 70 and 80 installationshad been visited . in one major difference , although the air force had recommended retaining allfive maintenance depots , with a reduced workload , the commission put all the depots on a list to beconsidered for possible closure or realignment . on june 22 , the commission began its final vote , and announced its first set ofrecommendations on closures and realignments , after reviewing 40% of the recommendationssubmitted by dod . it made substantial changes in several of the air force recommendations: theair force had wanted to close rome laboratory , ny , but the commission voted to keep it open .