no similar spending is anticipated in fy2007 . this has dramatically reduced the use of ams inspectors . ams inspection work now is done on imported tobacco , as nearly all of the domestic crop is contracted for sale rather than auctioned . the agricultural marketing service provides a market news service for sellers and buyers of tobacco . daily reports of grades , prices , and sales volume at the auction markets are distributed throughout the tobacco industry . the cost of the tobacco news service in fy2006 is an estimated $190,000 , and the budget for fy2007 is $194,000 . similar market news services are provided for all major agricultural commodities . market news services are designed to provide farmers , and others in the marketing chain , with timely , accurate , and unbiased information on market conditions , to help them make better decisions on where and when to sell and buy commodities . according to economists , such information is necessary for a market economy to function efficiently and effectively . in the absence of a taxpayer - funded market news service , the information might be collected and sold by commercial enterprises , but questions of bias could arise . in the past , usda - funded research related to tobacco production , processing , and marketing . some of the research was carried out by agriculture research service ( ars ) scientists and some was done by university scientists funded through the cooperative state research , education , and extension service ( csrees ) . annual research spending by the usda averaged about $6.6 million until it was terminated under the fy1995 agricultural appropriations law and subsequent laws . the restriction does not apply to research on medical , biotechnological , food , and industrial uses of tobacco . a special research grant of $329,000 was approved for fy2006 to investigate alternative uses of tobacco plant material . the jointly funded federal - state - county extension education and technical assistance program is designed to serve as a link between the nation's agricultural research institutions and farmers . the term extension conveys the concept of extending the work of researchers into the community . at the county level , extension agents distribute information and expert advice to farmers and others through published materials , seminars , and direct consultation . the state extension staff , given their close proximity to researchers , continuously trains the county agents and designs and prepares materials for use by the county agents . in fy1997 , csrees spent $680,000 on tobacco - related extension activities . federal funding was eliminated in fy1998 by the administration and remains at zero . all state and county extension activity related to tobacco is funded by the states . the economic research service ( ers ) is responsible for assembling and analyzing economic data and forecasting market data within the usda . as with the other major commodities , ers assembles and analyzes supply and demand data on tobacco . ers periodically publishes analytical findings in a tobacco situation and outlook report .