this provision in h.r . 961 was one of several proposed to address the issue . some members favored simply exempting hydropower projects from clean water act regulation , arguing that ferc project review is intended to consider inputs of state and federal agencies , indian tribes , and the public in connection with licensing and relicensing decisions . others argued that states should continue to have authority to regulate matters related to water quality concerns . section 507 attempted to balance those concerns . the supreme court declined to review the case . the state of oregon had responded to the 1996 district court decision by adopting rules establishing a certification process for livestock grazing permits on federal lands in oregon . however , after the court of appeals reversed that ruling and the supreme court declined to review it , the state withdrew the rules . groups representing ranchers , farmers , and similar interests were pleased that the district court's ruling was overturned , believing that congress did not intend section 401 to apply to nonpoint source pollution . other cwa programs and tools such as financial incentives are better means of addressing nonpoint source pollution problems , some say . environmentalists disagreed with the appeals court's conclusion and the legal outcome of the case , and many continue to argue that section 401 generally supports a reading that includes nonpoint source discharges . in a broader context , some observers had viewed the district court's ruling as giving a boost to ongoing activities in states to develop total maximum daily load ( tmdl ) allocations on pollution - impaired water bodies . efforts to carry out this clean water act requirement have been prompted by lawsuits in more than three dozen states , claiming that epa and states have failed to fulfill mandates in the law . in many cases , tmdls are being developed that result in imposition of pollution control requirements and other measures affecting nonpoint sources as well as point sources in order to improve water quality and attain water quality standards . while the 9 th circuit's 1998 ruling did not directly affect the tmdl process , some persons saw the reversal of the lower court's ruling as removing one possible argument for ensuring that nonpoint sources are addressed in tmdl plans and processes . following the supreme court's 2006 ruling in the s.d . warren case ( discussed above ) , environmental advocates renewed legal challenge of grazing permits , arguing that the court's ruling in that case that 401 certification applies to dam discharges could also be applied to agricultural runoff . the environmental group had challenged the failure of the forest service to require a company that sought a cattle grazing permit on forest service land to obtain a 401 certificate from the state of oregon . however , the same federal court rejected the challenge , concluding that the facts in the more recent oregon case differed from those in the s.d . warren case , thus supporting its 1998 ruling that the cwa only allows states to address point source discharges under section 401 .