§ 677 ( c ) . ( 2 ) the commission on the advancement of women and minorities in science , engineering , and technology development act , 42 u.s.c . an injured party who prevails in an action against the united states is more likely to be compensated fully than one who prevails against a private party . in general , however , these statutes probably leave injured parties worse off . first , they arguably remove an incentive for individuals protected by them to exercise due care in the performance of their duties . second , they leave some injured parties with no remedy , because the ftca makes the united states liable for only some of the torts of its employees . in general , the ftca makes the united states liable for the torts of its employees to the extent that a private employer would be liable for the torts of its employees , under the law of the state where the tort occurred . however , the ftca has exceptions under which the united states may not be held liable even though a private employer could be held liable under state law . these exceptions include suits by military personnel for injuries sustained incident to service , suits based on the performance of a discretionary function , intentional torts , claims arising out of combatant activities , claims arising in a foreign country , and others . in addition , the ftca does not permit awards of punitive damages , and does not allow jury trials ( and plaintiffs in tort cases tend to prefer jury trials ) . the supreme court has held that the ftca makes federal employees immune from suit under state law for torts committed within the scope of employment even when an ftca exception precludes recovery against the united states . united states v. smith , 499 u.s. 160 ( 1991 ) . the same apparently would be the case with respect to organizations or individuals who are not federal employees but who are declared federal employees for ftca purposes . consequently , in considering whether to make a private organization or individual a federal employee for ftca purposes , congress may wish to balance the benefits of immunizing the organization or individual from liability against the likelihood of leaving potential plaintiffs without a remedy . a way that congress might protect both plaintiffs and defendants would be to allow the defendants to be sued but provide for the united states to take over the defense of the suit and to pay any damages for which the defendants are held liable . this way , plaintiffs would not be precluded by the exceptions in the ftca from recovering against the united states . a partial precedent for this approach was the national swine flu immunization program , p.l . 94-380 ( 1976 ) , which made an action against the united states under the ftca the exclusive remedy for persons having claims in connection with the swine flu immunization program of the 1970s against vaccine manufacturers , but it removed or relaxed several of the ftca exceptions that might have precluded recovery in some cases .