an extended meeting with president obama was not reported . during her june 6 , 2012 , visit to azerbaijan , secretary clinton stated that she discussed the key issues of security , energy , and democratization with president aliyev . she thanked azerbaijan for its "essential" role in the transit of personnel and supplies to afghanistan , and its "central role" in europe's efforts to diversify sources of energy and transport routes . the next presidential election is scheduled for october 2013 . proposed amendments to the constitution were overwhelmingly approved by citizens in a referendum held on march 18 , 2009 . according to a small delegation from pace , the voting "was transparent , well organized , and held in a peaceful atmosphere. they criticized the dearth of discussion in the media of the merits of the constitutional amendments and voiced regret that some changes to the amendments proposed by the venice commission were not made before they were voted on . some opposition parties had in particular objected to an amendment lifting term limits on the presidency during a "state of war," and had called for a boycott of the referendum . on december 23 , 2009 , municipal elections were held throughout the country . opposition parties and local election monitors reported interference in the candidate registration process . a council of europe delegation alleged that there were shortcomings in the counting of voters in the polling stations , the legibility of ballot papers , and the reliability of the vote count . the collapse of the soviet union and the nk conflict in the early 1990s contributed to the decline of azerbaijan's gdp by over 60% by 1995 . beginning in the late 1990s , rising oil and gas exports ( and rising world prices for oil ) fueled gdp growth in azerbaijan . the global economic downturn and decline in oil prices contributed to lower , but still positive , gdp growth in 2008 through 2010 . in 2011 , however , gdp growth slowed substantially to a scant 0.1% , mainly because maintenance work in the oilfields contributed to reduced oil exports , according to the economist intelligence unit ( eiu ) . this reduced economic activity was compensated somewhat by growth in the construction , agricultural , and service sectors , marking the growing impact of such non - energy sectors on economic growth . in 2012 , the azerbaijani government reported that the economy grew 2.2% and that inflation was a modest 1.8% . the eiu and other sources suggest that gdp growth rate may actually have been less and inflation may have been more , and that the economy remained sluggish because of lagging oil production , which was mitigated somewhat by growth in the manufacturing sector . inflation may have eased in 2012 from 8.1% in 2011 partly due to an improved harvest and moderating food prices . the eiu predicts that gdp growth will average about 2.3% per year for the next few years , due to the leveling - off of oil production until new oil and gas fields come on - line .