legislating is a collective exercise . drafters seek to capture a sponsor's intent in words , however imperfectly . language introduced as legislation is subjected to examination , criticism and revision in diverse congressional fora — large and small , formal and informal — as it moves toward approval — again , via diverse groups with varying degrees of expertise and interest — and eventual enactment into law . particularly since the 1980s , some court opinions have characterized modern congressional processes as too fractured to admit any statement or explanation made in any step along the way as an authoritative declaration by congress as a whole ( assuming congress had a discernible "collective understanding" on the matter at issue before the court in the first place ) . adding to this reluctance is the perception of some that the published history could be skewed by the partisanship of committee staff , the manipulation of interest groups , or the dominant influence of federal agencies . it is preferable , under this view , to re - focus on the statutory text to gain some space for judicial independence and clarity . more recently , some commentators and jurists who look at congressional processes have had a different take . they , too , see complexity and fragmentation in congress , but argue that one can ascribe an "institutional purpose" to legislation even though the motives of individual legislators may be unknown or unknowable . under this "busy congress" model , for example , congressional committees , as specialists in their field , are regarded as reporting accurate accounts of information and insight to their respective chambers so that members may better consider legislation they have limited knowledge of . the stuff of legislative history itself potentially comprises a wide variety of materials . on the one hand , a current statute may be compared to its predecessors and differences among their language and structure analyzed . this use is limited to examining language passed by congress , which , unlike materials attending congressional deliberations , is often thought to best reflect the intent of congress as a whole . considering past statutes and their evolution is not a particularly controversial exercise . on the other hand are the committee reports , hearings , floor debates , and other records of deliberations and correspondence on legislation as it moves through the legislative process . one aspect of examining this material can be to compare different versions of a provision as it progresses , a use somewhat like the comparing of statutes to their predecessors , but without each version having been approved by congress as a whole . courts may read contemporaneous congressional materials for many reasons: background information and context , explanations of specific legislative language , or expectations of how a provision will be applied to the particular fact situation before them . reliance on these materials varies among courts , with the circumstances of a statute's passage and its clarity or complexity being factors . courts also may be more willing to consult committee reports and the like for insight into the particular problem congress sought to address than they are to consult language that purports to direct certain interpretations or outcomes .