house committee on rules . u.s. congress . subcommittee on rules of the house . discharge petition disclosure . hearing on h.res . 103 rd cong. , 1 st sess . washington: gpo , 1993 . crs report 97-856 , the discharge rule in the house: recent use in historical context , by [author name scrubbed . few petitions reach this point . for those that do , the process usually takes some months , although on three occasions the petition garnered the necessary signatures in one day . the motion to discharge may then be offered on the floor , but only at the beginning of a day's session that falls at least seven legislative days after the motion is entered ; only on a "discharge day" ( the second or fourth monday of each month ) ; and not during the last six days of a session of congress . any member who signed the petition may offer the motion ; normally the one who initiated the petition is recognized . the motion is debatable for 20 minutes , equally divided between supporters and opponents ( typically , controlled by the member calling it up and the chair of the committee to be discharged ) . if a simple majority of members present and voting adopt the motion , the committee is discharged , and the house may proceed to consider the measure . because the measure has not been reported , however , it comes to the floor in the form introduced , with no recommended committee amendments and no written committee report to guide members or establish legislative history . ( delegates are not eligible to sign. ) at the final sine die adjournment of a congress , all legislative business terminates , including pending discharge petitions . a discharge motion that never comes to the floor may still serve proponents' purposes , for a committee may sometimes respond to a discharge effort by reporting the measure on its own initiative . this response may become increasingly likely as the petition approaches or obtains the required 218 signatures . even counting such cases , nevertheless , usually no more than one measure on which discharge is attempted reaches the house floor in a single congress . also , some such measures fail to pass the house , and only 30 have ever become law or otherwise received final approval . within the structure of this general mechanism , the discharge rule incorporates two distinct approaches: the petition may be filed either directly on the unreported measure itself or on a special rule for its consideration . the first approach permits the committee of referral to nullify the discharge attempt by reporting the measure , for once the committee no longer has the measure in its possession , it can no longer be discharged . the committee may even wait until all 218 signatures are obtained and then report the measure before the next discharge day . the motion to discharge then cannot be called up , because it is moot . although the measure is then procedurally available to be considered , it remains unlikely to reach the floor unless the reporting committee takes action to bring it up .