id . the operator of an off - shore internet gambling site subsequently seized upon this "congress - did - not - intend - to - criminalize" language when challenging his conviction under the wire act . the second circuit in cohen rejected the challenge with the observation that unlike suffolk where the transmission of gambling - related information came within the safe harbor of section 1084 ( b ) , cohen's case involved the online ( i.e. , wire ) transmission of wagers themselves , a transmission that falls outside the safe harbor provision of the section 1084 ( b ) . the facts that gave rise to suffolk and cohen , however , occurred prior to the 2000 amendments to the interstate horseracing act . the intent is most obvious where congress has expressly stated that a provision shall have extraterritorial application . section 1955 has no such expression of intended overseas application . in the absence of an explicit statement , the courts use various interpretive aids to divine congressional intent . unless some clearer indication appears , congress is presumed to have intended its laws to apply only within the united states . the courts have recognized contrary indications under several circumstances . congress will be thought to have intended a criminal proscription to apply outside the united states where one of the elements of the offense , like the commission of an overt act in furtherance of a conspiracy , occurs in the united states . similarly , congress will be thought to have intended to outlaw overseas crimes calculated to have an impact in the united states , for example , false statements made abroad in order to gain entry into the united states . finally , congress will be thought to have intended extraterritorial application for a criminal statute where its purpose in enacting the statute would otherwise be frustrated , for instance , the theft of united states property overseas . there is a countervailing presumption interwoven among these interpretive devices . congress is presumed not to have intended any extraterritorial application that would be contrary to international law . international law in the area is a matter of reasonableness , of minimal contacts , traditionally described as permitting geographical application of a nation's laws under five principles: a country's laws may be applied within its own territory ( territorial principle ) ; a country's laws may be applied against its own nationals wherever they are located ( nationality principle ) ; a country's laws may be applied to protect it from threats to its national security ( protective principle ) ; a country's laws may be applied to protect its citizens overseas ( passive personality principle ) ; and a country's laws may be applied against crimes repugnant to the law of nations such as piracy ( universal principle ) . section 1955 does not say whether it applies overseas . yet an offshore illegal gambling business whose customers where located in the united states seems within the section's domain because of the effect of the misconduct within the united states . the operation of an illegal gambling business using the internet may easily involve violations of the travel act , as several writers have noted .