beck , however , does not extend to union members . the court noted that , while former 18 u.s.c . these cases will be discussed in more detail in part four of this report . although this report will not discuss the case in more detail since it does not concern labor unions , note that in keller v. state bar of california , 496 u.s. 1 ( 1990 ) , the supreme court held that an integrated state bar , which by statute is the regulatory body for the legal profession in a state and requires the payment of mandatory dues by its members , is analogous to a union . therefore , according to the court , using mandatory dues to fund political and ideological activities , where such expenditures are not necessarily and reasonably incurred for the purpose of regulating the legal profession or improving the quality of the legal services available to the people of the state , the bar violated the integrated bar members' first amendment rights . generally , political activities by labor unions in federal elections are prohibited . first , the labor management relations act of 1947 prohibited labor union contributions to federal election campaigns . later , the federal election campaign act of 1971 , as amended , ( feca ) , generally continued this broad prohibition of labor union activities and funds in federal elections . however , the feca provided for three broad exemptions to this general prohibition of labor union political activities in federal elections: ( 1 ) communications by a labor organization directed at its members or their families on any subject: ( 2 ) non - partisan voter registration and get - out - the - vote activities by a labor organization which are directed to its members or their families: and ( 3 ) the establishment and administration of a political action committee or separate segregated fund ( commonly known as a pac ) for the purpose of the solicitation of contributions to such fund for political purposes . generally , any other type of political activity by labor unions in federal elections is prohibited under the feca , and labor union contributions and expenditures concerning federal elections outside these exceptions are prohibited . various advisory opinions of the federal election commission ( fec ) have further clarified the proper roles of labor unions in federal elections .