mosely . ( 92 ) the court in rejecting thestrict application of the miranda safeguards to bar newinterrogations , reviewed the circumstances leading to the incriminating statements to determine whena suspect waives his rights . ( 93 ) the court "...concluded that the admissibility of statements obtainedafter the person in custody has decided to remain silent depends under miranda on whether his 'rightto cut off questioning' was 'scrupulously honored.' ( 94 ) as for the application of the "scrupulouslyhonored" test , the majority concluded it was met on the facts of the case because "... the police hereimmediately ceased the interrogation , resumed questioning only after the passage of a significantperiod of time and the provision of a fresh set of warnings , and restricted the second interrogationto a crime that had not been a subject of the earlier interrogation. ( 95 ) hence , the court appeared tomove towards a less rigid approach , permitting limited renewed interrogations rather than an allinclusive miranda coverage . in 1977 , the court appeared to extend the miranda rights in brewer v. williams . ( 96 ) in decidingthat the police violated the suspect's rights to counsel under miranda , the court stated that "... courts[should] indulge in every reasonable presumption against waiver...." ( 97 ) the court noted that "... theright to counsel granted by the sixth and fourteenth amendments means at least that a person isentitled to the help of a lawyer at or after the time that judicial proceedings have been initiatedagainst him - 'whether by way of formal charge , preliminary hearing , indictment , information , orarraignment.' ( 98 ) being aware that a warrant hadbeen issued for his arrest , he had been arraignedon that warrant before a judge , and he had been committed by the court to confinement in jail , thecourt concluded "[t]here can be no doubt in the present case that judicial proceedings had beeninitiated ...." ( 99 ) the state has the burden ofproving that a suspect actually relinquished his rights,and not merely that he comprehended them . ( 100 ) hence , the court appeared to be giving expanded miranda protection by making waiver of the right to counsel more difficult . in 1979 , the court appeared to change its position again in north carolina v. butler . ( 101 ) ratherthan making waiver more difficult , the court appeared to make it easier by allowing implicitwaivers . ( 102 ) disregarding the rule that onlyexplicit waivers , either written or oral , are effective , thecourt placed emphasis on whether the accused waived his rights "knowingly and voluntarily" ratherthan the form of the accused's waiver . ( 103 ) therefore , according to butler , words and action may besufficient to waive a suspect's rights but the presumption by the courts must still be against waiver . ( 104 ) however , the court ultimately decided that all the circumstances will be reviewed in order todetermine if the waiver was voluntary . ( 105 ) in 1981 , the court once more in edwards v. arizona , ( 106 ) redefined the requirements for aneffective waiver .