a sentence. they proposal did not address the question of whether relevancy,repetition , or any other limitation might have beenimposed upon exercise of the right . experience among the states suggests that enforcement may be the stumbling block for any proposed amendment , since there seem to be few palatablealternatives . it is possible to draft the amendment to the united states constitution so that victims' rightsenforcement is paramount . legal proceedingsconducted without honoring victims rights would be rendered null ; sentencing hearings rescheduled and conductedanew ; plea bargains rejected ; trials begunagain ; unfaithful public servants exposed to civil and criminal liability ; inattentive governmental entities madesubject to claims and court orders . a fewproponents suggest that enforcement should be limited to the equitable powers of the courts . the proposals in the 106th congress were designed to eliminate the unfair treatment that results because the criminal justice "system . permits the defendant'sconstitutional rights always to trump the protections given to victims," yet to do so in a manner that would "not denyor infringe any constitutional right of anyperson accused or convicted of a crime. in instances of unavoidable conflict between victim and defendant rights,this seemed to mean the prosecution mustyield . the text of the two hardly defeated this interpretation with the assurance that the "only the victim or thevictim's lawful representative shall have standingto assert the rights" created by the amendment , since the rights of the accused come not from the victims' rightsamendment but from the sixth amendment orsome other source within the constitution . it amends the constitution . its very purpose is to makeconstitutional that which would otherwise not havebeen constitutionally permissible . it may uniformly subordinate defendants' rights to victims' rights . this would appear tohave been the intent with respect to s.j.res . 64 which would have denied victims a cause of action or grounds to interrupta criminal trial and otherwiseleaves crafting of enforcement mechanisms to congress and the state legislatures . 64 would have conferred legislative authority in two ways . few advocates have explicitly called for a "king - of - the - hill" victims rights amendment , but the thought seems imbedded in the complaint that existing law lacksuniformity . how else can universal symmetry be accomplished but by implementation of a single standard that fillsin where pre - existing law comes up short andshaves off where its generosity exceeds the standard ? proponents of s.j.res . 64 spokeof both the need to establish aminimum victims' rights standard and the need for uniformity . the principles of construction called into play in the case of a conflict between a victims' rights amendment and rights established elsewhere in the constitutionare similar those used to resolve federal - state conflicts . intent of the drafters is paramount . the courts will make every effort to reconcile apparent conflicts between constitutional provisions , but in the face of anunavoidable conflict between a right granted by an adopted victims rights amendment and some other portion ofthe constitution , the most recently adoptedprovision will prevail . first , they would have empowered congress todefine the class of victims entitled to claim rights under the amendment .