speakers of the house . new york: franklin watts inc. , 1994 . appendix a . speakers of the house of representatives , 1789-2017 appendix b . select bibliography albert , carl bert . little giant: the life and times of speaker carl albert . norman: university of oklahoma press , 1990 . bentley , judith . biggs , jeffrey r. honor in the house: speaker tom foley . pullman: university of washington press , 1999 . clancy , paul r. tip , a biography of thomas p. o ' neill , speaker of the house . new york: macmillan , 1980 . cheney , richard b. and lynne v. cheney . kings of the hill: power and personality in the house of representatives . under most circumstances , the speaker has the authority to ask members who seek recognition , "for what purpose does the gentleman ( or gentlelady ) rise ? the speaker may then decide whether or not to recognize that member for the specific reason given . in this way the speaker is able to assert control over what motions may be made and therefore what measures will be considered and the general flow of house floor proceedings . new york: columbia university press , 1928 ; reprint edition new york: ams press , 1968. cooper , joseph and david w. brady . "institutional context and leadership style: the house from cannon to rayburn," american political science review , vol . 75 ( june 1981 ) . davidson , roger h. , susan webb hammond , and raymond smock . masters of the house: congressional leadership over two centuries . boulder , co: west press , 1998 . follett , mary p. the speaker of the house of representatives . new york: longmans green , 1902 ; reprint edition new york: burt franklin , 1974 . fuller , hubert bruce . house rule xv , clause 1 , allows the speaker to entertain motions to suspend the rules on mondays , tuesdays , and wednesdays and during the last six days of a session . discretion over who may be recognized to make such motions gives the speaker virtually complete control over the suspension process . the institutional role of the speaker also extends beyond the duty to preside over the house . the speaker also exercises general control over the hall of the house and the house side of the capitol ( rule i , clause 3 ) and serves as the chair of the house office building commission . harris , douglas b . the speaker is frequently authorized in statute to appoint members to various boards and commissions , and it is typically the speaker who is the formal recipient of reports or other communications from the president , government agencies , boards , and commissions . 113 ( summer 1998 ) . hinds , asher c. "the speaker of the house of representatives: origin of the office , its duties and powers," american political science review , vol . 3 ( may 1909 ) . hitchner , dell g. "the speaker of the house of representatives," parliamentary affairs , vol . 13 ( spring 1960 ) . kennon , donald r. , ed .