u.s. congress . senate , committee on governmental affairs , federal advisory committee act ( public law 92-463 ) — source book: legislative his tory , texts , and other documents , committee print , 95 th congress , second session , washington: gpo , 1978 . u.s. department of justice , 2014 litigation and compliance report , at http: / / www.justice.gov / oip / 2014-foia - litigation - and - compliance - report . u.s. department of justice , the department of justice guide to the freedom of information act ( online edition ) , at http: / / www.justice.gov / oip / doj - guide - freedom - information - act - 0 . u.s. department of justice and u.s. general services administration , your right to federal records: questions and answers on the freedom of information act and privacy act , 2011 , http: / / publications.usa.gov / usapubs.php ? u.s. general services administration , faca database case digest , at http: / / casedigest.faca.gov / case / showcasetablepage.aspx . this report then provides citations to additional resources on each of the laws . congress routinely requests nonpublic information from executive branch agencies . among these legislative responses were the enactments of four statutes . two provide access to federal records: the freedom of information act ( 1966 ) and the privacy act ( 1974 ) . two provide access to federal meetings: the federal advisory committee act ( 1972 ) ; and the government in the sunshine act ( 1976 ) . this report offers an overview of each of these statutes , including the boundaries of their authority . when agencies resist these requests , congress has formal and informal methods of encouraging or requiring agencies to comply . language within foia explicitly states that the statute does not permit agencies to withhold information from congress . in general , an agency's dispute with the legislature over access to information is often resolved through negotiation — reduction of the quantity of records initially sought , substitution of other information , alternative delivery mechanisms , or limitation of the number of individuals who will examine materials provided by another branch . congress could use its "power of the purse" and the senate could use its advice and consent power to leverage its information access demands . federal courts rely upon a spirit of justice and fair play to sustain their orders for the production of information by another branch . in view of the american separation of powers model of government , such conflicts among the three branches are neither unexpected nor necessarily destructive — and probably will continue to occur . both congress and the judiciary have subpoena powers that can compel the production of materials by another branch . subpoenas , however , are usually only issued after other methods of securing requested information have been unsuccessful . even subpoenas , however , have sometimes been resisted . in 2012 , for example , the attorney general refused to turn over certain documents subpoenaed by the house committee on oversight and government reform , citing the president's determination that the information was protected by a form of executive privilege .