appendix a . the naaqs - setting process appendix b . circuit court . the circuit court issued its ruling on march 26 , 2002 , upholding epa's particulate and ozone standards . for any rule subject to this chapter , a small entity that is adversely affected or aggrieved by final agency action is entitled to judicial review of agency compliance with the requirements of sections 601 , 604 , 605 ( b ) [... if the head of the agency certifies that the rule will not , if promulgated , have a significant economic impact on a substantial number of small entities] , 608 ( b ) , and 610 in accordance with chapter 7 . §611 ( a ) ( 1 ) ] epa's decisions that requirements of the small business regulatory enforcement fairness act , the regulatory flexibility act , and the unfunded mandates act do not apply to the ozone and pm naaqs were challenged . these were among the suits consolidated in american trucking associations v. u.s. e.p.a . as previously noted , the d.c . circuit court of appeals upheld epa's position . before a rule can take effect , the federal agency promulgating such rule shall submit to each house of the congress ... a report .... a rule shall not take effect ... , if the congress enacts a joint resolution of disapproval .... [5 u.s.c . §801 ( a ) ( 1 ) ( a ) , ( b ) ( 1 ) ] epa's publication of its final decisions on the ozone and pm naaqs on july 18 , 1997 , triggered the congressional review of agency rulemaking provision of sbrefa . under this provision , congress could consider a joint resolution of disapproval , with special procedures in the senate to ensure floor consideration within 60 legislative days . while the procedure was not invoked , bills to delay the new standards were introduced , including h.r . 1984 and s. 1084 , with a hearing held on the latter . no bill to rescind the new naaqs was reported from committee , however . this term reflects the evolution of the process . before there were naaqs , the air quality act of 1967 ( a predecessor of the caa ) required the federal government to list air pollutants and to prepare "criteria" — a report summarizing scientific evidence concerning their health effects . the states then set standards . thus the air pollutants for which naaqs were later set were originally air pollutants for which the office of air quality in hew prepared "criteria.