workers. the department of labor ( dol ) has sought to enforce the existing policies on temporary employment of nonimmigrant foreign workers under h - 1b visas , and to penalize those employers who are found to be in violation . many in the scientific community maintain that in order to compete with countries that are rapidly expanding their scientific and technological capabilities , the united states needs to bring in those whose skills will benefit society and will enable us to compete in the new - technology - based global economy . individuals supporting this position do believe that the conditions under which foreign talent enters u.s. colleges and universities and the labor force should be monitored more carefully . and there are those who contend that the underlying concern of foreign students in graduate science and engineering programs is not necessarily that there are too many foreign - born students , but that there are not enough native - born students entering the scientific and technical disciplines . a may 2010 report of the national science board states that: attracting and retaining foreign - born talent remains an essential pillar of our nation's stem [science , technology , engineering , and mathematics] enterprise . as global demand for stem talent surges , we cannot reliably expect that the best and brightest from abroad will remain in the united states and continue to be a sufficient source of talent . congress directed the then ins to have the tracking system in operation by january 30 , 2003 . the deadline for implementation of sevis was extended to february 15 , 2003 . however , sevis experienced considerable problems and created excessive delays in processing visa applications . the more rigorous screening of visa applicants was one factor contributing to the delays . the existing problems with sevis are described as being primarily those relating to technical matters and personnel costs . currently , there is a proposal to implement a second - generation system , sevis ii , that would expand the capabilities of the current tracking system and address any reported technical difficulties or security issues . on september 13 , 2005 , the house subcommittee on national security , emerging threats , and international relations held a hearing to examine the procedures put in place to correct the gaps and vulnerabilities in the visa process . attention was directed at the mechanisms that are necessary to strengthen the visa process as an antiterrorism tool while simultaneously facilitating legitimate travel by foreign students , scientists , researchers , and others in the united states . witnesses testified that consular workloads had increased significantly , yet the visa - processing offices continued to lack strategic direction , adequate resources , and training . in addition , reliable data were not readily available , across and among departments and agencies , to determine security and visa fraud related issues and overall increased visa wait times . witnesses stated that because visa policies and requirements are ongoing and can change quickly , clear procedures on visa issuance and monitoring operations worldwide are necessary to guarantee that visas are adjudicated in a consistent manner at each visa - issuing post .