it is not comprehensible. after a meeting between u.s. members of congress and georgian legislators on the sidelines of the annual meeting of the nato parliamentary assembly in bucharest , romania , in mid - october 2011 , the u.s. delegation head , representative mike turner , released a statement of support for georgia . according to the statement , "the united states recently approved a commercial arms sale to georgia ; all nato states should look to arms sales with georgia that can add to the collective defense… . a stronger georgia is clearly in the interest of all nato members. a report issued in october 2011 by a team led by senators jeanne shaheen and lindsey graham urged that u.s. policy be changed to "normalize ... defense relations with georgia , including allowing sales of defensive military equipment [which] will encourage other allies to follow suit , enabling georgia to resume purchasing armaments from central european allies. on december 31 , 2011 , president obama signed into law the national defense authorization act ( ndaa ) for fy2012 ( p.l . section 1242 calls for the defense secretary to submit a plan to congress for the normalization of u.s. defense cooperation with georgia , including the sale of defensive weapons . in a signing statement , the president stated that if the provisions of the section conflict with his constitutional authority to conduct foreign relations ( presumably , in this case , including his "reset" policy with russia ) , they would be considered non - binding . at a press conference after he met with president obama in late january 2012 , president saakashvili stated that "we are very grateful for elevating our defense cooperation further , and talking about [developing] georgia's self - defense capabilities," while president obama appeared more reticent in stating only that "we will continue to strengthen our defense cooperation. russian then - prime minister ( and current president ) vladimir putin denounced the reported closer u.s. - georgia defense cooperation as encouraging georgia to carry out aggressive military actions . the report required by the ndaa for fy2012 was transmitted to congress on april 30 , 2012 . the report states that results of bilateral security collaboration since the 2008 conflict have included the revision of georgia's national security strategy and defense plan , institutionalizing afghan training and deployment methods , implementing a military personnel management system , reorganizing the armed forces . the latter has included the creation of a national defense academy to train officers who can operate with u.s. and nato forces and who share western values . the report stressed that there were two pillars of u.s. - georgia defense cooperation: u.s. support for modernizing georgia's armed forces ; and u.s. support for georgia's contributions to isaf . for the first pillar , there were 63 cooperative training , education , and operational contacts in fy2011 , and 23 in fy 2012 through april 2012 . according to the report , all of georgia's 19 requests since may 2010 for foreign military sales equipment and services have resulted in transfers or are in the process of being fulfilled .