the supreme court denied certiorari in the case . japan has expressed its intent to join the negotiations . were congress to enact trade negotiating authority with expedited legislative procedures in the future , it would have the option of including ongoing tpp negotiations within the scope of the statute . congress took this approach in the btpaa with respect to ongoing fta negotiations with singapore and chile and other trade negotiations under way at the time . addressing the third question , the court cited , inter alia , the need for the nation to speak with uniformity in the area of foreign affairs and commerce , and the fact that a judicial order declaring the nafta invalid "could have a profoundly negative effect on this nation's economy and its ability to deal with other foreign powers," noting that such an order "would not only affect the validity of nafta , but would potentially undermine every other major international commercial agreement made over the past half - century. the question whether trade agreements could constitutionally be entered into as congressional - executive agreements rather than treaties emerged during consideration of uruguay round implementing legislation . the question originally was posed because of the perceived effect of the agreements on states . the issue also arose in a judicial challenge to the nafta , in which it was alleged that the failure to use the treaty process rendered the agreement and its implementing legislation unconstitutional . in made in the usa foundation v. united states , an alabama federal district court held in july 1999 that "the president had the authority to negotiate and conclude nafta pursuant to his executive authority and pursuant to the authority granted to him by congress in accordance with the terms of the omnibus trade and competitiveness act of 1988 ... and section 151 of the trade act of 1974 ... and as further approved by the [nafta] implementation act. in the court's view , the foreign commerce clause , combined with the necessary and proper clause and the president's article ii foreign relations power , provided a constitutionally sufficient basis for the agreement . the court preliminarily held that institutional , but not individual plaintiffs , had standing to sue , and that the political question doctrine did not bar it from ruling on the merits . on appeal , the u.s. court of appeals for the eleventh circuit ( eleventh circuit ) , while agreeing that appellants had standing , held that the issue of whether an international commercial agreement such as the nafta is a treaty that must be approved by two - thirds of the senate was a nonjusticiable political question . the court dismissed the appeal and remanded to the district court with instructions to vacate . under the political question doctrine , a court will decline to rule on the merits if it finds that the underlying matter is committed to the discretion and expertise of the legislative and executive branches . in the case at hand , the eleventh circuit applied a tripartite inquiry that it said was suggested by justice lewis powell in goldwate r v. c arter , a distillation of criteria for determining justiciability originally identified in bak er v. c arr .