these waiver procedures apply in the senate only . under these procedures , a senator may make a motion to waive the application of a point of order either preemptively before it can be raised , or after it is raised , but before the presiding officer rules on its merits . points of order are not self - enforcing . these overall spending levels are then allocated to the various committees in the house and senate responsible for spending legislation . the overall levels and allocations are then enforced through the use of points of order , and through implementing legislation , such as that enacted through the reconciliation process . points of order are prohibitions against certain types of legislation or congressional actions . these prohibitions are enforced when a member raises a point of order against legislation that is alleged to violate these rules when it is considered by the house or senate . a point of order must be raised by a member on the floor of the chamber before the presiding officer can rule on its application , and thus for its enforcement . although the congressional budget process encompasses myriad procedures dealing with spending , revenue , and debt legislation , this report focuses only on that portion of the process that stems from the congressional budget act . the tables below list the points of order included in the congressional budget act , as amended through the bipartisan budget act of 2013 ( p.l . 113-67 ) ( table 1 ) , as well as related points of order established in various other measures . these points of order include provisions in the fy2010 budget resolution ( table 3 ) ; the fy2008 budget resolution ( table 4 ) ; the budget enforcement act of 1990 ( table 5 ) ; the rules of the house and separate orders adopted under h.res . 5 ( 114 th congress ) ( table 6 ) ; and the provisions of the statutory pay - as - you - go act of 2010 ( table 7 ) that pertain to the consideration , contents , implementation , or enforcement of budgetary decisions . points of order are typically in the form of a provision stating that "it shall not be in order" for the house or senate to take a specified action or consider certain legislation that is inconsistent with the requirements of the budget act . other provisions of the act , formulated differently , establish various requirements or procedures , particularly concerning the contents and consideration of the budget resolution or reconciliation legislation . these provisions , however , are not typically enforced through points of order , and are not included here . as amended through the bipartisan budget act of 2013 , points of order in the congressional budget act are permanent . none of the provisions listed in table 1 is scheduled to expire , although several points of order have limited applicability or have been rendered moot by the expiration of limits they were intended to enforce . the freestanding point of order protecting the social security trust fund in the house established in the budget enforcement act ( see table 5 ) is also permanent .