the figures in the table do not include these members as signers . examination of table 2 shows that the levels of support discharge petitions obtain fall into groupings fairly clearly separated in size . although no assurance can be given that future congresses may display similar groupings , the consistency with which these have continued to appear may suggest the presence of a general pattern . a first grouping includes only four petitions ( all but one in the 103 rd congress ) that gained more signatures than the strength of the minority party . three of these attained the full 218 signatures ; the fourth fell short of this level after an active counter - campaign by the leadership . petitions that reach this level of support evidently must draw at least some support from the majority party , and therefore presumably will appear on legislation supported either by a bipartisan coalition or by the rank and file of the majority party in opposition to its own leadership . a second grouping of 36 petitions was signed by fewer members than the strength of the minority party , but more than half this number ( usually , by more than 100 ) . in some congresses , petitions with this level of support have been the predominant form ; in the 106 th and 107 th congresses ( 1999-2002 ) , especially , almost all petitions have fallen into this grouping . house records do not identify the party of signers , but this level of support may often indicate a discharge effort favored principally by the minority , sometimes by an essentially united party and at least by a majority thereof . during the five congresses covered , only two petitions received between 60 and 95 signatures . thirteen , by contrast , received between 30 and 60 signatures . when a petition does not obtain 218 signatures , of course , no discharge motion can be offered on the floor , and no discharge vote can occur . table 8 reports action pursuant to the discharge rule itself in one column , and that pursuant to other procedures in a separate column . in either case , the pertinent column notes whether the measure was ( 1 ) reported from committee after the petition was filed , ( 2 ) taken up on the floor , and ( 3 ) passed or rejected . if the measure was considered under the terms of a special rule , the table also records floor action on the rule . for measures not considered in committee of the whole , the table identifies the procedure under which consideration took place . sometimes , although floor action does not take place on the measure that is the subject of the discharge procedure , it does occur on some other measure on the same subject . this action may occur because the committee of referral reports the other measure ; the leadership schedules it for floor consideration ; or the committee on rules reports a special rule for considering it .