b . for fy2000 c. for fy2001 d. increased progressively over the three years 2005-07 . table 1 . tanf grants for tribal family assistance programs ( as of september 15 , 2004 ) and their work rules a . these tribes also receive federal funds for the native employment works ( new ) employment and training program . some features of tribal programsfollow . recognized tribes and tribal organizations may operate family assistance programs in their service areas . a tribe's tanf grant equals federal afdc payments to the state for fy1994 attributable toindians in its service area ; the tribal grant is subtracted from the state's tanf grant . tribal tanf plans are for three years ( rather than 2 , as for states ) and contain many fewerrequired elements than state plans . thus , two washington tribes list as additional work activities: "teachingcultural activities" and "barrier removal , including counseling , and chemical dependency treatment. thetanana chiefs conference , in alaska , includes as work activities "approved subsistence hunting , fishing,gathering. most two tribal plans limit the "service population" to indians . however , the red cliff band oflake superior chippewa indians in wisconsin says it will serve all families , including non - indians , on thereservation ( and tribal member families in bayfield county ) ; and the white mountain apache tribe in arizonaalso says it will serve all families on the reservation . the sisseton - wahpeton sioux tribe serves only one - parentfamilies with its tribal plan ; its 2-parent families are aided by bia's general assistance program . table 1 shows that most of the tribal tanf plans have set work participation rates below the all - family rate of50% and the 2-parent family rate of 90% specified for state tanf programs in fy2002 . the table also showsthat 36 of the 45 tribal grantees ( including the navajo nation in arizona and utah ) receive state funds - - claimed as tanf moe amounts - - to help pay for their programs . the tribes that do not receive state fundingare located in wisconsin ( 8 tribes ) , south dakota ( 1 tribe ) and new mexico ( part of the navajo nation ) . grantees estimated their monthly caseload at 33,510 families . according to thefifth annual tanfreport , the average number of indian families served by state governments under regular tanf programs wasabout 35,000 in fy2000 , down 50% from the corresponding fy1996 figure ( a part of the decline representedpersons who moved from the regular state program to a tribal program ) . however , regular tanf data collection and reporting rules apply to tribalplans . the hhs secretary , with participation of the tribe , establishes work participation rules,time limits for benefits , and penalties for each tribal family assistance program . in general , indian tribes inalaska must operate plans in accordance with rules adopted by the state for tanf . ( the national congress ofamerican indians has asked for removal of this provision , and for the restrictive definition immediately below,saying that it wants alaskan tribes to be treated like other tribes. )