, significant difficulty or expense. in determining whether an action poses an undue burden , the regulations require the consideration of several factors , including the nature and cost of the action , the overall financial resources of the site , the geographic separateness and the administrative or fiscal relationship of the site or sites in question to a parent corporation , the overall financial resources of the parent corporation , and the type of operation or operations of any parent corporation or entity . when a particular auxiliary aid would cause an undue burden , the public accommodation must provide alternative assistance so that the individual can take full advantage of the services and goods offered . the new regulations also indicate that the type of auxiliary aid or service necessary for effective communication varies depending on the circumstance . the new title iii regulations specifically state that "[a] public accommodation should consult with individuals with disabilities whenever possible to determine what type of auxiliary aid is needed to ensure effective communication , but the ultimate decision as to what measure to take rests with the public accommodation , provided that the method chosen results in effective communication. these new regulations contain detailed sections on communications . like the previous regulations , the new regulations require that public entities and public accommodations furnish appropriate aids and services when necessary to ensure effective communication with an exception regarding fundamental alterations or undue burdens . more specifically , the title iii regulations state that public accommodations do not have to provide auxiliary aids if such measures would "fundamentally alter the nature of the goods , services , facilities , privileges , advantages , or accommodations being offered or would result in an undue burden , i.e. unlike the previous regulations , the new regulations specifically extend the requirement for effective communication to companions who are individuals with disabilities . doj noted in its comments on the new regulations that this was a particularly important issue . effective communication with companions is particularly critical in health care settings where miscommunication may lead to misdiagnosis and improper or delayed medical treatment . the department has encountered confusion and reluctance by medical care providers regarding the scope of their obligation with respect to such companions . a minor child may not be used to interpret except in an emergency situation . the ada purposely adopted a flexible standard regarding nondiscrimination requirements . this flexibility was seen as a means to balance the rights of the patients with disabilities the interests of treating physicians and hospitals . because of this flexibility , precise requirements are not readily enunciated . however , there are some exceptions including an emergency involving an imminent threat to safety or welfare , and where the individual with a disability specifically requests that the accompanying adult interpret and the accompanying adult agrees . therefore , whether or not a doctor or hospital must provide an interpreter for a hearing impaired individual depends on the particular circumstances surrounding the patient's care . exactly when a sign language interpreter may be required has been discussed in several judicial decisions .