gtlds . after the imposition of registration fees in 1995 , criticism of nsi's sole control over registration of the gtlds grew . in addition , there was an increase in trademark disputes arising out of the enormous growth of registrations in the .com domain . there also was concern that the role played by iana lacked a legal foundation and required more permanence to ensure the stability of the internet and the domain name system . these concerns prompted actions both in the united states and internationally . an international ad hoc committee ( iahc ) , a coalition of individuals representing various constituencies , released a proposal for the administration and management of gtlds on february 4 , 1997 . the proposal recommended that seven new gtlds be created and that additional registrars be selected to compete with each other in the granting of registration services for all new second level domain names . to assess whether the iahc proposal should be supported by the u.s. government , the executive branch created an interagency group to address the domain name issue and assigned lead responsibility to the national telecommunications and information administration ( ntia ) of the department of commerce ( doc ) . on june 5 , 1998 , doc issued a final statement of policy , "management of internet names and addresses. called the white paper , the statement indicated that the u.s. government was prepared to recognize and enter into agreement with "a new not - for - profit corporation formed by private sector internet stakeholders to administer policy for the internet name and address system. in deciding upon an entity with which to enter such an agreement , the u.s. government would assess whether the new system ensured stability , competition , private and bottom - up coordination , and fair representation of the internet community as a whole . the white paper endorsed a process whereby the divergent interests of the internet community would come together and decide how internet names and addresses would be managed and administered . accordingly , internet constituencies from around the world held a series of meetings during the summer of 1998 to discuss how the new corporation might be constituted and structured . meanwhile , iana , in collaboration with nsi , released a proposed set of bylaws and articles of incorporation . the proposed new corporation was called the internet corporation for assigned names and numbers ( icann ) . after five iterations , the final version of icann's bylaws and articles of incorporation were submitted to the department of commerce on october 2 , 1998 . on november 25 , 1998 , doc and icann signed an official memorandum of understanding ( mou ) , whereby doc and icann agreed to jointly design , develop , and test the mechanisms , methods , and procedures necessary to transition management responsibility for dns functions — including iana — to a private - sector not - for - profit entity . on september 17 , 2003 , icann and the department of commerce agreed to extend their mou until september 30 , 2006 . the mou specified transition tasks which icann agreed to address .