each activity is discussed below . although members of congress have broadly supported the role of the federal government in environmental education on a bipartisan basis , there has been continuing controversy over its role in the classroom . there appears to be general consensus that educating students in the natural and social sciences to examine the potential impacts of human behavior on the environment is appropriate for instruction . however , some critics argue that certain textbooks and curricula misinform students by advocating specific measures to address environmental problems , or by presenting unbalanced or scientifically inaccurate data . in response , epa has issued guidelines specifying that the environmental education grants it awards cannot be used for projects that would recommend a specific course of action or advocate a particular viewpoint , and that activities must be based on "objective and scientifically sound information" to be eligible for funding . however , the national environmental education act does not include requirements to insure that activities funded by epa adhere to these guidelines . whether to include such requirements in federal statute has been an issue . interest in the federal government's role in environmental education has become broader in response to public desire for better understanding of complex environmental issues affecting human health , sustainability of natural resources , biological diversity , and other societal objectives . the complexity of such issues , and the ability of schools to address them , have motivated some educators to question whether epa or other federal agencies should play a more prominent role in environmental education . in the 110 th congress , at least two bills would broadly address the federal role in environmental education . as introduced on august 2 , 2007 , the no child left inside act of 2007 ( s. 1981 ) would expand the federal role in environmental education by creating an office of environmental education within the department of education to administer new grant programs intended to supplement epa's existing program . as passed by the house on september 18 , 2008 , the no child left inside act of 2008 ( h.r . 3036 ) would directly amend the national environmental education act of 1990 for a similar purpose of authorizing a new grant program within the department of education to supplement epa's existing efforts . this new grant program would differ from epa's current program by focusing more on the outcome of environmental education in terms of achieving academic standards and demonstrating environmental literacy . three amendments to the bill were agreed to in house floor debate that would expand the eligibility of recipients of the new grants to include municipalities , to make instruction in environmental justice issues an eligible use of grant funds , and to specify the eligibility of activities that involve partnering with state and local park and recreation departments . in addition to creating a new role for the department of education , h.r .