50 , winter 1998 , pp . it is an integral part of the american system of checks and balances . underlying the legislature's ability to oversee the executive branch are democratic principles as well as practical purposes . john stuart mill , the british utilitarian philosopher , insisted that oversight was the key feature of a meaningful representative body: "the proper office of a representative assembly is to watch and control the government. as a young scholar and future president , woodrow wilson — in his 1885 treatise , congressional government — equated oversight with lawmaking , which was usually seen as the supreme function of a legislature . he wrote , "quite as important as legislation is vigilant oversight of administration. the philosophical underpinning for oversight is the constitution's system of checks and balances among the legislative , executive , and judicial branches . james madison , known as the "father of the constitution," described the system in federalist no . 51 as establishing "subordinate distributions of power , where the constant aim is to divide and arrange the several offices in such a manner that each may be a check on the other. oversight , as an outgrowth of this principle , ideally serves a number of overlapping objectives and purposes: improve the efficiency , economy , and effectiveness of governmental operations ; evaluate programs and performance ; detect and prevent poor administration , waste , abuse , arbitrary and capricious behavior , or illegal and unconstitutional conduct ; protect civil liberties and constitutional rights ; inform the general public and ensure that executive policies reflect the public interest ; gather information to develop new legislative proposals or to amend existing statutes ; ensure administrative compliance with legislative intent ; and prevent executive encroachment on legislative authority and prerogatives . in sum , oversight is a way for congress to check on , and check , the executive branch . oversight occurs through a wide variety of congressional activities and avenues . some of the most publicized are the comparatively rare investigations by select committees into major scandals or into executive branch operations gone awry . cases in point are temporary select committee inquiries into: homeland security matters following the terrorist attacks on september 11 , 2001 ; china's acquisition of u.s. nuclear weapons information , in 1999 ; the iran - contra affair , in 1987 ; intelligence agency abuses , in 1975-1976 , and "watergate," in 1973-1974 . the precedent for this kind of oversight actually goes back two centuries: in 1792 , a special house committee investigated the ignominious defeat of an army force by confederated indian tribes . by comparison to these select panel investigations , other congressional inquiries in recent congresses — into intelligence information and its sharing among federal agencies prior to the 9 / 11 attacks , u.s. intelligence about weapons of mass destruction before the invasion of iraq , whitewater , access to federal bureau of investigation files , and campaign financing — have relied for the most part on standing committees . the impeachment proceedings against president clinton in 1998 in the house and in 1999 in the senate also generated considerable oversight .