assistance . although the state department's early march 2002 international narcotics control strategy report mentioned that mexico was a major supplier of heroin,methamphetamine , and marijuana and the transit point for more than one - half of the cocaine sold in the unitedstates , it noted that mexico's counter - narcoticsefforts had been impressive and had resulted in tangible successes against the three major drug cartels in thecountry . 10 ) in the senate . 1646 establishes new drug certification and designation procedures in section 706 . thissection requires the president to make areport , not later than september 15 of each year , identifying the major drug transit or major illicit drug producingcountries . at the same time the president isrequired to designate any of the named countries that has "failed demonstrably," during the previous 12 months , tomake substantial efforts to adhere tointernational counter - narcotics agreements ( defined in the legislation ) and to take other identified counter - narcoticsmeasures . in keeping with this approach , the joint explanatory statement of the committee of conferenceindicates that managers believe that thepresident should direct u.s. executive directors in multilateral development banks to vote against loans forcountries failing to qualify for assistance under eitherthe old or the new procedures . on october 11 , 2000 , the senate agreed to s.res . 366 ,introduced by senator hutchison , thatwelcomed the constitutional transition in mexico and expressed the sense of the senate that a one - year waiver ofthe drug certification requirement is warranted inorder for incoming new governments in both countries to develop more effective and cooperative counter - narcoticsprograms . in the period leading up to the deadline of march 1 , 2001 , when president bush would be required to certify thatmexico and other drug producing or drug transitcountries had cooperated fully with the united states in drug control efforts , there were a number of congressionalefforts to modify or suspend the longstandingdrug certification requirements . in early january 2001 , senator gramm was quoted as saying , following a congressional delegation trip to mexico and meetings with mexican president fox , thatmembers of the delegation would work to eliminate the drug certification requirement and that he believed presidentbush wanted to eliminate the requirement aswell . in late january 2001 , senators dodd , mccain , hollings , and hagel introduced s. 219 , to suspend the existing drug certification process for allcountries for the two fiscal years following enactment , unless the president determined that the certification of oneor more countries would advance u.s. drugcontrol goals . the measure specifies that the certification requirements would be suspended for fiscal years 2001and 2002 if enacted on or before february 28,2001 . finding that the annual certification process does not foster effective bilateral or multilateral cooperation withthe united states , the bill urges the presidentto take advantage of the period of suspension to convene a conference of drug producing , transit , and consumingcountries to develop an effective multilateralstrategy , and to transmit to congress the necessary legislation to implement a new strategy .