kent. the senate agreed to a motion to dismiss the articles of impeachment against former judge kent on july 22 , 2009 . authority to remove the president , vice president , and federal civil officers by impeachment has been placed , by constitutional mandate , in the hands of the legislative branch of the united states government . although rooted in the soil of english impeachment experience , the american impeachment system differs from its english forebear in some significant respects . recorded incidents of english impeachments may begin as early as 1376 , and one source would place the first in 1283 . a more fixed procedure appears to have begun in 1399 , with the passage of the statute of i henry iv , c. 14 . whichever date one chooses , it is clear that the english practice took root well before the colonial beginnings of the united states . it ceased to be used in england at about the time that it became part of the american system of government . the last two impeachments in england appear to have been those of warren hastings in 1787 and of lord melville in 1805 . the english system permitted any person to be impeached by the house of commons for any crime or misdemeanor , whether the alleged offender was a peer or a commoner . unlike the british system , which permitted penal sanctions to attach upon conviction of impeachment , the american system is designed to be remedial in function . despite surface similarities to a criminal trial , the judgments which may be rendered upon conviction of an article of impeachment in the american system are limited to removal from office and disqualification from holding further offices of public trust . thus , the american system seems more designed to protect the public interest than to punish the person impeached . nevertheless , much of the procedure and practice involved in this country's application of its impeachment process draws guidance and support from british precedents . the american impeachment process , a constitutionally based remedy , provides a legislative mechanism for investigating and trying allegations of some forms of serious misconduct on the part of the president , vice president , and "civil officers of the united states. this mechanism has been used in cases involving judges , presidents , and certain senior members of the executive branch . it has been found not to apply to senators , and , although a parallel case does not exist as to members of the house of representatives , it seems likely that , on similar lines of reasoning , it would also be found inapplicable to them . the "civil officer" language is not defined in the constitution , and its outer limits are still somewhat unclear . it has been used to reach cabinet level officials . it may be argued that it should be regarded as reaching anyone whose appointment to an office of public trust must be in compliance with the appointments clause of the constitution . private citizens are not vulnerable to impeachment .