that is true . we have a medical care program for the life of our beneficiaries , and it is pretty well defined in thelaw . that easily gets interpreted to , or reinterpreted into , free medical care for the rest of your life . that is a pretty easy transition for people to make in their thinking , and it is pervasive . we spendan incredible amount of effort trying to reeducate people that that is not their benefit . ( 46 ) in an effort to control this growth in costs , it has been reported that the department ofdefense is considering raising out - of - pocket costs for many of its beneficiaries: ...[d]efense officials want annual enrollment fees for tricare prime , the military'smanaged - care plan , to more than triple by october 2008 for working - age retired officers . they would go from $230 for an individual - and $460 for family coverage - to $750 and$1,500 , respectively . the fees would double - to $450 and $900 , respectively - for under - 65enlisted retirees . retirees who use tricare standard , the military's traditional fee - for - servicehealth insurance , would also see their annual deductibles raised . they also would pay - forthe first time - an annual enrollment fee . beyond 2008 , all tricare fees and co - paymentswould be indexed to medical inflation... . in october , the congressional budget officereleased an updated report on "the long - term implications of current defense plans. itpresented the kind of kudzu - like cost projections for military health care that have persuadedthe joint chiefs of staff to back [assistant secretary of defense ( health affairs ) ]winkenwerder's plan . by 2024 , the office reported , military medical cost will grow "byabout 80 percent in real terms ... from $37 billion in 2006 to $66 billion. that's 37 percentof total budget growth expected across military operations , maintenance and personnelaccounts . and those represent 60 percent of the defense budget . other than the cost of warand contingency operations , the office reported , the greatest budget risk facing the militaryis health care costs . the report encouraged an increase in fees . but it suggested that a"transformational" set of higher fees and co - payments boost out - of - pocket user costs to thelevel at civilian hmos . ( 47 ) in addition , the co - payments for many pharmaceuticals , under the above proposal would alsobe increased . by comparison , the annual cost of blue cross / blue shield coverage ( for example , for a 47 year old individual or family of four , 80 percent coverage , $300 annual deductible , ppo ) is $3,168and $8,520 , respectively . ( 48 ) even with the above increases , military retirees would still paya fraction of the annual costs that many civilians pay . the military officers association of america ( moaa ) , a leading voice in the militarycoalition ( 49 ) announced,among its goals for 2006: oppose health care cost - shifting from the government to militarybeneficiaries .