sealed . independent counsel appointed may 31 , 1989 . no indictments returned . reportfiled august 23 , 1989 . cost of the investigation: $15,000 . larry d. thompson , appointed july 3 , 1995 to replace arlin m. adams ( appointedmarch 1 , 1990 ) . appointed to investigate allegations of criminal conspiracy to defraud the unitedstates ( involving favoritism and payments made to officials to influence the award of grants andsubsidies in programs of the department of housing and urban development during the reaganadministration ) by samuel r. pierce , former secretary of the department of housing and urbandevelopment , and others . the office of independent counsel announced on january 11 , 1995 that no indictment wouldbe sought for former secretary pierce in light of the secretary's admissions of mismanagement of,and responsibility for corruption at , the department of housing and urban development , his age,his deteriorating health , the lack of personal benefit to the secretary or his family , and conflictingevidence of intent . ( 34 ) the results of independent counsels' investigations with respect to other persons were as follows:carlos a. figueroa , consultant , pleaded guilty to making false statements with intent to defraud inrelation to monies paid to hud officials in exchange for influence in making hud grants formoderate rehabilitation subsidies ; joseph a. straus , former special assistant to hud secretarypierce from 1981 to 1983 , pleaded guilty to conspiracy and cover up in the receipt of payments froma private developer in return for helping the developer obtain federal monies for rehabilitationprojects ; j. michael queenan and ronald l. mahon , former hud officials "who obtained ... federalhud subsidies after they became developers," found guilty of bribery , conspiracy to commit briberyand money laundering ( the money laundering charges were dismissed by the judge notwithstandingthe jury verdict ) ; catalina vasquez villalpando , united states treasurer from 1989 to january 20,1993 , pleaded guilty to obstruction of justice with respect to destruction of documents sought ininvestigation of former employer / firm and hud grants ; deborah gore dean , former executiveassistant to hud secretary pierce , was found guilty of conspiracy , receipt of illegal gratuities andperjury in relation to the favorable "allocat[ion of] hud moderate rehabilitation funds toconsultants or developers" who provided favors to family or political associates ; thomas demery,former hud assistant secretary for housing from 1986 to 1989 , pleaded guilty to the acceptanceof illegal gratuities and obstruction of justice in receipt of things of value from developers ; robertb .