such a case can be made . but should price stability be the sole goal of monetary policy ? proponents make that case based on five powerful strands of economic theory and empiricism , as well as one political argument . it is , perhaps , best to begin the case against a single goal for the federal reserve with the proposition that while the current monetary system does not have an explicit anchor such as would be provided by a fixed exchange rate or a legislated inflation target , it does have an implicit anchor . rates above 3% - 4% seem to bring on monetary tightening of the type that often leads to a cyclical downturn . thus , in practice , the adoption of an inflation target cannot be supported on the grounds that the fed has neglected to pursue the goal of price stability . the burden of proof should be on proponents to show that the fed's past performance could have been improved — or there is reason to believe that future performance could be improved — if a price stability regime had been in place . the case against an exclusive price stability goal can be subdivided into six parts . beginning in the late 1980s , a number of countries imposed a goal of price stability on their central banks . their experience will be used in the exposition to follow because it demonstrates that the manner in which the legislation is written in those countries has either compounded or simplified the technical problems noted below . mishkin and schmidt - hebbel identify 17 countries that currently use a goal of price stability ; in addition , the european central bank has such a goal . the american model of central banking has distinctive attributes . the u.s. congress delegates to a central bank its power to "coin money and regulate the value thereof. in doing so , it specifies a variety of goals that monetary policy should achieve that can be viewed as mutually inconsistent . this lack of goal independence is , however , arguably superficial since the federal reserve has long been allowed to pick and choose the one or ones on which it will place the greatest emphasis during any given time period . the federal reserve has also been given complete instrument independence in the sense that no constraints are placed on the monetary powers available to it to achieve its ends . the exercise of monetary policy is completely at the discretion of the federal reserve . a growing number of economists argue that a more desirable regime would be one in which the central bank is directed to achieve a single goal , price stability . while this regime would restrict the goal independence of the federal reserve , instrument independence would continue as it is now . most economists would agree that monetary policy has been highly successful in the past 25 years . proponents of a single price stability goal for monetary policy must contend with the time - honored adage "if it ain't broke , don't fix it.