rec . nature of contest — not disclosed by record . while a notice of contest was filed , the contestant failed to transmit the evidence taken in this matter to the clerk of the house . there was no evidence presented before the committee on elections and no briefs were filed . on february 9 , 1934 , the committee dismissed the contest even though its report noted that "the official returns in this contest disclose that the contestant had more than a 14,000 majority of the votes cast in the general election held november 8 , 1932. . disposition of the contest — h.res . 259 was reported from the committee on elections recommending that contestant shanahan was not entitled to a seat and that contestee beck was entitled to a seat . on february 24 , 1934 , the house passed the resolution ( 78 cong . rec . nature of contest — contestant reese , the regular republican candidate for congress in the 8 th district of mississippi , complained of mississippi election law infractions . specifically , he alleged that there had been a second candidate for congress on the ballot in the district who ran as a "republican," but who had no connection with the regular , national party ; and that there had been a failure to appoint any republican election officers or judges in the district "as mandated by the laws of the state of mississippi. disposition of the contest — contestant reese filed a letter with the house elections committee on may 6 , 1933 , withdrawing from the contest . the committee recommended the adoption of h.res . 261 , declaring that reese was not entitled to the seat and that ellzey was entitled to the seat . on february 24 , 1934 , the house adopted h.res . 261 ( 78 cong . rec . nature of the contest — contestee utterback was returned to the congress by a majority of 294 votes ( 34,520 to 34,226 ) . contestant brewster charged illegal or insufficient returns and registrations , and illegal and fraudulent marking of ballots . the governor of maine sent the vote tabulation to congress with a statement that utterback was "apparently elected. on the first day of the new congress , utterback was asked to step aside while the oath was collectively administered to the other members - elect ( 77 cong . rec . 71 , march 9 , 1933 ) . the elections committee majority noted that although there had been some election irregularities in some district precincts , it found that "these irregularities , however , are of long standing and were no different in the election under consideration than in preceding elections in which the contestant was a successful candidate for office. the contest involved 16 precincts and had been submitted to the supreme court of maine , which could render advisory opinions to the governor and council . the court advised that returns from two of the precincts should be thrown out for failure by the election officials to carry out certain statutory duties . consequently , contestee acquired a majority of 74 votes .