the requirements of h.res . 451 were continued in the rules packages for both the 111 th and the 112 th congresses . as part of the rules package ( h.res . 5 ) for the 113 th congress ( 2013-2014 ) , the house amended the code of conduct ( rule xxiii , clause 8 ( c ) ) to remove references to "spouses" and replace those references with the term "relative. for the purpose of the rule , relative is defined as an individual who is related to the member , delegate , or resident commissioner as father , mother , son , daughter , brother , sister , uncle , aunt , first cousin , nephew , niece , husband , wife , father - in - law , mother - in - law , son - in - law , daughter - in - law , brother - in - law , sister - in - law , stepfather , stepmother , stepson , stepdaughter , stepbrother , stepsister , half brother , half sister , grandson , or granddaughter . additionally , h.res . 5 required that copies of executed oaths ( or affirmations ) made by an officer or employee of the house be retained by the sergeant at arms , while oaths ( or affirmations ) made by members , delegates , or the resident commissioner continue to be retained by the clerk of the house . first adopted as part of the rules package ( h.res . 5 ) for the 114 th congress ( 2015-2016 ) , the house made two changes to rule xi , clause 3 , by adding a new paragraph at the end of the section on house ethics committee procedures that stated the committee may not take any action that would deny any person any right or protection provided under the constitution of the united states . 5 further amended rule xi , clause 3 ( a ) ( 6 ) ( b ) ( i ) to require that all new officers , employees , members , delegates , and the resident commissioner receive ethics training within 60 days of beginning their house service . previously , only new officers or employees were required to complete ethics training within their first 60 days of service . as part of the rules package ( h.res . 5 ) for the 115 th congress ( 2017-2018 ) , the house amended rule ii , clause 3 to authorize the sergeant at arms to impose a fine — $500 for a first offense and $2,500 for any subsequent offense — against a member , delegate , or resident commissioner for using electronic devices to take photographs , or record floor proceedings in violation of rule xvii , clause 5 . should a fine be imposed , the member has 30 calendar days or 5 legislative days ( whichever is later ) to appeal the fine to the committee on ethics . the committee then has 30 calendar days or 5 legislative days ( whichever is later ) to dismiss the fine or allow it to proceed , and report its action to the speaker of the house , the chief administrative officer ( cao ) , and the member involved .