so with men . if you would win a man to your cause , first convince him that you are his sincere friend . therein is a drop of honey that catches his heart , which , say what he will , is the great high - road to his reason , and which , when once gained , you will find but little trouble convincing his judgment of the justice of your cause , if indeed that cause really is a good one . how long should a member speak ? the answer to this fundamental question of speechwriting , like so many others , depends on a wide range of factors . audience analysis and occasion have been previously noted , but the habits and attitudes of the speaker must also be taken into consideration . the natural inclinations of the member must be examined . is the member a person of few words , or is he or she a good talker ? does the member stick to the text , or lay it aside to share anecdotes , personal reminiscences , or even humor , with the audience ? these and other related questions can be answered only through experience on the part of the congressional speechwriter . learning the member's style and preferences will result in a better product that communicates more effectively . theme , audience , time , place , occasion and purpose — once these are settled , the speechwriter's next concern is to gather ideas , facts , examples , illustrations , quotations , and humor , in short , whatever is needed to give substance , character , and interest to the speech . there is no shortcut for researching a speech , although a number of resources can speed the process . congressional speechwriters often consult the congressional research service first when preparing a draft statement or an address for a member . crs offers a range of speechwriting resources for the use of congressional staff , many of which are available from the crs home page , at http: / / www.crs.gov . to find this report and other speechwriting resources , go to the crs home page and click on the tab on the right , "reference desk" http: / / www.crs.gov / reference / general / reference.shtml . on the left side of the page you will find a link to "speechwriting & holidays / commemorative events" http: / / www.crs.gov / reference / general / speechwriting.shtml . this page provides links to commemorative speech materials , many of them focusing on major holidays , such as the fourth of july and labor day , and month - long celebrations like black history month and native american heritage month . information is provided on the history of and related facts about the holiday or celebration . the speechwriting page also accesses sources providing practical tips for writing a speech , quotations , the full text of selected speeches and united states historical documents and writing guides . other sources of information on public policy , reference resources , appropriations information , legal resources and many external links conveniently organized by topic are also available on the crs home page .