not included in p.l . 105-277 is senate bill language on metered - dose inhalers ( mdis ) , which are used to treat asthma andother chronic lung diseases . under the montreal protocol , the fda is required to phase out the use of chlorofluorocarbons ( cfcs ) in mdis and approve new devices that use a less environmentally damaging propellent compound . thesenatedirected fda to gather information on safe and effective non - cfc mdis , which meet patients needs , before phasingoutcfc devices . another senate provision that was not included in the final act is a requirement for country of origin labeling for freshproduce . instead , the bill directs the general accounting office ( gao ) to study the potential effects of mandatorycountryof origin labeling of fresh produce and submit a report to congress no later than 6 months after enactment of thisact . separately , p.l . 105-277 provides $11.35 million for fda buildings andfacilities . 105-277 maintains the fy1998 appropriation level of $34 million to fund tobacco outreach and enforcement activities,and also continues support for the president's food safety initiative ( fsi ) . currently , attention focuses on swapcontracts,which are the basis of a booming international market in off - exchange , or over - the - counter , derivatives . usda is responsible for many activities outsideof theagriculture budget function . hence , spending for usda is not synonymous with spending for farmers . usda net outlays ( after adjustment for offsetting receipts ) for the most recently completed fiscal year ( fy1997 ) were$52.5 billion . by far the largest outlay within the department , $35.9 billion ( 67% ) of total outlays in fy1997 , wasfor itsfood and nutrition programs , primarily the food stamp program ( the costliest of all usda programs ) , various childnutrition programs , and the women , infants and children ( wic ) program . total fy1997 outlays also included $8.9billion ( 17% ) for farm and foreign agricultural services . in response to these concerns , the fy1999 omnibus appropriations act ( p.l . 105-277 ) imposes a "restraint period" on thecftc , directing it not to issue or propose any new rule or regulation affecting swaps or "hybrid" financialinstrumentsbefore march 30 , 1999 . u.s. department of agriculture and related agenciesappropriations , budgetauthority ( $ in millions ) note : an item with an asterisk ( * ) represents the total amount of direct and guaranteed loans thatcan be made given therequested or appropriated loan subsidy level . only the subsidy level is included in the totals . ( 1 ) fy1998 enacted levels include supplemental spending and rescissions provided by the fy1998 emergencysupplemental appropriations act ( p.l . ( 2 ) the senate amendment which would provide $66 million to fund the president's food safety initiative is distributedamong the recipient agencies in this table: usda chief economist=$98,000 ; ers=$906,000 ; ars= $8.92 million ; csrees=$11.2 million ; fsis=$8.347 million ; fda= $37 million . within this mission area of usda are the programs fundedthrough thecommodity credit corporation ( eg , commodity support payments , the conservation reserve program , and certaintradeprograms ) , crop insurance , farm loans , and foreign food aid programs .