480 programs . no bonuses were awarded in fy2011 . a federally chartered public corporation operated by usda , the commodity credit corporation ( ccc ) , makes credit guarantees available to private financial institutions who finance the purchase of u.s. agricultural exports . under the gsm - 102 , the ccc guarantees repayment of credit made available to finance u.s. agricultural exports on credit terms of up to three years . exporters tallied $4.1 billion of agricultural exports under the gsm - 102 program in fy2011 . usda announced $5.4 billion in ccc guarantees for agricultural exports under the gsm - 102 program for fy2012 . the ccc also operates the facilities guarantee program ( fgp ) , which guarantees credit to u.s. banks that finance export sales of u.s. goods and services that are used to improve agricultural export - related facilities in emerging markets ( storage , processing , and handling facilities ) . two export market development programs , the market access program ( map ) and the foreign market development program ( fmdp ) , assist producer groups , associations , and firms with promotional and other activities . the united states is the world's leading supplier of food aid . it provides more than half of the global total . the united states provides food aid mainly through p.l . 480 , also known as the food for peace program . wheat and wheat flour are the main commodities provided as food aid , but rice and vegetable oils are also important in p.l . higher - value products are made available in special feeding programs . responsibility for implementing food aid programs is shared by usda and the u.s. agency for international development ( aid ) . 480 food aid is provided on a grant basis through title ii of the food for peace act of 2008 , the successor legislation of the agricultural trade and development assistance act of 1954 ( p.l . two other food aid programs are conducted under section 416 ( b ) of the agricultural act of 1949 and the food for progress act of 1985 . the former provides surplus ccc inventories , if available , as donations ; the latter provides concessional credit terms or commodity donations to support emerging democracies or countries making free market economic reforms . a recently enacted food aid program , the mcgovern - dole school food for education program , finances school feeding and child nutrition projects in poor countries . they are a broader measure of support than direct government spending alone . the percentage pse measures support in relation to gross farm receipts . as a percent of gross farm receipts , the pse for the united states is 7% in 2010 , the third - lowest among oecd countries ( figure 24 , table 24 ) . oecd attributes a decrease of 3% ( over 2009 ) in the pse expected for the united states for 2010 to a decrease in market price support for dairy . over a longer period , the trend in producer support in the united states has been downward , dropping from a pse of 22% in 1986-1988 to 7% in 2010 .