table 1 . status of dot appropriations,fy199 . one of the major challenges facing appropriators continues to be the allocationof funds for the u.s. department of transportation among numerous competingnational interests . competition for these funds stems from various transportationinterests , and from the modal administrations themselves seeking portions of the"transportation pie. monies have been allocated for a diverse array of purposes , forexample , to pay for the expenses of the u.s. coast guard , to improve safety acrossthe transportation system , and to help finance various infrastructure needs . in thedot and related agencies appropriations act , monies are also provided to supportthe national transportation safety board , and the surface transportation board ( stb ) , and several other transportation - related agencies . ( 2 ) the perennial question of priorities surrounds the appropriations process . throughout its budget request , the dot continues to emphasize several prioritiesincluding: safety , infrastructure , innovative financing , environmental enhancement,technology , and national security . much of the appropriations process must take place within the newly enacted framework of the transportation equity act for the 21st century ( tea - 21 ) , signedinto law on june 9 , 1998 ( p.l . the act , whichauthorizes appropriations for key transportation programs through the fiscal year2003 , emphasizes certain programs and de - emphasizes others . the general sense ofcongress appears to be that , although transportation trust funds are not sacrosanct,proceeds from the gasoline tax must be targeted towards the maintenance of the vastu.s . highway and transit network , and not viewed as a source of revenue for thegeneral treasury . although attempts to move highway and transit programs"off - budget" were unsuccessful , congress did insert language within tea - 21toprotect specific funding by creating "fire walls" around programs . in addition tospending ceilings , the fire walls effectively create floors . the creation of thesedevices emerged as a point of contention between authorizers and appropriators . crs issue brief ib97030 . amtrak and the 105th congress , by stephen j thompson . crs issue brief ib97029 . supplemental appropriations and rescissions for fy1997 , coordinated by [author name scrubbed] . crs report 98-749 ( pdf ) e , the transportation equity act for the 21st century ( tea - 21 ) and the federal budget , by [author name scrubbed] , september 4 , 1998 . crs report 98-593e . airport improvement program: airport finance issues for congress , by [author name scrubbed] crs report 96-67e . the surface transportation board ( stb ) : an overview and selected public policy issues , by stephen j thompson . crs report 96-901 . automobile air bags: new issues / new research , by [author name scrubbed] . crs report 97-271 . federal traffic safety programs and grants: issues and options for reauthorization , by [author name scrubbed] and brad a. trullinger . crs report 97-516e . istea reauthorization: highwway related legislative proposals in the 105th congress , 1st session , by [author name scrubbed] . crs report 98-221e . istea reauthorization: highwway related legislative proposals in the 105th congress , 2nd session , by [author name scrubbed] . crs report 96-803 .