with regard to issue and express advocacy , h.r . the attendant practical implications aresignificant . if a communication is deemed toconstitute "express advocacy," it will be subject to the disclosure requirements , source restrictions , and contributionlimits set forth in feca . ( 2 ) on the other hand,if a communication is deemed to be "issue advocacy," it cannot be constitutionally subject to any regulation and,therefore , may be funded with unregulated or"soft money. in the 1976 landmark decision , buckley v. valeo , ( 3 ) the supreme court provided the genesis for the concept of issue and express advocacy communications . in buckley , the court evaluated the constitutionality of provisions of the federal election campaign act ( feca ) that applied to expenditures "relative to a clearlyidentified candidate" and "for the purpose of influencing an election. the court found that such provisions did notprovide a sufficiently precise description ofwhat conduct was regulated and what conduct was not regulated , in violation of first amendment "void forvagueness" jurisprudence . furthermore , the courtwas concerned , under the overbreadth doctrine , that the statute could encompass not only communications with anelectoral connection , but could encompassconstitutionally protected issue - based speech as well . in order to avoid these vagueness and overbreadth problems , the court held that the government's regulatory power under feca would be construed to reach onlythose funds spent for communications that "include express words of advocacy of the election or defeat" of a clearlyidentified candidate . hence , the buckley court began to distinguish between communications that expressly advocate the election or defeat of a clearlyidentified candidate and those communications thatadvocate a position on an issue . the court found that the latter type of communication is constitutionally protectedfirst amendment speech and that only"express advocacy" speech could be subject to regulation . ( 4 ) further , in animportant footnote , the court provided some guidance as to how to determine whethera communication is "express advocacy" or "issue advocacy. that is , the court stated that its construction of thesubject provisions of feca would only apply tocommunications that included words "such as," "vote for," "elect," "support," "cast your ballot for," "smith forcongress," "vote against," "defeat," or "reject. ( 5 ) these terms are often referred to as the "magic words," which many lower courts have ruled are required , under buckley , in order for a communication toconstitute express advocacy . in the 1986 decision of federal election commission v. massachusetts citizens for life , inc. , ( mcfl ) , the supreme court continued to distinguish between issueand express advocacy , holding that an expenditure must constitute express advocacy in order to be subject to thefederal election campaign act ( feca ) prohibition against corporations using treasury funds to make an expenditure "in connection with" any federalelection . ( 6 ) in mcfl the court ruled that apublication urging voters to vote for "pro - life" candidates , while also identifying and providing photographs ofcertain candidates who fit that description , couldnot be regarded as a "mere discussion of public issues that by their nature raise the names of certain politicians.