, in state court . in pilot life , the court found that erisa preempted a participant's claim for damages because the claim constituted an alternative remedy outside the limited scope of remedies congress provided for in erisa . the court distinguished the illinois statute from the remedy sought in pilot life and other cases , finding that the illinois statute merely prescribes "a state regulatory scheme that provides no new cause of action under state law and authorizes no new form of ultimate relief. the court also rejected rush's argument that independent review was an "alternative scheme of arbitral adjudication," and thus in conflict with congress' intent to confine dispute resolution under erisa to the courts . in dismissing rush's argument , the court noted that the state scheme was significantly different from arbitration , and was actually closer to a "mandate for [a] second opinion" rather than arbitration . in aetna health inc. v. davila , a participant and a beneficiary of erisa - regulated employee benefit plans suffered injuries allegedly arising from plan administrators' decisions not to provide coverage for medication and an extended hospital stay recommended by the respondents' treating physicians . rather than appealing the decision , asking a court for a preliminary injunction , or purchasing treatment and seeking reimbursement , one respondent took an alternative medication from which he allegedly suffered a severe reaction , and the other respondent experienced postsurgery complications after being discharged . the respondents sued their plan administrators for failure to exercise ordinary care in the handling of coverage decisions in violation of a duty imposed by the thcla . the petitioners removed the cases to federal district court arguing that the respondents' causes of action were completely preempted by section 502 ( a ) of erisa . the district court agreed , and the respondents appealed . the fifth circuit consolidated their cases along with several others , and found that the respondents' claims under the thcla were not preempted by erisa . the supreme court granted certiorari and held that the respondents' claims under the thcla were completely preempted by section 502 ( a ) ( 1 ) ( b ) and should be removed to federal court . the court determined that if an individual brings suit complaining of a denial of coverage for medical care where the individual is entitled to such coverage only because of the terms of an erisa - regulated employee benefit plan , and where no legal duty ( state or federal ) independent of erisa is violated , the suit falls within the scope of section 502 ( a ) ( 1 ) ( b ) . in davila , the court found that the duty imposed by the thcla on managed care entities to "exercise ordinary care when making health care treatment decisions" did not arise independent of erisa or the plan terms in the respondents' cases . the respondents brought suit to rectify a wrongful denial of benefits promised under erisa - regulated plans , not to remedy a violation of a legal duty independent of erisa .