emissions trading . table 2 . u.s. baseline year greenhouse gas emissions source: epa , inventory of u.s. greenhouse gas emissions and sinks: 1990 - 2001 ) april 2003 , epa 430r03004 . the emissions baselines shown in table 2 are not immutable . each annual report includes updated estimates based on methodological and data revisions,although such changes are usually small . revisions are discussed at some length ineach report . the criteria for calculating emissions agreed upon by the conference ofparties hinge on both current technical knowledge and policy judgments . newtechnical information can change factors , for example concerning calculation ofgreenhouse gas equivalents ; and policy judgments can be adjusted , for exampleconcerning the time frame for calculating effects . in addition , a few technical issuesremain unresolved , for example in assigning emissions from fuels burned ininternational travel . however , any changes tend to be modest , seldom affecting totalsmuch more than plus or minus 1% , except for sequestration figures , which have beensubject to larger changes . ( 14 ) besides actual quantities of emissions , an alternative measure of a nation's contribution to global warming is "greenhouse gas intensity of the economy" - - thatis , emissions per unit of gross domestic product ( gdp ) . in effect , this measurefocuses on the efficiency of the economy in terms of greenhouse gas emissions: themore efficient , the fewer emissions per dollar of economic output and thus the lowerthe "greenhouse gas intensity. for the united states , greenhouse gas intensity hasbeen declining since at least the 1980s ; for the 1990s , the decline in intensity wasabout 10% , based on net emissions ( 15 ) ( see table 3 ) . projecting greenhouse gas emissions involves modeling the nation's economicgrowth and activity , with special attention to variables affecting fossil fuelcombustion . the modeling also depends on assumptions about energy policydirections . if reducing emissions becomes a goal , then projections become subject to the outcome of unresolved issues in how the emissions reductions goals might bemet . for example , the major source of co 2 emissions , fossil fuel combustion , is influenced by overall economic activity and growth as well as by energy policydecisions such as development of non - carbon based substitutes , the rate of adoptionof energy efficient technologies , and the retirement rate of nuclear facilities , amongothers . these policy factors are difficult to predict in the absence of a concreteclimate change policy . ( 16 ) the climate change planproposed by president bush infebruary 2002 provides some new policy directions , but many elements depend oncongressional action ( eg , for funding ) or voluntary private sector initiatives , makingprojections of their impact problematic . table 3 . u.s. greenhouse gas intensity ( 1990-2001 ) source: table 1 ; economic report of the president , february 2003 , table b - 2 ; crscalculations . under the unfccc , the united states committed to the voluntary goal of holdinggreenhouse gas emissions at the end of the 1990s to their 1990 levels . if the united stateshad met this goal , its greenhouse gas emissions for 2000 would have been 1,675 mmtce . however , u.s. emissions in 2000 were 1,921 mmtce ( not counting sinks ) .