notes a . these figures represent current year dollars , exclude permanent budget authoritiesand contract authority , and reflect subsequent rescissions and transfers . a2: administration defense plan , february 1998 ( budget authority , current year dollars in billions ) source: office of management and budget , historical tables: budget of the united states government , fy1999 , february 1998 ; congressional budget office . a3: ballistic missile defense funding , fy1999 ( millions of dollars ) sources: department of defense , "rdt&e programs ( r - 1 ) : department of defense budget forfy1999," feb. 1998 ; department of defense , "program acquisition costs by weapon system:department of defense budget for fy1999," feb. 1998 ; s.rept . 105-532 .. congressional record , may 14 , 1998 , p. s4853 . congressional record , may 21 , 1998,p . a4: congressional action on major weapons programs: fy1999authorization ( amounts in millions of dollars ) * notes : all amounts exclude initial spares and military construction . sealift ship procurement wasrequested in shipbuilding and conversion , navy , but hnsc , sasc , and sac provided it underrevolving funds in the national defense sealift fund . for ballistic missile defense , the militaryconstruction request is $17.2 million , which is often reported as part of the total elsewhere . guard andreserve equipment refers only to amounts provided in a separate account - - the amounts do not includeitems procured for guard and reserve forces in regular line items . a5: congressional action on major weapons programs:fy1999appropriations ( amounts in millions of dollars ) * notes : all amounts exclude initial spares and military construction . sealift ship procurement wasrequested in shipbuilding and conversion , navy , but hnsc , sasc , and sac provided it underrevolving funds in the national defense sealift fund . for ballistic missile defense , the militaryconstruction request is $17.2 million , which is often reported as part of the total elsewhere . guard andreserve equipment refers only to amounts provided in a separate account - - the amounts do not includeitems procured for guard and reserve forces in regular line items and do not include c - 130 aircraft . does not include emergency funding provided in the omnibus appropriations bill ( h.r . for emergency amounts , see table 6 , below . a6: defense - related supplemental appropriations in fy1999omnibus appropriations act ( h.r . 4328 ) ( millions ofdollars ) a7: congressional action on fy1999 defense authorization bill by title ( budget authority in billions of dollars ) * notes: the request reflects cbo scoring and is shown as reported in the house . senate amountshave been adjusted to be consistent with the structure of the request as reported in the house . totalsmay not add due to rounding . sources: h.rept . a8: congressional action on fy1999 defense appropriationsbill by title ( budget authority in billions of dollars ) * notes: totals may not add due to rounding . these data are not comparable with authorizationfigures in table a6 , because the structure of accounts differs - - the largest difference is that theauthorization bills include defense health funding in operation and maintenance , while theappropriations bills provide defense health funding in other dod programs . sources: h.rept .