members may vote in the house . members , delegates , and the resident commissioner have the right to vote in the committee of the whole . however , if the question is decided within the margin of votes cast by the delegates and the resident commissioner , the committee shall rise and the speaker shall put the question de novo ( as if new ) to the house . rule xviii , clause 6 ( e ) states that the "chair shall order a recorded vote on a request supported by at least 25 members , delegates , and the resident commissioner. thus , any member , delegate , or the resident commissioner may say , "i request a recorded vote," and , if 25 supporters ( the member who made the request can be part of the tally , too ) rise and are counted by the chair , the recorded vote will occur by electronic device . if few members are present in the chamber , a lawmaker who plans to request a recorded vote will usually say , "mr. [or madam] chair , i request a recorded vote and , pending that , i make a point of order that a quorum is not present. ( a quorum in the committee of the whole is 100 members , delegates , and the resident commissioner. ) assuming that the point of order is sustained , the statement prompts a quorum call , and the member who requested the recorded vote can ask 24 other colleagues to support his or her request as they come onto the floor . when the speaker or chair of the committee of the whole counts to determine sufficient support for yea and nay votes or recorded votes , the accuracy of the count is assumed and cannot be challenged . this assumption also applies to division votes and determining the presence of a quorum . under house rule xx , clause 8 , the speaker has the authority to postpone and cluster certain votes . for most questions , postponed votes occur within two legislative days . a vote to agree to the speaker's approval of the journal , however , is to occur within the same legislative day . under rule xx , clause 2 ( a ) , the minimum time for a vote by electronic device is 15 minutes in either the house or the committee of the whole . the 15-minute period is the minimum time allowed , rather than the maximum , for the conduct of a recorded vote . the chair has the discretion to hold the vote open longer . the voting period for some votes may be shorter than 15 minutes under certain circumstances . the speaker may reduce the voting time to not less than five minutes ( rule xx , clause 9 ) "on any question that follows another electronic vote or a report from the committee of the whole , if in the discretion of the speaker members would be afforded an adequate opportunity to vote. certain votes in the committee of the whole may also be reduced to not less than two minutes , as noted in rule xviii , clause 6 .