the pia is the worker's basic benefit before any adjustments are applied . the benefit formula applicable to a given worker is based on the individual's earliest eligibility year ( ely ) , that is , the year in which the worker first attains age 62 , becomes disabled , or dies . for workers whose ely is 2019 , the pia is determined as follows in table 1 . the averaging provision in the benefit formula tends to cause workers with short careers in social security - covered employment to have low aimes , even if they had high earnings in their noncovered career , similar to people who worked for low earnings in covered employment throughout their careers . this is because years of zero covered earnings are entered as zeros into the formula that averages the worker's earnings history over 35 years . for example , a person with 10 years in social security - covered employment would have an aime that reflects 25 years of zero earnings , even if that person worked for 25 years in a high - paying , noncovered career . consequently , for a worker whose aime is low because his or her career was split between covered and noncovered employment , the benefit formula replaces more of covered earnings at the 90% rate than if the worker had spent a full 35-year career in covered employment at the same earnings level . according to the social security administration ( ssa ) , as of december 2018 , nearly 1.9 million social security beneficiaries were affected by the wep ( table 4 ) . the overwhelming majority of those affected ( about 94% ) were retired workers . approximately 3% of all social security beneficiaries ( including disabled workers and dependent beneficiaries ) and 4% of all retired - worker beneficiaries were affected by the wep in december 2018 . of retired workers affected by the wep , approximately 58% were men ( table 5 ) . for data on the number and share of social security beneficiaries affected by the wep , by state , see table a - 1 and table a - 2 in the appendix , respectively . the wep was enacted in 1983 as part of major amendments ( p.l . 98-21 ) designed to shore up the financing of the social security program . the 40% wep formula factor was the result of a compromise between a house bill that would have substituted a 61% factor for the regular 90% factor and a senate proposal that would have substituted a 32% factor . the purpose of the 1983 provision was to remove an unintended advantage that the regular social security benefit formula provided to certain retired or disabled worker - beneficiaries who were also entitled to pension benefits based on earnings from jobs not subject to the social security payroll tax . the regular formula was intended to help workers who spent their lifetimes in low - paying jobs , by providing them with a benefit that replaces a higher proportion of their career - average earnings than the benefit provided to workers with high career - average earnings .