fisa has no such concern . the supreme court has agreed to consider the case . every six months , the attorney general must report on the use of fisa authority . recipients are the house and senate judiciary committees and the house and senate intelligence committees . in a manner consistent with the protection of national security , the transmission must provide: ( 1 ) the number of persons targeted under: ( a ) fisa electronic surveillance orders , ( b ) fisa physical search orders , ( c ) fisa pen register / trap and trace orders , ( d ) fisa tangible item orders , and ( e ) fisa acquisitions relating to u.s. persons overseas ; ( 2 ) the number of persons covered as lone wolf terrorists ; ( 3 ) the number of times the attorney general has authorized the use of fisa material in a criminal proceeding ; ( 4 ) a summary of the signification legal interpretations of the fisa court or the fisa court of review ; and ( 5 ) copies of the decisions , orders , and opinions of those courts . the foreign intelligence surveillance act ( fisa ) authorizes special court orders for several purposes: electronic surveillance , physical searches , installation and use of pen registers and trap and trace devices , and orders to disclose tangible items . it once authorized surveillance orders which targeted the communications of persons overseas . its replacement provisions for the review of orders directed at persons abroad expire on december 31 , 2017 . fisa insists that congress be informed as to the extent that its authority has been used and establishes a safe harbor for those who help carry out its orders . the foreign intelligence surveillance court ( the fisa court ) is a creature of fisa . the fisa court consists of eleven federal district court judges from throughout the country , designated by the chief justice of the united states . the individual members of the court receive and act upon fisa order applications . federal magistrate judges , designated by the chief justice , may also perform those functions with respect to pen register / trap and trace orders . members of the fisa court , sitting in panels , pass upon challenges associated with the execution of tangible item and overseas targeting orders . these panels also rule upon requests to modify or set aside gag orders issued in connection with the execution of tangible item orders . the government may appeal the denial of a fisa application to a foreign intelligence surveillance court of review made up of three federal judges designated by the chief justice . government access : the fisa electronic surveillance and physical search components use generally parallel procedures . both draw from their law enforcement counterparts , but with important differences .