no funds were appropriated . in several congresses since the 107 th , house and senate committees have approved bills to extend the act's srf program and increase authorization of appropriations for srf capitalization grants , but no legislation other than appropriations has been enacted until recently . issues debated in connection with these bills included extending srf assistance to help states and cities meet the estimated $298 billion in funding needs ; modifying the program to assist small and economically disadvantaged communities ; and enhancing the srf program to address a number of water quality priorities beyond traditional treatment plant construction , particularly the management of wet weather pollutant runoff from numerous sources , which is the leading cause of stream and lake impairment nationally . congress did enact certain changes to the srf provisions of the cwa in 2014 ( p.l . these amendments addressed several issues , including extending loan repayment terms from 20 years to 30 years , expanding the list of srf - eligible projects to include energy - and water - efficiency , increasing assistance to indian tribes , and imposing "buy american" requirements on srf recipients . however , the amendments did not address other long - standing or controversial issues , such as: authorization of appropriations for srf capitalization grants , which expired in fy1994 ; state - by - state allocation of capitalization grants ; and applicability of prevailing wage requirements under the davis - bacon act , which currently apply to use of srf monies . this legislation also includes provisions authorizing a five - year pilot program for a new type of financing , a water infrastructure finance and innovation act ( wifia ) program , authorizing federal loans and loan guarantees for wastewater and public water supply projects . this new program is intended to assist large water infrastructure projects , especially projects of regional and national significance , and to supplement but not replace other types of financial assistance , such as srfs . congress has recently focused extensively on reducing federal spending , making it a challenge for legislators to provide federal assistance for water infrastructure programs . although interest in meeting the nation's water infrastructure needs is strong and likely to continue , policy makers will balance proposals to assist local communities with policies to achieve greater fiscal discipline . unclear for now is how infrastructure programs will fare in these debates . title ii of p.l . 92-500 authorized grants to states for wastewater treatment plant construction under a program administered by the environmental protection agency ( epa ) . federal funds are provided through annual appropriations under a state - by - state allocation formula contained in the act ; the formula ( which has been modified several times since 1972 ) is based on states' financial needs for treatment plant construction and population . states used their allotments to make grants to cities to build or upgrade categories of wastewater treatment projects including treatment plants , related interceptor sewers , correction of infiltration / inflow of sewer lines , and sewer rehabilitation . amendments enacted in 1987 ( p.l . 100-4 ) initiated a new program to support , or capitalize , state water pollution control revolving funds ( srfs ) .