this requirement does not apply to the appropriations committee . however , the expectation that senators are prepared to invoke it may encourage committee chairs to schedule meetings sought by other committee members . scheduling meetings ; standing orders of the senate ; section 401 of s.res . 4 , 95 th congress when a committee or subcommittee schedules or cancels a meeting , it is to provide that information — including the time , place , and purpose of the meeting — for inclusion in the senate's computerized schedule information system . ( see public announcement , below. ) open meetings ; rule xxvi , paragraph 5 ( b ) in general , committee and subcommittee meetings , including hearings , are open to the public . for any committee or subcommittee meeting ( or a series of meetings on the same subject that may extend up to 14 calendar days ) , the committee or subcommittee is authorized to vote to close a meeting if it ( 1 ) involves national security information , ( 2 ) concerns committee personnel or staff management or procedure , ( 3 ) could invade personal privacy or damage someone's reputation or professional standing , ( 4 ) could reveal identities or damage operations relating to law enforcement activities , ( 5 ) could disclose certain kinds of confidential financial or commercial information , or ( 6 ) could divulge information that some law or regulation requires to be kept confidential . by agreeing , in open session , to a motion made ( and seconded ) to close the meeting to the public , the committee can go into closed session only to determine whether the subject of the meeting or the testimony at the hearing falls into any of the six specified categories . if it determines that this is the case , the committee can then decide by a second rollcall vote in open session to close the remainder of the meeting . presiding at committee meetings ; rule xxvi , paragraph 3 in the absence of the committee chair at any committee meeting , the next ranking member of the majority party shall preside . quorum at meeting ; rule xxvi , paragraph 7 ( a ) ( 1 ) a committee or subcommittee may set its own quorum requirement for transacting business at meetings so long as the quorum is not less than one - third of the membership . a committee can set a lesser quorum requirement for hearings , but a majority must be physically present to order a measure or matter reported ; see quorum at hearing and quorum for reporting , below . also , proxies cannot be used to constitute a quorum ; see proxy votin g , below . maintaining order ; rule xxvi , paragraph 5 ( d ) the committee chair is responsible for maintaining order at committee meetings and may close a meeting for that purpose until order is restored . proxy voting ; rule xxvi , paragraphs 7 ( a ) ( 3 ) and 7 ( c ) ( 1 ) a committee may adopt rules permitting proxy voting ( see proxy votes on reporting , below ) .