other bills — h.r . 928 and 2324 , whose earlier versions incurred objections from omb — have been reconciled and await chamber action . these proposals are designed to increase the igs' independence and powers . different versions have called for providing specifics on initial oig budget estimates to congress ; removing an ig only for "cause" ; setting a term of office for igs ; establishing a council of inspectors general for integrity and efficiency in statute ; revising the pay structure for igs ; allowing for ig subpoena power in any medium ; and granting law enforcement powers to qualified igs in dfes . other coordinative devices have been created administratively . statutory offices of inspector general have been authorized in 67 current federal establishments and entities , including all 15 cabinet departments ; major executive branch agencies ; independent regulatory commissions ; various government corporations and boards ; and five legislative branch agencies . all but nine of the oigs are directly and explicitly under the 1978 inspector general act . each office is headed by an inspector general , who is appointed in one of three ways: ( 1 ) 30 are nominated by the president and confirmed by the senate in "establishments," including all departments and the larger agencies under the ig act , plus the cia ( table 1 ) . ( 2 ) 36 are appointed by the head of the entity in 29 "designated federal entities" — usually smaller boards and commissions — and in seven other units , where the igs operate under separate authority: sigir , ondi , and five legislative agencies ( table 2 ) . ( 3 ) one ( in sigar ) is appointed by the president alone ( sec . initiatives in response to the 2005 gulf coast hurricanes arose to increase oig capacity and capabilities in overseeing the unprecedented recovery program . these include igs or deputies from affected agencies on a homeland security roundtable , chaired by the dhs ig ; membership on a hurricane katrina contract fraud task force , headed by the justice department ; an office in the dhs oig to oversee disaster assistance activities nationwide ; and additional funding for the oig in homeland security . in the 110 th congress , the igs in dod and in other relevant agencies have been charged with specific duties connected with combating waste , fraud , and abuse in wartime contracting ( p.l . a new ig has been instituted in the aoc , in the gao , and in the afghanistan reconstruction effort , while other legislative action requires that full - agency websites link to the separate oig "hotline" websites . separate recommendations have arisen in the recent past , such as consolidating dfe oigs under presidentially appointed igs or under a related establishment office ( gao - 02-575 ) . pending proposals in the 110 th congress include the following: requiring ig annual reviews to report on program effectiveness and efficiency ( h.r . 6639 ) ; and establishing igs for the judicial branch ( h.r . 785 and s. 461 ) and the washington metropolitan area transit authority ( h.r . the intelligence authorization act for fy2009 ( h.r .