appendix a . — in general . — except as provided in paragraph ( 2 ) , the amendment made by subsection ( a ) [enacting section 1801 ( a ) ( 1 ) ( c ) in bold italics above] shall cease to have effect on june 1 , 2015 . ( 2 ) exception. fisa has no such concern . fisa authorizes the collection of information about the activities of foreign powers and their agents , whether those activities are criminal or not . ecpa's only concern is crime . at common law , "eavesdroppers , or such as listen under walls or windows , or the eaves of a house , to hearken after discourse , and thereupon to frame slanderous and mischievous tales , are a common nuisance and presentable at the court - leet ; or are indictable at the sessions , and punishable by fine and finding of sureties for [their] good behavior. the court of review shall have jurisdiction to consider such petition and shall provide a written statement for the record of the reasons for a decision under this paragraph . ( 2 ) certiorari to the supreme court . — the government may file a petition for a writ of certiorari for review of a decision of the court of review issued under paragraph ( 1 ) . the record for such review shall be transmitted under seal to the supreme court of the united states , which shall have jurisdiction to review such decision . ( g ) construction . — except as provided in this section , nothing in this act shall be construed to require an application for a court order for an acquisition that is targeted in accordance with this section at a united states person reasonably believed to be located outside the united states . ( a ) jurisdiction and scope . — ( 1 ) jurisdiction . — the foreign intelligence surveillance court shall have jurisdiction to enter an order pursuant to subsection ( c ) . ( 2 ) scope . — no element of the intelligence community may intentionally target , for the purpose of acquiring foreign intelligence information , a united states person reasonably believed to be located outside the united states under circumstances in which the targeted united states person has a reasonable expectation of privacy and a warrant would be required if the acquisition were conducted inside the united states for law enforcement purposes , unless a judge of the foreign intelligence surveillance court has entered an order with respect to such targeted united states person or the attorney general has authorized an emergency acquisition pursuant to subsection ( c ) or ( d ) , respectively , or any other provision of this act . ( 3 ) limitations . — ( a ) moving or misidentified targets . — if a united states person targeted under this subsection is reasonably believed to be located in the united states during the effective period of an order issued pursuant to subsection ( c ) , an acquisition targeting such united states person under this section shall cease unless the targeted united states person is again reasonably believed to be located outside the united states during the effective period of such order .