these amendments were not enacted . ( 42 ) two amendments relating to children with disabilities were offered and accepted during house education and workforce committee markup of h.r . 4141 , 106th cong. , theelementary and secondary education act amendments . one amendment , offered by representativenorwood , concerned the discipline of a child with a disability who carries or possesses a weapon . the other amendment , offered by representatives talent , mcintosh and tancredo , concerned thediscipline of a child with a disability who knowingly possesses or uses illegal drugs at school orcommits an aggravated assault or battery at school . these amendments were not enacted . ( 43 ) legislation in the 108th congress . in the 108th congress , the idea reauthorization bills both included amendments that would change the current law relating to the discipline of children with disabilities . 1350 ,108th congress , passed the house on april 30 , 2003 . on may 13 , 2004 , the senate incorporated s. 1248 in h.r . 1350 and passed h.r . 1350 in lieu of s. 1248 . conferees have not yet been appointed . ( 44 ) both house and senate bills would keep the ability of school personnel to suspend a child with a disability for up to ten school days but they differ regarding other changes in placement . the housebill would delete many of the provisions in current law while the senate bill would make somerevisions . the house report states that " ( t ) he discipline improvements in the bill provide for auniform school discipline code and substantially reduce the confusion and complexity of the currentsystem. 1350 ( house ) , schoolpersonnel would be able to order a changein placement of a child with a disability who violates a code of student conduct to an appropriateinterim alternative educational setting selected so as to enable the child to continue to participate inthe general education curriculum and to progress toward iep goals for not more than 45 school days ( to the extent such alternative and such duration would be applied to children without disabilities ) .in addition , this action "may include consideration of unique circumstances on a case - by - case basis. 1350 ( house ) specifically states that this change in placement could last beyond45 school days if required by state law or regulation for the violation in question , to ensure the safetyand appropriate educational atmosphere in the schools . the senate report describes the senate changes regarding discipline as making the procedures "simpler , easier to administer , and more fair to all students. ( 46 ) the senate bill would change thecurrent law relating to interim alternative educational settings by adding a provision allowing schoolpersonnel to remove a student to an interim alternative educational setting for not more thanforty - five days , regardless of whether the behavior is determined to be a manifestation of a disability,where a child with a disability has committed serious bodily injury upon another person while atschool or at a school function under the jurisdiction of a state or local educational agency .