do satellites provide military applications for china ? have u.s. firms contributed intentionally or unintentionally to china'sdevelopment of ballistic missiles in ways that harmed u.s. national security , and what should be thegovernment's response to findings of such alleged transfers of u.s.technology ? ( 3 ) members were concerned about the prc'smodernization of its ballistic missiles . ( 4 ) there were also congressional concerns about the u.s. space industry ( satellite - makers as well as space launch businesses ) , aside from questions about china . ( 5 ) this crs report discusses security concerns , significant congressional and administration action , and a comprehensive chronology pertaining to satellite exports to china ( since 1988 underthe reagan administration ) . the events summarized below , based on open sources and interviews,pertain to various issues for u.s. foreign and security policy ( including that on china and weaponsnonproliferation ) : should congress exercise strong oversight of the administration's policy on satellite exports , including ensuring congressional review ? what are the benefits and costs of satellite exports to china for u.s. economicand security interests ? should the united states continue , change , or cease the policy in place sincethe reagan administration that has allowed exports of satellites to china ( for its launch and,increasingly , for its use ) ? should the presidential waiver ( of post - tiananmen sanctions ) for loral'schinasat - 8 have been issued during an ongoing criminal investigation into alleged assistance byloral and hughes to china's missile program ? are there adequate controls and monitoring on exports of u.s. - origin satellitesand / or satellite technology , and on technical exchanges with prc engineers that could contributeto china's programs on missiles or military satellites and other spacecraft ? should commercial space cooperation , especially allowing china to gain theeconomic benefits of satellite launches , be used as leverage in u.s. policy on weaponsnonproliferation ? should sanctions for missile proliferation be imposed on china's space launchcompany , china great wall industry corporation , and other companies , to improve china'snonproliferation practices ? should the united states negotiate a new space launch agreement with china,and did the country abide by the previous agreements ? members of congress were concerned about allegations that u.s. firms provided expertise tothe people's republic of china ( prc ) that could be used in its ballistic missile and space programsand that the clinton administration's policies on satellite exports facilitated legal or illegal transfersof military - related technology to china . the new york times reported in april 1998 that the justicedepartment began a criminal investigation into whether loral space and communications ltd. ( ofnew york ) , and hughes electronics corp. ( of los angeles ) violated export control laws . ( 2 ) the firmswere alleged to have shared their findings with china , without approval from the u.s. government,on the cause of a prc rocket's explosion while launching a u.s. - origin satellite in february 1996 . in sharing their conclusions , the companies allegedly provided expertise that china could use toimprove the accuracy and reliability of its ballistic missiles , including their guidance systems .