reorganization . during the presidential campaign , president - elect trump proposed to consolidate trade - related agencies and departments into one office called the "american desk" under the department of commerce . the general contours of the trump proposal appear to be reminiscent of president obama's call for reorganization authority to reorganize and consolidate , into one department , the trade - related functions of opic and five other federal entities into one department to streamline the federal government and make it more effective . the proposal , however , did not gain much traction in congress , largely due to concerns about its implications for the u.s. trade representative ( ustr ) and its u.s. trade negotiation and enforcement functions . other proposals offered by stakeholders include consolidating federal agencies focused on promoting international development through private sector tools ( such as opic , tda , and certain elements of usaid ) , and / or creating a "development finance agency. such proposals raise debates about whether reorganization would reduce costs and improve the effectiveness of trade policy programs , or undermine their effectiveness given the differing missions of federal trade agencies . privatization or termination . other possible options include privatizing or terminating opic , the feasibility of which previously has been analyzed . supporters of such options may argue that opic's self - sustaining nature is proof that there is no market failure ; that opic competes with or crowds out the private sector , which is more efficient and better suited than the federal government to support investments ; and that opic's activities impose potential costs and risks on u.s. taxpayers , since they are backed by the full faith and credit of the u.s. government . those in favor of opic may argue that the federal government plays a unique role in addressing market failures ; that opic's backing by the full faith and credit of the u.s. government may make certain transactions more commercially attractive or give opic leverage to guarantee repayment in a way that is not available to the private sector ; and that federal investment support is critical when there is a shortfall in private sector financing and insurance . internal oversight . opic's own internal oversight structure presents another area of interest . usaid's inspector general has legal authority to conduct reviews , investigations , and inspections of opic's operations and activities ,   while external auditors conduct audits of opic's financial statements and report findings to opic's board of directors . one possibility is establishing an opic - specific inspector general . some may support this approach given differences in opic's private sector financing focus and usaid's grant - making functions . opponents may assert that the current opic - usaid arrangement suffices or express concern about the additional resources a new inspector general could require . other possibilities include directing ex - im bank's inspector general to conduct opic oversight . some may support this on the basis that ex - im bank and opic offer some similar financing and insurance products , though others may express concern because of differences in the two agencies' missions and stakeholders .