cotton is the other major export . major trade partners include turkey , china , iran , and afghanistan . the agricultural sector employs about one - half of the labor force . however , only 7% of the land area is arable , and much is still devoted to cotton production , so tajikistan relies heavily on food imports . in 2011 , food prices greatly increased , fueled in part by increased tariffs imposed by uzbekistan on rail transit for food imports . one million or more tajiks — about one - half of the labor force — are labor migrants , and about 40% or more of the remaining population lives in poverty . remittances reportedly were $3.6 billion in 2012 , accounting for nearly one - half of tajikistan's gdp , making the country first in the world in terms of such dependency . the u.n. development program ( undp ) has reported that poverty and frequent electricity and gas cutoffs have contributed to the elimination of 70% - 80% of the forest cover in tajikistan since it gained independence . in mid - 2012 , tethys petroleum ltd. , a small canadian oil and gas exploration firm , announced that it had found substantial oil reserves in tajikistan's khatlon region , and in june 2013 , an agreement was signed by tethys , total ( france ) , and a subsidiary of the china national petroleum corporation ( cnpc ) for the development of the oilfield . gazprom also has announced finding added gas reserves in tajikistan . meeting with president rahmon in dushanbe in september 2013 , gazprom ceo aleksey miller reportedly stated that tajikistan would soon be able to supply its own domestic needs for gas . the construction of the roghun dam on the vakhsh river — which would nearly double tajikistan's electricity production — is a centerpiece of the country's economic development strategy . the government envisages that the hydroelectric power generation will provide for domestic needs — ending wintertime shortages — as well as serve as a source of export earnings . uzbekistan has opposed the building of the dam , with its planned large reservoir , on the grounds that the project may endanger its agricultural production and otherwise alter the environment . at tajikistan's request , the world bank in early 2010 launched an analysis of the economic and environmental impact of the dam . in september 2013 , the world bank stated that it would release the "first phase" of technical reports on the dam project . during the world bank analysis , tajikistan agreed to defer constructing the dam ( although uzbek and other observers allege that construction has continued ) . some observers have stated that by deferring construction , president rahmon has condemned the country to a longer period without adequate electricity in the winter and has increased discontent with his rule . the goal of the international community is for tajikistan and uzbekistan to negotiate a mutually acceptable solution , possibly involving a water - for - gas trade , similar to the soviet - era regional water - sharing arrangement .