what is a national emergency ? the president then took command of the forces organized to put down the rebellion . here was the beginning of a pattern of policy expression and implementation regarding emergency powers . congress legislated extraordinary or special authority for discretionary use by the president in a time of emergency . in issuing a proclamation , the chief executive notified congress that he was making use of this power and also apprised other affected parties of his emergency action . over the next 100 years , congress enacted various permanent and standby laws for responding largely to military , economic , and labor emergencies . during this span of years , however , the exercise of emergency powers by president abraham lincoln brought the first great dispute over the authority and discretion of the chief executive to engage in emergency actions . by the time of lincoln's inauguration ( march 4 , 1861 ) , seven states of the lower south had announced their secession from the union ; the confederate provisional government had been established ( february 4 , 1861 ) ; jefferson davis had been elected ( february 9 , 1861 ) and installed as president of the confederacy ( february 18 , 1861 ) ; and an army was being mobilized by the secessionists . lincoln had a little over two months to consider his course of action . when the new president assumed office , congress was not in session . for reasons of his own , lincoln delayed calling a special meeting of the legislature but soon ventured into its constitutionally designated policy sphere . on april 19 , he issued a proclamation establishing a blockade on the ports of the secessionist states , "a measure hitherto regarded as contrary to both the constitution and the law of nations except when the government was embroiled in a declared , foreign war. congress had not been given an opportunity to consider a declaration of war . the next day , the president ordered the addition of 19 vessels to the navy "for purposes of public defense. a short time later , the blockade was extended to the ports of virginia and north carolina . by a proclamation of may 3 , lincoln ordered that the regular army be enlarged by 22,714 men , that navy personnel be increased by 18,000 , and that 42,032 volunteers be accommodated for three - year terms of service . the directive antagonized many representatives and senators , because congress is specifically authorized by article i , section 8 , of the constitution "to raise and support armies. in his july message to the newly assembled congress , lincoln suggested , "these measures , whether strictly legal or not , were ventured upon under what appeared to be a popular and a public necessity , trusting then , as now , that congress would readily ratify them . it is believed," he wrote , "that nothing has been done beyond the constitutional competency of congress. congress subsequently did legislatively authorize , and thereby approve , the president's actions regarding his increasing armed forces personnel and would do the same later concerning some other questionable emergency actions .