states recommend projects for assistance . in fy2016 , the arc is funded at a level of $146 million , budgeted primarily for area development assistance , covering a range of community - based projects including basic infrastructure , business , and human development . historically , environmental projects have received about 5% of arc economic and human development funds . prior to the 1996 farm bill ( the federal agriculture improvement and reform act of 1996 , p.l . 104-127 ) , these usda grants and loans , as well as other usda rural development assistance to businesses , industries , and communities , were authorized as separate programs . eda provides project grants for construction of public facilities , including water and sewer systems , to alleviate unemployment and underemployment in economically distressed areas . development grants provide for infrastructure projects that foster industries and commercial businesses that provide long - term employment and are part of approved overall economic development programs in areas of lagging economic growth . economic development grants can be used for a wide range of purposes and frequently have a sewer or water supply element . in fy2016 , eda's public works grants are funded at $100 million . in historic terms , the largest federal program for wastewater treatment assistance is administered by epa under the clean water act . since 1973 congress has appropriated $94 billion in assistance under this act . fy2016 funding is $1.39 billion . funds are distributed to states under a statutory allocation formula and are used to assist qualified projects on a priority list that is determined by individual states . prior to 1989 , states used their allotments to make grants to cities and other localities . usda makes either direct loans to applicants or guarantees up to 90% of loans made by third - party lenders . most very small systems have no credit history and have never raised capital in financial markets . small to medium systems ( serving 3,301 to 50,000 persons ) are institutionally more capable than smaller systems , yet they also face financing challenges . rural and non - rural communities compete for funding ; rural areas have no special priority , nor are states required to reserve any specific percentage for projects in rural areas . some small communities and states with large rural populations have had problems with the cwa loan program . many small towns did not participate in the previous grants program and are more likely to require major projects to achieve compliance with the law . yet many have limited financial , technical , and legal resources and have encountered difficulties in qualifying for and repaying loans . they often lack an industrial tax base or opportunities for economies of scale and thus face the prospect of very high per capita user fees to repay a loan for the full cost of sewage treatment projects . still , small communities have been participating in the clean water srf program: an estimated 23% of the $42 billion in srf assistance since 1989 ( representing 67% of loans made by states ) has gone to communities with less than 10,000 in population .