annual . this publication can be used to locate organizations by subject area . when standard internship directories contain no entries for internships in a specific field , relevant groups listed in this publication may be able to suggest contacts for internship opportunities . this work can be found in many libraries in print or in electronic form in the associations unlimited subscription database . insider's guide to political internships: what to do once you're in the door . boulder , co: westview press , 2002 . this publication provides advice on "surviving and thriving" in political internships , including on capitol hill and in congressional district offices . vault guide to top internships . new york , ny: vault . annual . this directory profiles internship programs at more than 100 companies , organizations and government agencies . some of this information is also available on the internship portion of the vault website at http: / / www.vault.com / find_an_internship.aspx . washington internships : philadelphia , pa: university of pennsylvania press , 2009 . this book provides information on how to become a valued intern and enhance networking skills . insider tips are given on such things as how to deal with work related tasks and locating summer housing . encyclopedia of associations . farmington hills , mi: gale cengage . the internet resources provided are not exhaustive . applying for an internship or fellowship is similar to applying for admission to a college or university . the application process takes time and effort , often requiring essays and interviews . in pursuit of success , applicants typically begin their search early and explore what best suits their interests and career goals . application deadlines and program durations vary from agency to agency . applicants often apply to more than one program because competition is stiff , with the number of applicants often far exceeding the number of positions available . opportunities are generally available in the spring , summer , and fall , with summer positions being the most popular and competitive . the terms fellowship and internship are sometimes used interchangeably in the names of specific programs . fellowships are generally intended for persons with advanced degrees or substantial professional experience and are usually salaried positions lasting nine months to a year or more . internships , which are either salaried or volunteer short - term arrangements , usually require relatively little experience and are often filled by students . although they are sometimes confused with interns , congressional pages are high school students who serve congress as messengers . the house page program ceased operations in august 2011 , while the senate still employs pages . for more information on the senate page program , see its website at https: / / www.senate.gov / reference / reference_index_subjects / pages / vrd.htm . the duties , responsibilities , and salaries ( if any ) of interns and fellows vary from program to program . most program responsibilities are substantive in nature and often involve challenging projects . they may range from conducting legislative research for a congressional office to biomedical research at the national institutes of health .