the 31 dams ( i.e. , hydroelectric projects ) in the federal columbia river power system ( fcrps ) produce about 40% of the power in the pacific northwest , and the reservoirs behind these dams create a major navigable waterway as far inland as lewiston , idaho . while the design of some dams is described as "fish - friendly" ( eg , wells dam on the columbia river in washington ) , poorly designed dams can physically bar or impede anadromous fish migrations to and from the sea , kill juveniles as they pass through a dam's turbines , and expose fish to potentially harmful gas supersaturation . if delayed by dams during migration , both juvenile and adult salmon can be exposed to increased predation , to an increased risk of bacterial infections , and to higher temperatures which cause stress and sometimes death . decreased river flow can also harm juveniles by delaying their downstream migration . changing fcrps operations to benefit salmon is controversial , in part because costs of dam and power generation changes are passed along to power customers through increased rates . the goal of fish hatcheries , operated along the pacific coast since 1877 , has been the augmentation of natural salmonid populations and the production of fish to replace those lost where dams completely blocked fish passage and destroyed native salmonid populations . today , at least 80% of the salmon caught commercially in the pacific northwest and northern california each year come from hatcheries . in the 1970s , however , scientists discovered that some hatchery practices reduced genetic diversity in fish populations . the mixing of populations by hatcheries and transplantation has generally resulted in decreased genetic fitness of wild populations and the loss of some stream - specific adaptations . also , hatchery fish generally have lower survival rates than wild fish , and are less able to adjust to changing ocean conditions or to escape predators . the harvest of intermingled salmonid populations from different watersheds presents several problems , including how to protect esa - listed populations while promoting the harvest of abundant native and hatchery fish . water diversions for agriculture exacerbate these problems . according to state water resource agencies , almost every water basin in oregon , eastern washington , and northern california is now over - appropriated ( i.e. , there are more legal permits for diversion than available water ) during the hottest and driest months of the year . dams for hydropower , flood control , and irrigation substantially alter aquatic habitat and can have significant impacts on anadromous fish . since hatcheries are often more productive than natural fish populations , managing fisheries to avoid surplus returns to hatcheries can result in overharvested natural populations . controversy arises when managers must consider how much the harvest of abundant populations must be curtailed to protect less abundant esa - listed populations . such policies can frustrate both commercial fishermen and sport anglers . esa - listed or seriously depressed populations thus can become a limiting factor on fish harvest , resulting in tens of millions of dollars in foregone fishing opportunities to avoid further depressing the weakest populations .