amendments to this motion are not in order . 1 as passed by the house . before this threshold is reached , the two chambers presumably are still in the process of reaching agreement . thus , amendments between the houses , as an alternative to conference , are couched in terms of one chamber concurring in the other's amendments , or concurring in the other's amendments with amendments . for example , when the house concurs in senate amendments with house amendments , the house does so because it does not accept the senate amendments — in fact , it disagrees with them . but the house does not state its disagreement explicitly and formally at this stage because crossing the threshold of disagreement has significant procedural consequences , especially in the house . whereas house amendments are always privileged in the senate , most senate amendments are not privileged in the house before the house has reached the stage of disagreement . moreover , the order of precedence among certain motions is reversed in the house ( but not in the senate ) after the stage of disagreement has been reached . before the stage of disagreement , the order of precedence among motions in both chambers favors motions that tend to perfect the measure further ; after the stage of disagreement in the house , the order of precedence is reversed , with precedence being given to motions that tend to promote agreement between the chambers . before the stage of disagreement , for example , a motion to concur with an amendment has precedence over a motion to concur ; after the stage of disagreement in the house , a motion to recede and concur has precedence over a motion to recede and concur with an amendment . the precedence among motions before and after the stage of disagreement can become important during the process of exchanging amendments between the houses . it is most likely to matter after a conference committee has reported and the house and senate are considering amendments in true or technical disagreement . for this reason , a more detailed discussion of the subject is reserved to the sections on such amendments . if the differences between the house and the senate cannot be resolved through the exchange of amendments between the houses , two possibilities remain . first , stalemate can lead to the death of the legislation if both chambers remain adamant . second , the two houses can agree to create a conference committee to discuss their differences and seek a mutually satisfactory resolution . historically , major bills have been sent to conference , either after an unsuccessful attempt to resolve the differences through amendments between the houses or , more often , without such an attempt having even been made . the process of arranging for a conference can begin as soon as the second house passes the bill at issue , either with one or more amendments to parts of the measure or with a single amendment in the nature of a substitute that replaces the entire text approved by the first chamber .