ยง 2252 note . then , in the child pornography prevention act of 1996 ( cppa ) , congress enacted a definition of "child pornography" that included visual depictions that appear to be of a minor , even if no minor was actually used . the statute thus banned visual depictions using adult actors who appear to be minors , as well as computer graphics and drawings or paintings done without any models . in ashcroft v. free speech coalition , the supreme court declared the cppa unconstitutional to the extent that it prohibited pictures that were not produced with actual minors . child pornography , to be unprotected by the first amendment , must either be obscene or depict actual children engaged in sexual activity ( including "lascivious" poses ) , or actual children whose images have been "morphed" to make it appear that the children are engaged in sexual activity . the court observed in ashcroft that statutes that prohibit child pornography that use real children are constitutional because they target "[t]he production of the work , not the content. the cppa , by contrast , targeted the content , not the means of production . the government's rationales for the cppa included that "[p]edophiles might use the materials to encourage children to participate in sexual activity" and might "whet their own sexual appetites" with it , "thereby increasing ... the sexual abuse and exploitation of actual children. the court found these rationales inadequate because the government "cannot constitutionally premise legislation on the desirability of controlling a person's private thoughts" and "may not prohibit speech because it increases the chance an unlawful act will be committed 'at some indefinite future time.' the government also argued that the existence of "virtual" child pornography "can make it harder to prosecute pornographers who do use real minors," because , "[a]s imaging technology improves ... it becomes more difficult to prove that a particular picture was produced using actual children. this rationale , the court found , "turns the first amendment upside down . the government may not suppress lawful speech as a means to suppress unlawful speech. in response to ashcroft , congress enacted title v of the protect act , p.l . 108 - 21 ( 2003 ) , which prohibits any "digital image , computer image , or computer - generated image that is , or is indistinguishable from , that of a minor engaging in sexually explicit conduct. it also prohibits "a visual depiction of any kind , including a drawing , cartoon , sculpture , or painting , that ... depicts a minor engaging in sexually explicit conduct," and is obscene or lacks serious literary , artistic , political , or scientific value . it also makes it a crime to advertise , promote , present , distribute , or solicit any material in a manner that reflects the belief , or that is intended to cause another to believe , that the material is child pornography that is obscene or that depicts an actual minor . the adam walsh child protection and safety act of 2006 ( p.l . 109 - 248 ) amended 18 u.s.c .