the house can also use this procedure . a senate or house bill can also have part of the other chamber's bill inserted into it , or can be so heavily amended that it is unclear whether the underlying text originated in the senate or house bill . other events can occur to render the tracking of a bill and its contents difficult . bills are sometimes reported out without an accompanying committee report to provide context for the legislative language . voice votes or unanimous consent agreements may be granted instead of recorded votes , rendering it impossible to determine which member voted for or against the bill or amendments offered during floor consideration . in addition , there may be times when a fiscal year ends without the enactment of some appropriations bills . under those circumstances , congress usually passes a continuing resolution ( cr ) , which grants a temporary extension of budget authority for a specified period of time and purpose . crs also typically specify that the funds provided may be used only for activities funded in the previous fiscal year . for more information on the components of a cr and the defense budget , see crs report r42647 , continuing resolutions: overview of components and recent practices , by james v. saturno and jessica tollestrup . there are several types of votes: voice votes , teller votes , division votes , and unanimous consent votes , but only when there is a recorded vote will there be a vote number and vote tally in the congressional record . the section below is based on "methods of voting in the house and senate: putting members' positions on the record," from the congressional quarterly's guide to congress , 6th ed . ( 2008 ) , pp . division vote — those in favor or opposed stand , and the chair takes a head count: only vote totals are announced and there is no record of how individual members voted . recorded vote — members vote electronically , each recorded vote is given a sequential number , and vote totals plus how each member voted are recorded in the congressional record . teller vote — an older method in which members were counted as they passed between chair - appointed tellers for the "ayes" and "noes" ; only vote totals are announced and there is no record of how individual members voted . unanimous consent vote — usually reserved for noncontroversial legislation . voice vote — the presiding officer calls for the "ayes" and then the "noes," members shout in chorus on one side or the other , and the chair decides the result . for more information on the process , see crs in focus if10515 , defense primer: the ndaa process , by valerie heitshusen and brendan w. mcgarry ; crs report rs20371 , overview of the authorization - appropriations process , by bill heniff jr. ; and crs report r42388 , the congressional appropriations process: an introduction , coordinated by james v. saturno . this may be accomplished by a conference committee appointed by the leadership of each chamber . this committee then negotiates a compromise bill that is reported to both houses .