disabling terroristcapabilities . enhanced unilateral use of covert operations , ( 3 ) though not without downsides , holds promise as an effective long - term policy alternative to highprofile use ofmilitary force . a seeming industrial explosion at a factory believed to be producing nerve gas chemicals draws lessformal criticism and political posturing byother nations than an openly announced missile attack . the dangers here are that the united states is not especiallycompetent at secret - keeping and thatcounter - terror can be misequated to terrorism . effective use of covert policy alternatives requires institutionalization of covert action capability tapping into thebest that each agency has to offer . in a world where state sponsorship for terrorism is drying up , private fundingbecomes critical to the terrorist enterprise.terrorist front businesses and banking accounts could increasingly become the target of creative covert operations.to support such efforts and effective lawenforcement oriented approaches to curbing money flows , assisting personnel in other countries in tracing andstopping money flows to terrorists , theirorganizations and front companies may warrant consideration . so - called "grey" area or "black" area information operations which bring to light vulnerabilities inthe personalities of key terrorist leaders ( i.e .corruption , deviant sexual behavior , drug use ) , promoteparanoia , and inter - organizational rivalries , warrantincreased attention as well . one can assassinate a person physically only once ; but "character assassination" in themedia can be done daily . 98-733 - - terrorism: u. s. response to bombings in kenya and tanzania: a new policy direction ? updated september 1 , 199 . on august 7 , 1998 , the u.s. embassies in kenya and tanzania were bombed . at least 252 people died ( including 12 u.s. citizens ) and more than 5,000 wereinjured . secretary of state albright pledged to "use all means at our disposal to track down and punish" thoseresponsible . on august 20,1998 , the united stateslaunched missile strikes against training bases in afghanistan used by groups affiliated with radical extremist andterrorist financier usama bin laden . u.s.officials have said there is convincing evidence he was a major player in the bombings . a pharmaceutical plant insudan , identified by u.s. intelligence as aprecursor chemical weapons facility with connections to bin laden , was hit as well . the united states has bombed terrorist targets in the past in retaliation for anti - u..s. operations ( libya , in 1986 following the berlin disco bombing and iraq in1993 as a response to a plot to assassinate former president bush ) and an increasingly proactive law enforcementpolicy has resulted in bringing roughly 10suspected terrorists to the u.s. for trial since 1993 . however , this is the first time the u.s. has given such primaryand public prominence to the preemptive , notjust retaliatory , nature and motive of a military strike against a terrorist organization or network . this may besignaling a more proactive and globalcounter - terrorism policy , less constrained when targeting terrorists , their bases , or infrastructure . the proactive nature of the u.s. response , if official administration statements are to be taken at face value , can readily be interpreted to signal a new direction inanti - terrorism policy .