this officer is hereafter referred to as sergeant at arms . today , the sergeant at arms performs the original duties of the doorkeeper and is responsible for the protection of the senate wing of the capitol , the senate office buildings , and the senate chamber . in addition , the sergeant at arms serves as the senate's chief protocol officer and has administrative responsibility for senate offices and other senate services , including the senate beauty and barber shops , the senate garage , the senate post office , the senate recording studio , and the senate photographic studio . the sergeant at arms is elected by the senate and serves "from congress to congress until a successor is chosen. the duties and responsibilities of the sergeant at arms and doorkeeper have developed over time through several sources . these sources include statutes , senate rules and orders , and customs and precedents . statues , rules and orders , and other materials may be found in the united states code , which is the codification , by subject matter , of the general and permanent laws of the united states ; the united states statutes at large , which is the collection of all laws and concurrent resolutions enacted during each session of congress , published in the order they were enacted into law ; the senate manual , which contains the texts of the ( 1 ) standing rules of the senate , ( 2 ) standing orders of the senate , ( 3 ) rules for the regulation of the senate wing of the united states capitol , and ( 4 ) excerpts from law applicable to the senate ; and custom and precedent . additionally , many of the duties of the sergeant at arms are defined by the senate committee on appropriations and the senate committee on rules and administration . as a consequence of its jurisdiction over senate administrative matters , the senate committee on rules and administration oversees operations of the sergeant at arms . the duties and responsibilities of sergeant at arms can be divided into three broad categories: law enforcement and security , protocol , and administration . each category reflects the basic responsibility to ensure safe and effective operation of the senate . as the senate's chief law enforcement officer , the sergeant at arms is responsible for security in the senate wing of the capitol , the senate office buildings , adjacent grounds , and for the security of senators . at the request of a majority of senators present on the floor , the sergeant at arms also has the authority to compel the attendance of absent senators . the sergeant at arms enforces rules made by the senate committee on rules and administration and serves as a member of the capitol police board , which is authorized by law to design , install , and maintain security systems for the capitol and its grounds .