table 4 presents other policymaking criteria . once again , one sees conflict and complementarity across the different lenses . eliminating non - market barriers can be a key to technological development , a removal that those peering through the economic lens would likely see as appropriate , although difficult . similarly , those employing the technological lens have no objection to the ecological orientation of those using that lens , although they might question the need for such considerations — especially since those looking through the ecological lens might demand such thorough analysis of the implications of new technologies that its costs of development could be greatly increased or its adoption might be delayed . however , those viewing through the economic lens might object to the perspective given by the ecological lens , if it were to give weight to values or concerns that could not be justified through cost - benefit analysis ( analysis to which those peering through the ecological lens might object ) . elements of all three lenses can be seen in the policies promoted during the george w. bush administration and in the actions of the congress — although different perspectives dominate . for the administration , the technological ( and to a lesser degree , the ecological ) lens appeared very important to the long - term success of its initiatives . the focus of administration initiatives was on development and use of technology to achieve reductions without significant economic pain . that the administration rejected a mandatory program suggests that the economic lens heavily influenced the design of its climate change program . unlike the clinton administration , the george w. bush viewed costs to be a major obstacle to reducing greenhouse gases in the near term . for the congress , the failure to date to enact any comprehensive climate change legislation seems to reflect a focus on increasing certainty about the problem and on the costs of actions , consistent with the economic lens . while congress did ratify the 1992 framework convention on climate change and enacted several global climate change provisions in the 1992 energy policy act , a "go - slow" approach is manifest by such actions as the senate's unanimous vote of 95-0 in support of s.res . 98 , which stated the administration should sign no agreement that would result in serious harm to the economy or that did not include developing countries ( along with developed countries ) within its control regime . in addition , the resolution stated that any agreement submitted to the senate include a detailed and comprehensive economic impact assessment of the treaty . yet , while similar concern about the economy was expressed in s.amdt . 866 in 2005 , that action also put the senate on record for taking action . action was initiated in 2008 with the reporting of and floor debate on s. 2191 , which would have established a cap - and - trade program to address climate change . this approach itself is consistent with viewing the issue from an economic perspective — but the fact of action suggests either a shift toward perceived benefits outweighing costs , or , perhaps , a refocusing through other policymaking lenses .