the secretary is the chief financial officer of the senate . as such , the secretary is responsible for funds appropriated to the senate and for managing and supervising the disbursing office , which among its financial duties handles the senate payroll and related personnel matters . the secretary also conducts audits of senate financial activities . details on expenditures of funds appropriated to the senate are published semi - annually by the secretary in the senate document , report of the secretary of the senate . acting jointly , only the majority and minority leaders and the president pro tempore can certify that the secretary is unable to perform her duties . the duties and responsibilities of the secretary of the senate have developed over time through several sources . these sources include statutes , senate rules and orders , and custom and precedent . statutes , rules and orders , and other materials may be found in the united states code , which is the codification , by subject matter , of the general and permanent laws of the united states ; the united states statutes at large , which is the collection of all laws and resolutions enacted during each session of congress ; the senate manual , which contains the texts of the ( 1 ) standing rules of the senate , ( 2 ) standing orders of the senate , ( 3 ) rules for the regulation of the senate wing of the united states capitol , and ( 4 ) excerpts from laws applicable to the senate ; and through custom and precedent . many of the duties of the secretary of the senate are defined by the senate committee on appropriations and the senate committee on rules and administration . as a consequence of its jurisdiction over senate administrative matters , the senate committee on rules and administration oversees operations of the secretary of the senate . the secretary of the senate's duties and responsibilities can be divided into three broad categories: financial , administrative , and legislative . the secretary of the senate is responsible for a number of services within the senate . these responsibilities include the senate stationery room ; the senate library ; the conservation and preservation office ; the office of public records ; the senate historical office ; the office of senate curator ; the office of senate security ; the office of interparliamentary services ; the office of printing and document services ; the disbursing office ; the senate page program ; and the senate gift shop ( including gift shop revolving fund ) . other duties of the secretary of the senate include maintenance of the senate public website ; supervision of senate staff displaced by the death or resignation of a senator ; and supervision of the senate legal counsel . the secretary of the senate manages functions that support the legislative process in the senate , such as signing legislation after senate passage .