pages serve principally as messengers . they carry documents between the house and senate , members' offices , committees , and the library of congress . they prepare the senate chamber for each day's business by distributing the congressional record and other documents related to the day's agenda , assist in the cloakrooms and chambers ; and when congress is in session , they sit near the dais where they may be summoned by members for assistance . most reports of misbehavior were later found to be unsubstantiated . as a consequence of the allegations , however , both the house and senate for the first time provided supervised housing for their pages ; established separate page schools and took over the education of the pages , which had been provided under contract by the district of columbia school system ; and developed more educational and recreational opportunities for their pages . in the 110 th congress ( 2007-2008 ) , at the request of then house speaker nancy pelosi and republican leader john boehner , the house inspector general ( ig ) conducted an inquiry into the supervision and operation of the house page residence hall , and subsequently issued a confidential report recommending changes . in 2008 , an independent study , conducted by consultants to the house , was conducted . in response to the findings of those efforts , the house implemented new policies to enhance the safety and supervision of the pages and oversight of the page program . these changes followed investigations of allegations related to the page program participants , including the exchange of inappropriate communications between a member of the house and former pages , and of misbehavior by a few pages in the 109 th and 110 th congresses . a follow up review of the page program was carried out in the summer of 2010 by the same independent consultants . according to house leaders , concerns raised in 2008 , including costs and the need for the program , remained . in august 2011 , speaker john boehner and democratic leader nancy pelosi announced the termination of the house page program effective august 31 . in a dear colleague letter , the leaders cited both changes in technology obviating the need for most page services , and the program's costs as reasons to discontinue the program . in the 112 th congress , ( 2011-2012 ) , h.res . 397 , entitled reestablishing the house of representatives page program , was introduced by representative dan boren . the resolution would have created an advisory panel to make recommendations for the operation of a reestablished page program . the house page program would have been reestablished in the first school semester after the advisory panel submitted its recommendations to the committee on house administration . membership of the nine - person advisory body would have been composed of three members of the house from the majority party of the house , three members of the house from the minority party , and three individuals who were not members and who had served as house pages . the measure was referred to the committee on house administration , and no further action was taken .