perjury is also a federal crime . perjury is a false statement made under oath before a federal tribunal or official . moreover , some false certifications are punishable as perjury by operation of a federal statute . subornation of perjury is inducing someone else to commit perjury . if the matter relates to an offense under chapter 109a [sexual abuse] , 109b [sex offender registration] , 110 [sexual exploitation] , or 117 [transportation for illicit sexual purposes] , or section 1591 [sex trafficking] , then the term of imprisonment imposed under this section shall be not more than 8 years . section 1622 outlaws procuring or inducing another to commit perjury: "whoever procures another to commit any perjury is guilty of subornation of perjury , and shall be fined under this title or imprisoned for not more than five years , or both. the crime consists of two elements — ( 1 ) an act of perjury committed by another ( 2 ) induced or procured by the defendant . perjury under either section 1621 or section 1623 will support a conviction for subornation under section 1622 , but proof of the commission of an act of perjury is a necessary element of subornation . although the authorities are exceptionally sparse , it appears that to suborn one must know that the induced statement is false and that at least to suborn under section 1621 one must also knowingly and willfully induce . subornation is only infrequently prosecuted as such perhaps because of the ease with which it can now be prosecuted as an obstruction of justice under either 18 u.s.c . §§ 1503 or 1512 which , unlike section 1622 , do not insist upon suborner success as a prerequisite to prosecution . section 371 outlaws conspiring to commit another federal offense , including making a false statement in violation of section 1001 , perjury under sections 1621 and 1623 , and subornation of perjury under section 1622 . as a general matter , conspiracy requires the agreement of two or more people to commit a federal crime and for one of the parties to commit some affirmative act in furtherance of the scheme . conspiracy under section 371 is punishable by imprisonment for not more than five years . conspiracy is a separate crime , and offenders may be punished for conspiracy , as well as for the commission of the crime that is the object of the offense , and for any crime committed in the foreseeable furtherance of the crime . perjury , subornation of perjury , and false statements are each punishable by imprisonment for not more than five years . they are also punishable by a fine of not more than $250,000 ( not more than $500,000 if the defendant is an organization ) . when the defendant is convicted of a crime other than perjury or false statements , however , perjury or false statements during the investigation , prosecution , or sentencing of the defendant for the underlying offense will often be treated as the basis for enhancing his sentence by operation of the obstruction of justice guideline of the u.s . sentencing guidelines ( u.s.s.g .