multilateral treaties 1 . protocol relating to military obligations in certain cases of double nationality , concluded april 12 , 1930 , in force may 25 , 1937 , 50 stat . 913 , 2 bevans 1049 , 178 l.n.t.s . convention on the nationality of women , concluded dec. 26 , 1933 , in force aug. 29 , 1934 , 49 stat . 875 , 3 bevans 141 . bilateral treaties 1 . some nations still do not permit citizens to renounce citizenship . section 1481 of title 8 of the u.s. code enumerates actions which may result in the expatriation of a u.s. citizen , regardless of whether that person is a citizen by birth or naturalization . a naturalized citizen could be "denaturalized," i.e . , have his citizenship revoked by a u.s. court upon a finding that the immigrant committed fraud or misrepresentation in gaining admission to the u.s. or in obtaining his citizenship . however , this report will not address this issue since it is separate from the expatriation acts in section 1481 . section 1481 includes acts demonstrating an allegiance to another nation which may be incompatible with allegiance to the u.s. those acts include naturalization in a foreign country ; taking an oath of allegiance to a foreign state or one of its political subdivisions ; serving in the armed forces of a hostile foreign state or serving as a commissioned or non - commissioned officer in the armed forces of a foreign state ; serving in any office , post or employment under a foreign state's government , if one is a national of that state ; making a formal renunciation before a diplomatic or consular officer of the united states in a foreign state ; making a formal renunciation in a manner prescribed by the attorney general when the u.s. is at war ; and committing treason . section 1483 of title 8 restricts the conditions for expatriation . except for treason and formal renunciation in the u.s. , a citizen cannot be expatriated while he is in the u.s. or its possessions . however , acts committed in the u.s. or its possessions can be grounds for expatriation once the citizen leaves the u.s. and resides outside it and its possessions . also , a citizen who asserts his claim to u.s. citizenship within six months of attaining majority shall not be considered expatriated as the result of serving in the armed forces of a foreign state or making a formal renunciation abroad before a u.s. diplomatic or consular official . section 1489 provides that treaties and conventions ratified by the senate before december 25 , 1952 , supersede the provisions on expatriation , except that no woman shall lose her nationality solely by reason of her marriage to an alien , regardless of the provisions of a treaty . currently , the mere commission of an act of expatriation enumerated in section 1481 , or any other act that may be evidence of expatriation , cannot result in loss of citizenship unless committed voluntarily and with specific intent . at one time a u.s. citizen could lose his citizenship by denationalization as well as by expatriation .