cir. in that case , the incumbent director of ots , timothy ryan , on the day he resigned assigned all his duties to the then deputy director for washington operations , jonathon fiechter , who then served for almost four years . no nomination for the office was made during that period . two days after fiechter resigned , president clinton invoked the vacancies act to designate nicolas retsinas , a hud assistant secretary , to be the acting director . within 120 days , the president submitted a nominee for director , who was thereafter confirmed by the senate . doolin bank challenged the legality of the initiation of an enforcement proceeding by fiechter during his tenure . the court held that the vacancies act applied to the situation . it ruled , however , that the 120-day time limit of section 3348 does not begin to run until the president acts to designate a current advice and consent official or a first assistant succeeds by operation of law . in the situation before it , neither occurred until retsinas was designated four years after ryan left . the court refused to consider doolin's contention that fiechter was actually ryan's first assistant because the "argument comes too late," having not been raised in the administrative proceeding below or in its opening brief to the appeals court . but the court commented that since it held that retsinas effectively ratified fiechter's actions after he took office , "we do not decide whether fiechter lawfully occupied the position of director. thus the court did not address the effect of section 3349 , which makes the act the exclusive vehicle for temporarily filling vacant positions , on fiechter's assignment . further , the court's assumption that the lack of presidential action does not trigger the time limits of the act , and the failure to definitively resolve the validity of the fiechter designation , left open the possibility of revitalized use of the justice department's "vesting and delegation" theory , or the assignment of acting officials by outgoing officials coupled with presidential inaction without regard to the requirements of the vacancies act . the senate committee's concerns with the doolin decision — that it recognized a right in the president to do nothing under the vacancies act and thereby allow an agency to designate an acting head for an indefinite period , and also the ability of a lawful successor of an unlawful acting official to retroactively ratify and make valid actions of the predecessor that might have otherwise been voidable — were strongly voiced in the committee's report , in the floor debate , and in the bill that reached the floor . a threat of filibuster in support of the administration's opposition to the bill , and the failure to muster the 60 votes necessary to invoke cloture , prevented a senate vote on s. 2176 . presidential inaugural transitions. holdover provisions relating to certain independent establishments. exclusion of certain officers. notification of intent to nominate during certain recesses or adjournments . ( 2 ) subchapter heading.