appendix a. u.s . merchandise exports to latin america and the caribbean , 1998-2009 appendix b. u.s . merchandise imports from latin america and the caribbean , 1998-200 . three clear challenges emerge from this picture . first , brazil and the united states have demonstrated a prolonged reluctance to move off their respective positions , which bodes poorly for resurrecting the ftaa . the addition of venezuela and possibly other countries with less than sympathetic attitudes toward the united states as full mercosur members could solidify this standoff . nationalizations of key industries and other efforts to increase the role of the state in managing the economies of venezuela , bolivia , and ecuador also do not augur well for broadening support for market - based trade solutions . second , multiple ftas , by definition , promote an inefficient and cumbersome trading system with each fta having its own rules of origin ( to deter non - member transshipment of goods ) and related customs administration and enforcement requirements that can complicate trade and investment decisions . it is not without reason , therefore , that many interest groups wish to find a way to rationalize such a convoluted system . third , latin america is expanding its trade to other countries in the world . china , in particular , has increased its trade and investment relationship with the region . from 2000 to 2009 , total trade has grown by a factor of 10 , and investment has poured into the region . in both cases , china is in search of long - term , reliable sources of basic commodities . in 2009 , over 70% of latin american exports to china were in basic ores , copper , grains , and mineral fuels . while this trade structure is currently lucrative , it does nothing to diversify latin america's exports into more value added goods , and leaves the fortunes of these countries to the often volatile commodities markets . reconciling the disparate trade arrangements in the western hemisphere will be difficult and perhaps impossible in the absence of a complementary multilateral solution . for example , conventional wisdom argues that without advancement in agricultural issues at the wto , action on a comprehensive ftaa ( or something like it ) is unlikely . further , a less comprehensive ftaa has so far been rejected and offers a far less compelling alternative to a multilateral agreement on economic grounds . therefore , the ftaa may not emerge in the near future , despite the logical solution that a hemispheric - wide agreement presents to improving the flow of trade ( and investment ) over existing arrangements . without a hemispheric - wide solution and given the limitations to further expansion of u.s. bilateral ftas , alternatives are being debated on how to deepen hemispheric trade relations . one emerging line of thinking calls for reform of the u.s. fta template , including reopening existing ftas to revise and deepen labor and environment chapters , among others . the evolving nature of commitments to these disciplines continues , as evident in congressional insistence on revising bilateral agreements already negotiated , as was the case with peru , colombia , panama , and south korea .