it remained at 1% for a year . as the expansion gathered momentum , the target was raised gradually to 5¼% , in 17 equal increments spread over two years . even as the fomc drew attention to upward movements in the core rate of inflation at various meetings during 2006 and 2007 , it continued to express the view that inflation would moderate over time , as would the rate of growth of gdp . these reasons appear to be important for leaving the rate unchanged at 5¼% for more than a year . however , during the late summer of 2007 , the fall in housing prices and conditions in financial markets related to the difficulty in refinancing subprime mortgages and extending credit in general became a matter of great concern . to ease these conditions , the board of governors on august 17 , 2007 , reduced the discount rate for primary credit to 5¾% . this was followed on september 18 with another reduction of ½% and a reduction in the federal funds target to 4¾% . additional cuts of ¼% in both rates were approved on october 31 and december 11 , 2007 . on january 22 , 2008 , the target was reduced by ¾% and on january 30 by a further ½% . the economy began to soften in the third quarter of 2007 ( gdp growth was negative , falling at an annual rate of - 0.2% ) . in the first quarter of 2008 it was positive again , and rose at an annual rate of 0.9% . this change in operating procedure is shown in table 1 . since the onset of the financial crisis in the summer of 2007 , the fed has not made an issue of whether banks borrow at the discount window or in the federal funds market even though the discount rate remains slightly higher than the target rate for federal funds . because the discount rate is administered , changes in it are stated explicitly and all transactions with the federal reserve are at that rate . hence , the changes shown in table 1 are the relevant transactions rate . however , because the federal funds rate is market determined , it may vary from day to day or within a day from the announced target set by the fomc . thus , the federal funds rates shown in table 1 are the target rates . reference to the available financial data may show rates in the federal funds market that vary somewhat from the target in response to shifts in market conditions . at its december 16 , 2008 meeting , the fomc , for the first time , set a range for the federal funds target . this is because it was having difficulty holding the actual federal funds rate at the 1% target rate set on october 29 , 2008 . for much of the period between that date and december 16 , the actual federal funds rate was substantially below the 1% target . the fed tries to keep the economy operating at an output level consistent with a low rate of inflation and low unemployment .