alternatively , p.l . see table 4 for a summary of fers employee contribution rates by date of hire . members of congress contribute 8.0% of salary to the csrdf if covered by csrs ; 1.3% of salary to the csrdf if under fers and first covered prior to 2013 ; 3.1% of salary to the csrdf if under fers and first covered in 2013 ; or 4.4% of salary to the csrdf if under fers and first covered after 2013 . all members of congress pay social security taxes , regardless of whether they are under csrs or fers . as of september 30 , 2013 , the csrdf had net assets of $844.6 billion available for benefit payments under both csrs and fers . at the same time , the civil service trust fund had an unfunded actuarial liability of $785.0 billion , with $751.4 billion in unfunded liability attributable to csrs and $33.6 billion in unfunded liability attributable to fers . federal law has never required that employee and agency contributions must equal the present value of benefits that employees accrue under the csrs . in contrast , the fers act requires that the benefits accrued each year by employees must be fully funded by contributions from employees and their employing agencies . although the csrdf has an unfunded liability , it is not in danger of becoming insolvent . according to the projections of opm's actuaries , the assets of the csrdf will continue to grow over the next 75 years . the fund's assets are projected to reach $1.1 trillion in 2020 , $2.2 trillion in 2040 , $5.0 trillion in 2060 , and $9.6 trillion in 2080 . actuarial projections indicate that the csrdf will be able to meet its financial obligations in perpetuity . according to opm , "the total assets of the csrdf , including both csrs and fers , continue to grow throughout the term of the projection , and ultimately reach a level of about 5.3 times payroll , or about 20 times the level of annual benefit outlays. one reason that the csrdf will not exhaust its resources is that all federal employees hired since 1984 are enrolled in fers . by law , the benefits that employees earn under fers must be fully funded by the sum of employer and employee contributions and interest earnings . the csrdf is similar to the social security trust fund in that 100% of the monies deposited must be used to purchase special - issue u.s. treasury bonds . this exchange between the trust fund and the treasury does not result in revenues or outlays for the federal government . it is an intra - governmental transfer , which has no effect on the size of the government's budget surplus or deficit . again , quoting omb: from an economic standpoint , the government is able to prefund benefits only by increasing saving and investment in the economy as a whole . this can be fully accomplished only by simultaneously running trust fund surpluses equal to the actuarial present value of the accumulating benefits while maintaining an unchanged federal fund deficit , so that the trust fund surplus reduces the unified budget deficit or increases the unified budget surplus .