other material , vi . knowing the same to contain any false material declaration , shall be fined under this title or imprisoned not more than five years , or both . perjury is also a federal crime . perjury is a false statement made under oath before a federal tribunal or official . moreover , some false certifications are punishable as perjury by operation of a federal statute . subornation of perjury is inducing someone else to commit perjury . a. under oath or b. in any i. declaration , ii . certificate , iii . verification , or iv . statement under penalty of perjury as permitted under [section] 1746 of title 28 , united states code iii . in any proceeding before or ancillary to a. any court or b. grand jury of the united states iv . knowingly v. a. makes any false material declaration or b. makes or uses any other information , including any i. book , ii . paper , iii . document , iv . record , v. recording , or vi . in most cases , the courts abbreviate their description of the elements and state in one form or another that to prove perjury the government must establish that "the defendant ( 1 ) knowingly made a ( 2 ) false ( 3 ) material declaration ( 4 ) under oath ( 5 ) in a proceeding before or ancillary to any court or grand jury of the united states. section 1622 outlaws procuring or inducing another to commit perjury: "whoever procures another to commit any perjury is guilty of subornation of perjury , and shall be fined under this title or imprisoned for not more than five years , or both. the crime consists of two elements – ( 1 ) an act of perjury committed by another ( 2 ) induced or procured by the defendant . perjury under either section 1621 or section 1623 will support a conviction for subornation under section 1622 , but proof of the commission of an act of perjury is a necessary element of subornation . although the authorities are exceptionally sparse , it appears that to suborn one must know that the induced statement is false and that at least to suborn under section 1621 one must also knowingly and willfully induce . subornation is only infrequently prosecuted as such perhaps because of the ease with which it can now be prosecuted as an obstruction of justice under either 18 u.s.c . §§ 1503 or 1512 which , unlike section 1622 , do not insist upon suborner success as a prerequisite to prosecution . section 371 outlaws conspiring to commit another federal offense , including making a false statement in violation of section 1001 , perjury under sections 1621 and 1623 , and subornation of perjury under section 1622 . as a general matter , conspiracy requires the agreement of two or more people to commit a federal crime and for one of the parties to commit some affirmative act in furtherance of the scheme . conspiracy under section 371 is punishable by imprisonment for not more than five years .