if agreed to , a motion to discharge would place a measure or matter on the relevant chamber calendar . , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed]. ) in current practice , however , few resolutions go "over , under the rule," and because ( as noted above ) the senate almost never engages in morning business created by the beginning of a new legislative day as called for under rule viii , those resolutions that do are essentially placed in a kind of parliamentary limbo . they remain pending on the calendar of business , unreachable except by unanimous consent or by a rare morning hour created by operation of the rule . this report first discusses those processes or customs most often used by the senate and then discusses some procedures less often used to call up business . under chamber rules , technically any senator may offer the necessary agenda - setting motions "to proceed to the consideration" of a bill , resolution , or item of executive business . however , by long - established custom , in practice only the majority leader or his or her designee offer agenda - setting motions . ( see crs report rs21255 , motions to proceed to consider measures in the senate: who offers them ? items called up are often those on the senate's legislative or executive calendars , either reported by committee or , in the case of bills and joint resolutions , placed on the legislative calendar directly under rule xiv ( see crs report rs22309 , senate rule xiv procedure for placing measures directly on the senate calendar , by [author name scrubbed] ) . motions to take up privileged items of business are not debatable and , hence , are usually taken up by unanimous consent . among the items of privileged business are budget resolutions , reconciliation bills , conference reports , measures to resolve election contests , and measures to impose disciplinary sanctions against senators . motions to go into executive session to consider a nomination , treaty , or resolution on the senate executive calendar are also privileged and non - debatable . on the motion of any senator , a measure or matter can be made a special order of business at some future specified date . such motions are very rarely used , because they are fully debatable and need a two - thirds vote for approval . if there is objection to considering a resolution when it is submitted , the resolution is said to "go over , under the rule," and is placed on a special section of the calendar of business reserved for this purpose . such resolutions are to be laid before the senate on the next legislative day during the morning business period ( described above ) , which would occur automatically under rule viii . items pending at the end of morning business return to the calendar of business and can be called up later by a debatable motion or unanimous consent . executive resolutions that are placed on the executive calendar "over , under the rule" can be subsequently reached by unanimous consent or , as noted above , by non - debatable motion .