in 2004 , title i of p.l . 108-456 , the harmful algal bloom and hypoxia amendments act of 2004 , expanded this authority and reauthorized appropriations through fy2008 . legislation has been introduced in the 110 th congress to reauthorize and amend the harmful algal bloom and hypoxia research and control act . hypoxia research is regularly funded through appropriations to the national ocean service — part of the national oceanic and atmospheric administration in the department of commerce — in their extramural research account under national centers for coastal ocean science . this measure was signed into law as p.l . 105-383 on november 13 , 1998 ; title vi authorized appropriations through noaa to conduct research , monitoring , education , and management activities for the prevention , reduction , and control of hypoxia , harmful algal blooms , pfiesteria , and other aquatic toxins . for fy2008 , noaa has requested $8.9 million for extramural research grants related to harmful algal bloom and hypoxia , including forecasting . in the last few years , the u.s. department of agriculture's cooperative state research , education , and extension service has provided a special research grant of around $220,000 annually to iowa state university's leopold center for sustainable agriculture for a project to define and implement new methods and practices in farming that reduce impacts on water quality and the hypoxia problem in the gulf of mexico . in the last few years , the environ - mental protection agency's environmental programs and management account has provided a specific authorization of around $125,000 annually for the missouri department of agriculture's hypoxia education and stewardship project . mortality is especially likely for sedentary species . in addition , spawning areas and other essential habitat can be destroyed by the lack of oxygen . if these conditions persist , a so - called "dead zone" may develop in which little marine life exists . the recovery of marine ecosystems following a hypoxic event has not been extensively studied . decreased concentrations of dissolved oxygen result in part from natural eutrophication when nutrients ( eg , nitrogen and phosphorus ) and sunlight stimulate algal growth ( eg , algae , seaweed , and phytoplankton ) , increasing the amount of organic matter in an aquatic ecosystem over decades and centuries . as organisms die and sink to the bottom , they are consumed ( decomposed ) by oxygen - dependent bacteria , depleting the water of oxygen . when this eutrophication is extensive and persistent , bottom waters may become hypoxic , or even anoxic ( no dissolved oxygen ) , while surface waters can be completely normal and full of life . hypoxia is more likely to occur in coastal waters where the water column is stratified ( i.e. , layered ) because of differences in temperature or salinity or both . marine dead zones become most noticeable when and where natural eutrophication has been accelerated by human - influenced increases in nutrient loads . hypoxia often develops as a result of upwelled ocean waters , particularly along the western coast of the americas . in many instances , cool , nutrient - rich , deep marine waters rise along the coastal margin and support massive algal blooms that lead to hypoxia .