this report will be updated as events warrant . precollege ( k - 12 ) science and mathematics instruction has an important relationship to the future supply of u.s. scientific and technological personnel . the technological demands of the workforce are increasing exponentially . a basic science and mathematics education is necessary not only for those who will enter science as majors , but for all citizens to understand scientific and technical issues that affect their lives . in addition , scientific and technical skills are a requirement for an increasingly wide range of occupations such as health care , banking , insurance , and energy production . whether individuals are in the service sector , manufacturing , government , or management , many believe that some level of scientific literacy is required . the term "reform" is repeated throughout discussions of science education at the precollege level , covering such issues as: school curriculum and the quality of science instruction , student interest in science , the shortage of qualified teachers , teacher training and retraining , student achievement on science and mathematics measures , and the participation of minorities and women in science . the u.s. educational system has a long history of attempted education reforms . one particular report that received considerable attention was released in 1983 by the department of education ( ed ) . the report , a nation at risk , attacked the school system , declaring that u.s. schools were sinking under a "rising tide of mediocrity," partly as a result of a shortage of qualified teachers in science , mathematics , and other essential disciplines . more than 25 years after the report , there is some debate as to whether or not our educational system is still "at risk. reforms in science and mathematics education have focused on both what to teach and how to teach it . a 1998 publication of the american association for the advancement of science ( aaas ) , blueprints for reform - science , mathematics , and technology education , presented goals for science , mathematics , and technology literacy . the goals offered multidisciplinary instructions in the real world , structured so students would use the discovery process to study issues that are multidimensional , to arrive at alternative approaches , and to be able to anticipate both positive and negative consequences of their choices . in 2000 , the national council of teachers of mathematics ( nctm ) released a revised principles and standards for school mathematics , which described how students should be taught to solve non - routine problems in meaningful context . the nctm standards promoted the policy of students learning through induction rather than memorization , directing the instructional process on inquiry as opposed to the traditional tell - and - test approach , and promoting assessment methods that are open - ended instead of machine - scoreable . more recently , a 2005 report of the fordham institute states that "while state standards are very much in flux , the nation , in its entirety , is neither making progress nor losing ground when it comes to its expectations for what students should learn in science.