r es . 27 ) to withdraw congressional approval of the agreement establishing the wto . the house ways and means committee reported the resolution adversely on may 26 , 2005 , and the full house disapproved the resolution by a vote of 338-86 on june 9 , 2005 . debate on the resolution offered members an opportunity to examine the costs and benefits of wto participation and examine other aspects of wto membership . appendix a. wto members ( as of january 2008 ) appendix b. wto structure all wto members may participate in all councils , committees , etc. , except appellate body , dispute settlement panels , textiles monitoring body , and plurilateral committees . the negotiations mandated by the doha declaration take place in the trade negotiations committee and its subsidiaries . what is the role of congress in how the united states participates in the wto ? although the executive branch maintains a staff in geneva and conducts trade negotiations in the wto , congress has an important role in how the united states participates in the wto through its constitutional authority over the conduct of foreign commerce . are u.s. interests served through the wto dispute process ? 10 7 - 210 ) that approved expedited procedures for legislation to implement trade agreements passed in 2002 , congress prescribed trade objectives for u.s. negotiators and required the executive branch to consult with it . during negotiations , congress maintains oversight , and the congressional oversight group , which was established under p.l . the united states realizes several benefits from the existence of a multilateral forum for trade disputes . such a forum in general allows countries to peacefully resolve disputes without having to resort to more drastic measures . the wto dispute process presents a clear , understandable set of rules to be followed , and the process is nondiscriminatory among countries . the united states has been relatively successful in using the process as a complainant . as of october 2006 , the u.s. trade representative reports that 24 cases were resolved to u.s. satisfaction without litigation ; 26 cases were won by the united states on core issues ; in 4 cases the united states did not prevail on core issues ; and 24 other cases were in panel stage , in consultation , or monitoring progress or otherwise inactive . there are many complaints about the wto dispute settlement process . in some cases , countries have not adhered to dispute panels' findings . an example is the u.s. complaint against european union ( eu ) trade restrictions on imports of beef produced with hormones . critics say that some cases are filed for political , not economic , reasons . for example , some analysts say that the eu took no action for years against a u.s. tax benefit for exports ( the foreign sales corporation ) , but then filed a challenge after a u.s. win in another case . can the united states maintain its sovereignty as a member of the wto ? some critics of the wto have raised the question of whether the united states will lose its sovereignty as a member of the wto .