how is this inconsistency to be explained ? first , the house transacts much of its business on the floor by resolving itself into the committee of the whole—formally , the committee of the whole house on the state of the union . the primary reason for doing so is that the rules governing debate and amendment in committee of the whole are more flexible than those that apply when the house is meeting "in the house. resolving into committee of the whole is also convenient for another reason . the committee of the whole is a committee that the house has created in its rules , just as the house has created various standing committees . although the committee of the whole differs from other house committees in that all representatives are members of it and it meets on the house floor , it still remains a committee of the house . therefore , a meeting of the committee of the whole is not a meeting of the house itself , so the constitutional quorum requirement for the house does not apply in committee of the whole . instead , the house is free to set in its rules whatever quorum requirement it chooses for meetings of the committee of the whole . clause 6 ( a ) of house rule xviii provides that a "quorum of a committee of the whole house on the state of the union is 100 members," not the majority of house members that constitutes a quorum of the house . second , whether the house is meeting as the house or in committee of the whole , a quorum is always presumed to be present unless and until its absence is demonstrated . reasonably enough , the house presumes that it is complying with the constitution or its own rules , as the case may be . furthermore , neither the speaker nor the chair of the committee of the whole is empowered to take the initiative to ensure that this presumption is correct . at no time may the speaker or the chair interrupt the proceedings on the floor because he or she observes that the necessary quorum is not present or because he or she decides to count those present to determine whether the applicable quorum requirement is being met . instead , the speaker or chair responds to an assertion that a member makes from the floor that a quorum is not present ( or less often , when a member is recognized to move a call of the house ) . a quorum is always presumed to be present unless a member challenges this presumption from the floor , and the house's standing rules severely limit when he or she may do so . many of the details of these rules are discussed later in this report . to summarize them here , there is a critical linkage between the house's quorum and voting procedures: about the only times that a member has a right to make a point of order that a quorum is not present is when a vote is taking place .