postal service . many of the concepts used in the ada originated in section 504 and its interpretations ; however , there is one major difference . while section 504's prohibition against discrimination is tied to the receipt of federal financial assistance , the ada also covers entities not receiving such funds . in addition , the federal executive agencies and the u.s . postal service are covered under section 504 , not the ada . the ada contains a specific provision stating that except as otherwise provided in the act , nothing in the act shall be construed to apply a lesser standard than the standards applied under title v of the rehabilitation act ( which includes section 504 ) or the regulations issued by federal agencies pursuant to such title . the ada is a civil rights statute ; it does not provide grant funds to help entities comply with its requirements . it does include a section on technical assistance which authorizes grants and awards for the purpose of technical assistance such as the dissemination of information about rights under the ada and techniques for effective compliance . however , there are tax code provisions which may assist certain businesses or individuals . the eleventh amendment states: "the judicial power of the united states shall not be construed to extend to any suit in law or equity , commenced or prosecuted against one of the united states by citizens of another state , or by citizens or subjects of any foreign state. §§12101 et seq . , has often been described as the most sweeping nondiscrimination legislation since the civil rights act of 1964 . it provides broad nondiscrimination protection in employment , public services , public accommodations and services operated by private entities , transportation , and telecommunications for individuals with disabilities . as stated in the act , its purpose is "to provide a clear and comprehensive national mandate for the elimination of discrimination against individuals with disabilities. enacted on july 26 , 1990 , the majority of the ada's provisions took effect in 1992 . the ada amendments act , p.l . 110-325 , was enacted on september 25 , 2008 , to respond to a series of supreme court decisions that had interpreted the definition of disability narrowly . the supreme court has decided 20 ada cases . in the most recent supreme court decision , united states v. georgia , the court held that title ii of the ada created a private cause of action for damages against the states for conduct that actually violated the fourteenth amendment . however , the court did not reach the issue of whether the eleventh amendment permits a prisoner to secure money damages from a state for state actions that violate the ada but not the constitution . in addition , the supreme court decided arbaugh v. y . & h corp. , a case under title vii of the civil rights act of 1964 , which has implications for the ada's prohibition of discrimination where employers employ 15 or more employees .