appendix a . countries with which the united states has a bilateral extradition treaty appendix b . countries with which the united states has no bilateral extradition treat . timing also matters . the speedy trial features of u.s. law require a good faith effort to bring to trial a fugitive who is within the government's reach . furthermore , the lapse of time or speedy trial component of the applicable extradition treaty may preclude extradition if prosecution would be barred by a statute of limitations in the country of refuge . some treaties prohibit extradition for capital offenses ; more often they permit it but only with the assurance that a sentence of death will not be executed . prosecutors may request provisional arrest of a fugitive without waiting for the final preparation of the documentation required for a formal extradition request , if there is a risk of flight and if the treaty permits it . the justice department encourages judicious use of provisional arrest because of the pressures that may attend it . the criminal resource manual contains the form for collection of the information that must accompany either a federal or state prosecutor's application for a justice department request for provisional arrest . although treaty requirements vary , the justice department suggests that prosecutors supply formal documentation in the form of an original and four copies of a prosecutor's affidavit describing the facts of the case , including dates , names , docket numbers and citations , and preferably executed before a judge or magistrate ( particularly if extradition is sought from a civil law country ) copies of the statutes the fugitive is said to have violated , the statutes governing the penalties that may be imposed upon conviction , and the applicable statute of limitations if the fugitive has been convicted and sentenced: identification evidence ; certified documentation of conviction , sentence , and the amount of time served and remaining to be served ; copies of the statutes of conviction ; and a statement that the service of the remaining sentence is not barred by a statute of limitations if the fugitive is being sought for prosecution or sentencing: certified copies of the arrest warrant ( preferably signed by the court or a magistrate ) and of the indictment or complaint if the fugitive is being sought for prosecution or sentencing: evidence of the identity of the individual sought ( fingerprints / photographs ) and of the evidence upon which the charges are based and of the fugitive's guilt in the form of witness affidavits ( preferably avoiding the use grand jury transcripts and , particularly in the case of extradition from a common law country , the use of hearsay ) . a hearing under 18 u.s.c . ยง3184 is scheduled to determine whether the fugitive is extraditable . if the court finds the fugitive to be extraditable , it enters an order of extraditability and certifies the record to the secretary of state , who decides whether to surrender the fugitive to the requesting government . in some cases a fugitive may waive the hearing process . oia notifies the foreign government and arranges for the transfer of the fugitive to the agents appointed by the requesting country to receive him or her .