department of defense . 8 p. jefferson solutions . commissioned by the department of defense . review of the department of defense acquisition workforce , daswo1-97-1847 . washington , 1997 . september 1997 . 55 p. appendix a . title ix , subtitle b - additional reductions in defense acquisition workforce sec . defense acquisition workforce . ( a ) reduction of defense acquisition workforce ( 1 ) the secretary of defense shall accomplish reductions in defense acquisition personnel positions during fiscal year 1998 so that the total number of such personnel as of october 1 , 1998 , is less than the total number of such personnel as of october 1 , 1997 , by at least the applicable number determined under paragraph ( 2 ) . ( 2 ) ( a ) the applicable number for purposes of paragraph ( 1 ) is 25,000 . however , the secretary of defense may specify a lower number , which may not be less than 10,000 , as the applicable number for purposes of paragraph ( 1 ) if the secretary determines , and certifies to congress not later than june 1 , 1998 , that an applicable number greater than the number specified by the secretary would be inconsistent with the cost - effective management of the defense acquisition system to obtain best value equipment and would adversely affect military readiness . ( b ) the secretary shall include with such a certification a detailed explanation of each of the matters certified . ( c ) the authority of the secretary under subparagraph ( a ) may only be delegated to the deputy secretary of defense . ( 3 ) for purposes of this subsection , the term `defense acquisition personnel' means military and civilian personnel ( other than civilian personnel who are employed at a maintenance depot ) who are assigned to , or employed in , acquisition organizations of the department of defense ( as specified in department of defense instruction numbered 5000.58 dated january 14 , 1992 ) . ( b ) report on specific acquisition positions previously eliminated - not later than 30 days after the date of the enactment of this act , the secretary of defense shall submit to congress a report on reductions in the defense acquisition workforce made since fiscal year 1989 . the report shall show aggregate reductions by fiscal year and shall show for each fiscal year reductions identified by specific job title , classification , or position . the report shall also identify those reductions carried out pursuant to law ( and how the secretary implemented any statutory requirement for such reductions , including definition of the workforce subject to the reduction ) and those reductions carried out as a result of base closures and realignments under the so - called brac process . ( d ) review of acquisition organizations and functions - the secretary of defense shall conduct a review of the organizations and functions of the department of defense acquisition activities and of the personnel required to carry out those functions . the review shall identify the following: ( 1 ) opportunities for cross - service , cross - functional arrangements within the military services and defense agencies .