some of these initiatives are described below . the national defense authorization act of fy2008 ( h.r . 110-181 ) required dod , and especially the army , to train military personnel who are outside the acquisition workforce but are expected to have acquisition responsibility , and to incorporate contractors and contract operations into mission exercises . as outlined above , dod has initiated a number of steps to comply with p.l . 110-181 , including developing doctrine , developing a concept of operations , planning and introducing educational courses into the curricula of non - acquisition military personnel , and incorporating contractor support scenarios into mission - ready and other exercises . congress may wish to consider requiring officer and / or enlisted performance evaluations to include commentary and / or grade evaluation of contractor management . on the one hand , including a contractor management narrative as part of a performance evaluation could help ensure attention is given to this issue . however , it should be recognized that contract support is not relevant for all military personnel , and elements of contract support could also fall under other evaluation factors , such as personnel , management . alternatively , congress could consider requiring performance evaluations for military personnel whose mission involves or substantially relies on contractor support . another option would be to amend the performance evaluation guidelines to stipulate specifically that contractor management be part of the discussion of personnel management or other related factors . such a requirement would be similar to section 527 of the fy2009 duncan hunter national defense authorization act ( p.l . 110-417 ) which requires the chairman of the joint chiefs of staff to submit to congress a report outlining the joint education courses available throughout the dod . such a report could help congress execute its oversight function . such a report could help accomplish two goals: it can ( 1 ) help congress chart the military's progress in preparing the operational force to work with contractors during expeditionary operations and ( 2 ) help dod maintain focus on this issue . dod has stated as far back as 2004 that it would explore creating training courses on contracting for mid - and senior - level service schools . however , some analysts would argue that dod failed to follow through adequately on creating additional training on contract support until congress mandated training for appropriate non - acquisition military personnel . as described in this report , dod has recently taken a number of concrete steps to improve how the operational force works with contractors and has incorporated contractors and contract operations into mission - readiness and other exercises . analysts argue that only sustained congressional attention can help ensure that the desired results will be achieved . the calls for more robust training are not new . for example , in 2003 , gao testified before the house armed services committee , subcommittee on readiness , stating "[t]he lack of contract training for commanders , senior personnel , and some contracting officers' representatives can adversely affect the effectiveness of the use of contractors in deployed locations .