both are straightforward . first , should senate campaign finance reports be filed electronically ? second , if so , where should those reports be filed ? the primary arguments in favor of electronic filing concern efficiency and expense . currently , a contractor converts the paper reports filed with the secretary into electronic format . the fec then makes the reports publicly available on the internet . the conversion process can take weeks or months at a reported cost of $250,000 annually . as a result , house campaign finance data filed electronically ( and directly with the fec ) are routinely available well before senate data . various members of congress , campaign finance groups , and media organizations have supported electronic filing . both the fec and the secretary of the senate have stated publicly that their offices are , or can be , prepared to administer electronic filing . electronic filing could eliminate the conversion process and make public disclosure of the data much faster . electronic filing could , therefore , improve transparency and reduce costs . requiring electronic filing of senate reports would also place the same filing responsibilities on senate committees that currently exist for house candidate committees , party committees , and pacs . as a result , uniform filing standards would apply to all political committees . there is little , if any , notable opposition to electronic filing itself . however , some members have called for addressing other campaign finance disclosure issues alongside electronic filing . for example , attempts in the 110 th congress to bring up s. 223 were unsuccessful amid a dispute over whether the bill would be amended to require groups filing ethics complaints to disclose their donors . similarly , at a march 2007 senate rules and administration committee hearing on s. 223 , senator stevens emphasized the need to also consider disclosure requirements for 527 organizations . filing location has been a secondary issue of debate . senate reports are currently filed with the secretary of the senate rather than with the fec . bypassing filing with the secretary of the senate could make reports more readily accessible to the public and could reduce delay or costs associated with transmitting the reports to the fec . if campaign finance reports are considered senate documents , however , some may object to their being filed with the fec . during the 110 th congress , senator feinstein reported at a markup of s. 223 that senator byrd raised concerns about the possibility of filing directly with the fec because he viewed filing with the secretary as a matter of senate prerogative . the 1974 feca amendments established the fec , which enforces civil compliance with campaign finance law . the commission also facilitates disclosure of federal campaign finance data and administers the presidential public financing program . the 110 th congress enacted one bill affecting the agency's functioning . 110-433 , which president george w. bush signed in october 2008 , extended authority for the fec's administrative fine program ( afp ) until 2013 . ( the program had been set to expire at the end of 2008. )