the current budget situation is challenging . the federal government faces very large budget deficits , rising costs of entitlement programs , and significant spending on overseas military operations . the enactment of financial intervention and fiscal stimulus legislation designed to alleviate a credit crunch and to bolster the economy will push up the deficit , shifting fiscal burdens into the future . while gdp grew at an estimated annual rate of 2.8% in the third quarter of 2009 , perhaps marking an end to the longest post - world war ii recession , most forecasters expect unemployment to remain at high levels for the medium term . the congressional budget office ( cbo ) projects that the unemployment rate will crest at nearly 10.5% in early 2010 , well above some earlier predictions . high unemployment rates would add to government spending through "automatic stabilizer" programs , such as unemployment insurance and income support programs . the economic downturn has not only pushed federal spending up and revenues down , but also threatens to slow economic growth for the next few years . the federal government has responded to the economic slowdown with an array of policy responses unprecedented in recent decades , including fiscal stimulus and loan programs . these federal interventions have helped stimulate economic activity and reduce dislocation in financial markets , but may also expose the federal government to substantial credit risks . concern remains about the federal government's long - term fiscal situation . the rising costs of federal health care programs and the effects of the baby boom generation's retirement present serious challenges to fiscal stability . operating these programs in their current form may pass on substantial economic burdens to future generations . aside from the specific issues related to the budget in presidential transition years , the current economic climate poses another major challenge to policymakers shaping the federal budget . federal spending tied to means - tested social programs has been increasing due to rising unemployment , while federal revenues will likely fall as individuals' incomes drop and corporate profits sink . congress faces extraordinary budgetary challenges in fy2010 with both short - run and long - run budget priorities that may conflict in critical ways . in the short term , economic issues may dominate policy debates , creating pressure for higher deficit spending . in the long term , increasing federal health care costs are expected to keep mandatory spending rising . although estimates for the third quarter of 2009 , which put gdp growth at an annual rate of 2.8% , may signal an end to the economic recession , economic conditions remain weak due to budget challenges facing state and local governments , high levels of consumer debt , and continuing weakness in many real estate markets . most economists expect unemployment rates to remain elevated for the medium term . congress may choose to enact more government spending in response to the state of the economy . while the power of debt - financed government spending to provide fiscal stimulus is independent of how those funds are spent , clearly taxpayers and beneficiaries of federal programs gain more when that spending reduces households' economic vulnerabilities or promotes future economic efficiency .