this interpretation is not shared by all experts . the 2005 report "primarily reflected activities from january 2002 through december 2003. . whether the state department assesses that iran has violated article ii since then is unclear . a version of the report released in 2010 , which primarily reflected activities from january 1 , 2004 , through december 31 , 2008 , states that "the issues underlying" the 2005 report's conclusion regarding iran's article ii compliance "remain unresolved. subsequent versions of the report reiterated the 2010 report's assessment until 2016 , when the state department assessed that "previous issues leading to npt noncompliance findings [regarding iran] had been resolved. as noted , the 2007 nie assessed that iran halted its nuclear weapons program in 2003 ; subsequent u.s. official statements have consistently reiterated that tehran has not yet decided to build nuclear weapons . the united kingdom's then - foreign secretary william hague would not say whether iran had violated article ii when asked by a member of parliament in march 2012 . appendix a. iranian noncompliance with its iaea safeguards agreement the november 2003 report ( gov / 2003 / 75 ) from iaea director general elbaradei to the agency's board of governors details what the september 2005 board resolution described as "iran's many failures and breaches of its obligations to comply with its safeguards agreement. the report stated that iran has failed in a number of instances over an extended period of time to meet its obligations under its safeguards agreement with respect to the reporting of nuclear material and its processing and use , as well as the declaration of facilities where such material has been processed and stored . the report detailed some of these failures and referenced other failures described in two earlier reports ( gov / 2003 / 40 and gov / 2003 / 63 ) from elbaradei to the iaea board . according to gov / 2003 / 40 , iran failed to declare the following activities to the agency: the importation of natural uranium , and its subsequent transfer for further processing . the processing and use of the imported natural uranium , including the production and loss of nuclear material , and the production and transfer of resulting waste . additionally , iran failed to declare the facilities where nuclear material ( including the waste ) was received , stored , and processed ; provide in a timely manner updated design information for a research reactor located in tehran ; as well as provide in a timely manner information on two waste storage sites . gov / 2003 / 63 stated that iran failed to report uranium conversion experiments to the iaea . according to gov / 2003 / 75 , iran failed to report the following activities to the iaea: the use of imported natural uranium hexafluoride for the testing of centrifuges , as well as the subsequent production of enriched and depleted uranium . the importation of natural uranium metal and its subsequent transfer for use in laser enrichment experiments , including the production of enriched uranium , the loss of nuclear material during these operations , and the production and transfer of resulting waste .