citizenship and immigration services ( uscis ) . enforcement of the prohibitions on unauthorized employment in ina section 274a — or worksite enforcement — has been the job of dhs's u.s. immigration and customs enforcement ( ice ) since 2003 . worksite enforcement is one component of ice's responsibility to enforce federal immigration laws within the united states , known as interior enforcement . employers violating the ina section 274a prohibitions on unlawful employment may be subject to civil and / or criminal penalties . the federal government's approach to immigration - related worksite enforcement has changed over the years . in 1999 , for example , the immigration and naturalization service ( ins ) unveiled an interior enforcement strategy , which , as explained by an ins official at the time , gave priority in the area of worksite enforcement to two types of cases: ( 1 ) criminal employer cases , in which there was a pattern or practice of knowingly employing unauthorized workers , and ( 2 ) cases of employers who abused their workers and who violated multiple laws . in the aftermath of the september 11 , 2001 , terrorist attacks , interior enforcement priorities again shifted . resources were redirected from traditional program areas , including worksite enforcement , to national security - related investigations , and the primary focus of worksite enforcement became removal of unauthorized workers from critical infrastructure facilities such as airports and military bases . under the worksite enforcement guidance issued in 2009 , homeland security remains a primary concern of ice's worksite enforcement program . as described by ice: "investigations involving national security , public safety or those associated with our critical infrastructure and key resources sectors receive top priority. according to ice , the agency also prioritizes criminally prosecuting employers who "utilize unauthorized workers as a business model," "mistreat their workers," or "engage in human smuggling or trafficking," among other violations . in recent years , ice also has placed "increased emphasis on compliance and outreach" in conducting worksite enforcement . it has increased its use of inspections , or audits , of business owners' i - 9 records ( see above ) to determine whether they are in compliance with employment eligibility verification laws and regulations . in addition , the agency promotes the ice mutual agreement between government and employers ( image ) program as a way to reduce unauthorized employment . while the authority to enforce the ina employer sanctions provisions rests with dhs , ina section 274a does grant dol the authority to review i - 9 verification forms ( see above ) . under ina section 274a ( b ) ( 3 ) , employers must make completed i - 9 forms available to dol officers for inspection . dol and dhs signed a memorandum of understanding ( mou ) on worksite enforcement in march 2011 that delineates the enforcement roles of each agency and the ways in which they will work together to further their respective missions . it is widely believed that most unauthorized aliens enter and remain in the united states in order to work .