but this never happened . this break in the time lines is one of the primary reasons why many analysts and members of congress argued that the two sides should at least extend the monitoring and verification provisions in start through the end of the moscow treaty . in september 2006 , u.s . undersecretary of state robert joseph and russian deputy foreign minister sergei kislyak met to initiate a new strategic security dialogue . this dialogue evolved into a series of meetings that addressed a range of issues . start was included , but was not high on the agenda of the meetings . during the first meeting , and at a second one in december 2006 , the two sides outlined their goals for the talks . russia indicated that it wanted to follow start with a new formal treaty that would be "similar in size and complexity to start" and would use many of the same definitions and counting rules as start . russia also suggested that the two sides establish a regular working group , with meetings chaired at the assistant secretary level , to work out the details of this new treaty . according to a bush administration official , the united states had "no appetite for those big , giant documents that try to script every single element of strategic forces. the administration emphasized that the united states and russia no longer needed arms control agreements to manage their strategic relationship . the united states also did not want to set up a working group or negotiate a new treaty to follow start , and preferred to pursue broader "strategic discussions" within a political framework . in spite of their differences , the united states and russia agreed that they should continue to implement some of the monitoring and verification provisions in start after the treaty expired . russia proposed that they include these verification provisions in a new , legally binding treaty that would also limit the number of warheads permitted on each side . according to one russian official , these measures would have to be a part of a legally binding agreement to be permitted by domestic russian law . the united states , however , argued for a less formal arrangement of transparency and confidence - building measures . these could include voluntary notifications and site visits , but would not contain the detailed procedures and provisions included in start . although undersecretary of state joseph initially rejected the idea , the two sides did hold a series of meetings chaired at the assistant secretary level in search of a possible monitoring and verification agreement . they continued to disagree , however , on whether the verification measures should be voluntary or legally binding , and whether they should be attached to a formal treaty that would also limit the numbers of deployed warheads . in addition to the periodic meetings at the undersecretary level ( joseph / kislyak , then rood / kislyak ) and the working group meetings at the assistant secretary level , the united states and russia held several high level meetings that addressed the future of u.s. - russian arms control .