by then the recession may be history . but this rule does not always apply . for example , there was a recession beginning in march 2001 and ending in november 2001 that was not characterized by two successive quarterly declines in real gdp . in any case , an important distinction is that a recession is a period of declining output and not just a period of slower economic growth . it is possible for gdp growth to be positive yet so slow that the unemployment rate rises . this is sometimes referred to as a "growth recession. among economists , the nber is the generally accepted arbiter of business cycle turning points . the nber is a private nonprofit and nonpartisan organization that was founded in 1920 . in the beginning its focus was on the macroeconomy , business cycles , and long - term growth , but now it seeks to promote research on a wide variety of topics . for many years , the nber itself determined the dates of swings in the business cycle . in 1978 , however , a separate business cycle dating committee was formed . the members of the committee are appointed by the president of the nber , and they are now responsible for determining the dates of the beginnings and ends of recessions . the current members of this committee are robert hall , chair – director of nber's program of research on economic fluctuations and growth , and professor at stanford university ; martin feldstein – president emeritus of nber , and professor at harvard university ; jeffrey frankel – director of nber's program in international finance and macroeconomics , and professor at harvard university ; robert j. gordon – nber research associate , and professor at northwestern university ; james poterba – nber president , and professor at mit ; david romer – professor at the university of california , berkeley ; victor zarnowitz – senior fellow at the conference board , and professor emeritus at the university of chicago . one important indicator of economic conditions is growth in real gross domestic product ( gdp ) . gdp statistics are compiled each quarter , and thus there is a time lag between the first month that is reflected in the data and the release of the data . for example , the first release of data for the first calendar quarter of a given year does not occur until late april . the data from that release is subject to revision in each of the next two months and may be revised later on as well . it is not inconceivable that a first release of data that showed a decline in real gdp would later be revised to show an increase . even so , those using the rule of thumb that two successive quarterly declines in real gdp constitutes a recession would have to wait for the release of the second quarter data in august to establish that a recession began at the start of the year . because of the time lag associated with the release of gdp data , and because business cycle turning points are associated with months rather than quarters , the dating committee relies on a number of monthly economic indicators .