these seven bills were h.r . 2215 ( inslee ) , h.r . 2809 ( inslee ) , h.r . 6186 ( markey ) , h.r . 7284 ( lewis ) , s. 1324 ( obama ) , s. 2191 ( lieberman ) , and s. 3036 ( boxer ) . of these bills , s. 2191 was reported out of committee , and s. 3036 was discussed on the senate floor . a substitute to s. 3036 , s.amdt . 4825 , would also have established an lcfs . in most cases , these bills would have established the overall requirements of the program , but left the details to epa . key differences between these proposals include the stringency of the emissions reduction ( i.e. , percent reduction required ) , the timeframe for that reduction , and the fuels covered by the program . the more stringent proposals would require deeper cuts earlier , and include more fuels in the mandate . the establishment of a low carbon fuel standard could significantly affect fuel supplies and fuel prices . however , the details of any program are key to determining those effects . the stringency , scope , time frame , and flexibility of the program would determine its ultimate effects on both fuel markets and greenhouse gas emissions . california has not officially proposed regulations for its program , but instead has released drafts of possible regulations . the development of those rules could inform policymakers looking to establish a federal lcfs . however , the scope of a federal program — requiring compliance nationwide — would likely affect the fuel system in ways not comparable to california's experience . if more low - carbon fuel is needed in california , supply can be shifted from other parts of the country not under an lcfs . if more low - carbon fuel is needed nationwide , higher production and / or imports would be necessary . arb plans to have the rule adopted and implemented by 2010 . the draft rule would require fuel providers to achieve a set average ghg emissions level — which would decrease each year — on an energy - equivalent basis ( see table 1 ) . the draft essentially sets up two average requirements , one for gasoline and one for diesel fuel . all fuels that substitute for gasoline would be calculated in the gasoline average ; all diesel substitutes would be calculated in the diesel average . for example , natural gas or electricity used for passenger cars would be counted in the gasoline average . any over - compliance with the annual standard would generate credits for the fuel provider — credits that could be used by that provider to meet other requirements ( eg , transferred from the gasoline average to the diesel average ) , banked for future use , or traded to other fuel providers . in the 110 th congress , seven bills were introduced to establish a low carbon fuel standard similar to california's ( see table 2 ) . if the requirements of a low carbon fuel standard get ahead of the necessary supply , conventional fuel supply would need to be curtailed , or the program would need to be delayed .