we hope the parties agree . personally i think it can be done in a shorter period of time. how involved will obama , the white house / national security council staff , and secretary clinton be in diplomatic exchanges and in the day - to - day management of affairs ? who will be the primary actors in explaining administration policy to congress , and will those actors enjoy full access to and confidence of the key decisionmakers and implementers ? the environment shaping prospects for israeli - palestinian negotiations and a two - state solution can influence and be influenced by many factors . four particularly important aspects of the current situation with possible implications for congress are: the role of hamas , efforts to assist palestinians , israeli settlements in the west bank and east jerusalem , and possible constructive involvement by arab states . the role of hamas may pose the biggest open question: could hamas ( with which u.s. government representatives are currently prohibited from having contact because it is an fto ) be included ( either directly or indirectly ) in u.s. - facilitated final - status negotiations — in the event it wanted to be included ? acquiescing to the inclusion of hamas in the peace process in some manner could involve its integration or reintegration into existing palestinian leadership structures such as the pa and the plo . among current u.s. restrictions on aid aimed at hamas and its affiliates is a prohibition on direct aid to any pa government that includes members of hamas unless all government ministers publicly agree to recognize israel's right to exist and to be bound by previous israeli - palestinian agreements . prospects of palestinian unity may also lead to calls for a redefinition of the mission of u.s. - assisted pa security forces in the west bank , which target hamas members and sympathizers for arrest under certain conditions . as demonstrated by obama's cairo speech , the administration has not departed from the bush administration's stance on hamas . it has conditioned hamas's participation in the peace process on acceptance of the quartet principles . however , a june 2009 meeting by thomas pickering , a former u.s. ambassador to the united nations and current co - chair of the international crisis group , with mahmoud al zahar — one of hamas's most senior leaders — has led some to wonder if the administration might be open to indirect or secret talks with hamas . in august , washington post columnist david ignatius speculated that the timing could be right to pursue secret talks — perhaps allowing the united states to take advantage of possible hamas concerns occasioned by iran's internal post - election turmoil: but tehran's reliability as a patron is now open to question , and its friends may want to hedge their bets . it's an ideal time for the united states to explore alternatives — through a broad diplomatic opening with syria and secret contacts ( using saudi , egyptian and syrian channels ) with hamas .