each of these characteristics is discussed below . this report attempts to identify all congressional commissions established between the 101 st and 114 th congress . a large number of bills creating congressional commissions are introduced in congress each session . during the 114 th congress , bills have been introduced that would have created more than 20 congressional commissions . similar numbers of bills have been proposed in previous congresses . most of these bills proposing commissions are not enacted . congressional commissions can be generally placed into one of three categories . most congressional commissions are policy commissions , temporary bodies which study particular policy problems and report their findings to congress . less common are investigative commissions , which are similar in structure to policy commissions but tasked with reviewing specific events . c ommemorative commissions are entities established to commemorate a person or event , often to mark an anniversary . table 2 reports the total number and percentage of each type of commission identified in the lis database search of the 101 st through 114 th congresses . throughout american history , congress has found commissions to be useful tools in the legislative process . commissions may be established , among other things , to cope with increases in the scope and complexity of legislation , to forge consensus , to draft bills , to promote inter - party communication , to address issues that do not fall neatly within the jurisdictional boundaries of congressional committees , and to bring together recommendations . these goals can be grouped into six categories: expertise , issue and political complexity , consensus building , non - partisanship , solving collective action problems , and visibility . congressional commissions have been criticized by both political and scholarly observers . these criticisms chiefly fall into three groups . first , critics often charge that commissions are an "abdication of responsibility" on the part of legislators . second , commissions are undemocratic , replacing elected legislators with appointed decisionmakers . third , critics also argue that commissions are financially inefficient ; they are expensive and their findings often ignored by congress . statutes establishing congressional policy commissions generally include language that states the mandate of the commission , provides a membership structure and appointment scheme , defines member compensation and other benefits , outlines the commission's duties and powers , authorizes funding , and sets a termination date for the commission . a wide variety of options are available for each of these organizational choices . legislators can tailor the composition , organization , and working arrangements of a commission , based on the particular goals of congress . as a result , individual congressional commissions often have an organizational structure and powers quite different from one another . the following are key considerations for congress in forming a commission . the tables that follow provide information on the 107 congressional commissions identified by the database search of the 101 st through 114 th congresses . for each commission , the following information is provided: the name of the commission ; the type of commission ; and the public law creating the commission and date of enactment .