according to the u.s . global change research program: in the future , with continued global warming , heat waves and heavy downpours are very likely to further increase in frequency and intensity . substantial areas of north america are likely to have more frequent droughts of greater severity . hurricane wind speeds , rainfall intensity , and storm surge levels are likely to increase . the strongest cold season storms are likely to become more frequent , with stronger winds and more extreme wave heights . another issue for congress may be distinguishing how much of the higher costs of severe weather - related disasters may be due to changing demographics in hazard - prone areas from the effects of any increased frequency and intensity of extreme weather events due to climate change . congress may consider several options for potentially reducing the costs from the impacts of severe thunderstorms and tornadoes: improving detection and warning systems ; fostering efforts to build more resilient buildings and infrastructure ; and supporting research and development to better understand why and where severe thunderstorms and tornadoes occur , as well as other measures . whether and how climate change is influencing or could affect the frequency and intensity of thunderstorms and tornadoes is not yet evident , although some commentators ascribe a more extreme and violent climate to the influence of human - induced climate change . thus it is not clear whether long - term efforts to mitigate greenhouse gas - induced global warming — such as by reducing emissions of carbon dioxide and other gases — could also mitigate damage to property and reduce injuries and losses of life from severe thunderstorms and tornadoes . enhancing the scientific understanding of how and why severe thunderstorms and tornadoes form , and improving the accuracy and timeliness of forecasting and warning systems , will likely provide individuals and communities in the united states better information to help them avoid damage and injury from severe weather events . the role of the federal government in weather and climate research , thunderstorm and tornado forecasting , and issuing warnings is substantial . spending on weather forecasts and warnings comprises the bulk of the nws budget , which is itself the largest component of noaa's annual budget . several other federal agencies contribute to the weather and climate enterprise , including nsf , nasa , the u.s. geological survey , and others . the federal investment in weather - related response and recovery , including programs at the department of agriculture and fema , is also substantial . many observers and stakeholders call for increased funding for improving the understanding of physical processes that produce extreme events , such as severe thunderstorms and tornadoes , and how these processes change with climate . observers and stakeholders are broadly in agreement about the types of r&d needed , such as integrated data and observation systems , improved remote sensing capabilities , better modeling capability , and others . even if funding increased substantially , however , it may not necessarily lead to significant decreases in damages , injuries , or deaths from severe thunderstorms and tornadoes .