kill ! kill ! and shout various insults at the japanese spectators . japan wins 3-1 , leading to weeping chinese fans and riots . thousands of police are on hand , including riot troops in black body armor and special tactical units . earlier in the tournament , in chongqing , hostile chinese fans booed the japanese team throughout the games and surrounded the japanese team's bus after one match . 11 / 10 / 04 — an unidentified nuclear submarine , later discovered to be chinese , enters japanese territorial waters near the sakishima island chain off okinawa , initiating a two - day chase . japan's navy goes on alert for the first time in five years . japan accuses china of violating its sovereign rights and demands a formal apology . beijing expresses regret over the incident , saying that the sub was on routine maneuvers and that it made the incursion due to a technical error . 11 / 21 / 04 — koizumi and hu meet in a japan - china summit in santiago , chile . the leaders agree to develop economic and cultural bilateral ties , which are important for themselves and also for other parts of the world , and pledge to make efforts for the resumption of multilateral talks over north korea's nuclear ambitions . 1 / 6 / 05 — despite strong protests from china , japan grants taiwanese president lee teng - hui a weeklong visit to japan . china postpones a visit by a group of japanese lawmakers , claiming that the request was not made to protest lee's visit and that more time is needed to prepare for the trip . 4 / 5 / 05 — the japanese ministry of education , culture , sports , science and technology approves new editions of middle school textbooks that china says glosses over japan's world war ii record . anti - japan demonstrations occur in chendu , sichuan province , and shenzhen , guangdong province . millions of mainlanders sign a petition against tokyo's un bid on the security council . protestors attack japanese owned or funded stores and boycott japanese products . 4 / 9 / 05 — anti - japan demonstrations continue in cities across china . 10,000 people march in beijing to voice their anger at the textbooks , the city's biggest protest since 1999 . protestors stone the japanese embassy and the ambassador's residence . 4 / 17 / 05 — protestors hurl stones and eggs at the japanese consulate general building in shanghai . some 2,000 people take part in anti - japanese demonstrations in shenyang and 10,000 in shenzhen . 4 / 20-4 / 21 / 05 — china orders an end to anti - japanese protects . senior foreign diplomats are dispatched to all cities where protests occurred to calm sentiments and stress the importance of stability and observance of law . officials urge its leaders to meet with japanese leaders later this week . 4 / 24 / 05 — hu and koizumi meet for a 46-minute talk at the asian - african summit in indonesia in hopes of improving relations .