these issues are still unresolved . lebanon has not adopted a national budget since 2005 and , while the cabinet reported progress on a draft 2010 budget in june 2010 , the march 8 opposition continues to reject proposals for tax increases and spending limits supported by the march 14 leadership . we are monitoring new developments . as you know , the government formation is just beginning . a hezbollah - controlled government would clearly have an impact on our bilateral relationship with lebanon. hezbollah , allies withdraw from g overnment . in anticipation of looming indictments and in response to prime minister hariri's refusal to denounce the stl , hezbollah and its allies withdrew from the cabinet on january 13 , 2011 . the resignations coincided with prime minister hariri's meeting with president obama in washington . following the resignations , the white house issued a statement saying that "the efforts by the hezbollah - led coalition to collapse the lebanese government only demonstrate their own fear and determination to block the government's ability to conduct its business and advance the aspirations of all of the lebanese people. the state department also decried the action , calling it a "transparent effort by forces who seek to subvert justice and undermine lebanon's stability and progress. according to the constitution , the current government now serves as a caretaker until a new consensus can be reached . special tribunal for lebanon ( stl ) i ndictments . on january 17 , 2011 , stl prosecutor daniel bellemare signed indictments against the alleged assassins of rafiq hariri and filed them with pre - trial judge daniel fransen . fransen will now review the indictments and reject or certify them . the process could take months and the indictments will remain confidential . hezbollah responded with organized demonstrations in a number of beirut neighborhoods , but no serious incidents were reported . secretary of state hillary clinton called this "an important step toward justice and ending impunity for murder. she added that "those who oppose the tribunal seek to create a false choice between justice and stability in lebanon ; we reject this. the united states and lebanon have historically enjoyed a good relationship due in part to cultural and religious ties ; the democratic character of the state ; a large lebanese american community in the united states ; and the pro - western orientation of lebanon , particularly during the cold war . the american university of beirut ( aub ) was founded in 1866 by americans in lebanon and continues to receive u.s. funding . despite long - standing interaction between the united states and lebanon , some might argue that lebanon is of limited strategic value to the united states . pro - syrian elements have criticized it and syria has repeatedly threatened not to cooperate with the tribunal . opponents of the resolution objected on the grounds that it was passed under chapter vii of the u.n. charter , which could include the use of force , and that it represented interference in lebanon's internal affairs . the russian delegate to the u.n. commented that "never before has the security council ratified agreements on behalf of a parliament of a foreign country.