this table reflects the language as amended . though the sections generally afford the president the authority to furnish whatever assistance the section establishes , section 622 ( a ) and ( c ) ( 22 u.s.c . 2382 ( a ) , ( c ) ) of the act states that nothing contained in this act shall be construed to infringe upon the powers or functions of the secretary of state... . 2151 et seq .

 ) , enacted at the behest of president kennedy , sought to organize and implement u.s. foreign assistance programs with a commitment to long - range economic assistance to the developing world . the president , in a "special message to the congress on foreign aid," delivered march 22 , 1961 , described the u.s. foreign aid programs emerging from world war ii as [b]ureaucratically fragmented , awkward and slow , its administration is diffused over a haphazard and irrational structure covering at least four departments and several other agencies . the program is based on a series of legislative measures and administrative procedures conceived at different times and for different purposes , many of them now obsolete , inconsistent and unduly rigid and thus unsuited for our present needs and purposes . its weaknesses have begun to undermine confidence in our effort both here and abroad . president kennedy went on to note the declining prestige of the united states' foreign aid apparatus and the negative impact of that decline on administering and staffing programs abroad . the president also cited the uneven and undependable short - term financing of programs and the resulting disincentive for long - term efficient planning . general provisions measures that apply to the entire appropriations act are cited only at chapter 1 — policy , development assistance authorizations ; they are numerous and apply to most authorities . such general provisions sections prohibit assistance for reasons relating to terrorism , military overthrows , and debt arrearages , to name a few . through 1985 , congress regularly enacted new authorization legislation or amended the original act to update authorization time frames , and to incorporate newer programs and authorities . from 1986 on , however , congress turned more frequently to enacting freestanding authorities that did not amend the 1961 act , and included language in annual appropriations measures to waive the requirement to keep authorizations current . thus , sections in the foreign assistance act of 1961 , in many instances , do not refer to authorization beyond fiscal years 1986 and 1987 ( unless the program was added to the act by an amendment enacted after that period ) , but programs are continued through appropriations . table 3 presents the authorities enacted in the foreign assistance act of 1961 , as amended , and the corresponding appropriations that fund those authorities in the current foreign assistance appropriations act . the left - side column of table 3 cites sections of the foreign assistance act of 1961 , as amended , that authorize programs , and provides the latest year for which authorization is enacted . sections that establish a need for such a program — in the form of policy or finding statements , for example — are not cited .