igs generally comply with such requests . on january 22 , 2009 , sigtarp neil barofsky noted in a letter to the chairman of the house committee on financial services that his office was preparing requests to tarp recipients asking them to provide information and documentation related to their use or expected use of tarp funds , as well as their plans for following executive compensation limitations , within 30 days of the request . on january 30 , 2009 , in a letter to the director of the office of management and budget ( omb ) , peter r. orszag , senator grassley disclosed that omb had "advised the ig that sigtarp could not initiate its significant oversight effort to improve the general transparency of tarp funds due to restrictions of the paperwork reduction act" ( pra ) . according to the letter , sigtarp requested "emergency processing" by omb of its letter to tarp recipients . reportedly , omb initially noted that sigtarp "would not be limited" by the pra , and then subsequently withdrew its emergency approval within several minutes of granting such approval . according to the letter , it was senator grassley's understanding at the time that omb "is requiring sigtarp to post a proposed letter of inquiry to tarp recipients for 15 days , wait for comments , and then justify to omb that it has taken into account the public comments in redrafting the inquiry letter. the senate had passed a similar bill in the 110 th congress . 111-15 makes modifications to the sigtarp's audit and investigative authorities , grants the sigtarp temporary hiring power outside of the competitive civil service process , grants the sigtarp authority to hire up to 25 retired annuitants , requires coordination with other inspectors general with regard to audits and other responsibilities , and makes sigtarp reports publicly available , with certain exceptions . 111-15 makes sigtarp , as well as the special igs for iraq and afghanistan reconstruction , members of the newly codified council of the inspectors general on integrity and efficiency until the date that each special ig terminates . s. 976 would provide such an exemption for statutory igs , special igs , the council of igs on integrity and efficiency , and the recovery accountability and transparency board , which is comprised of igs and a presidential designee or appointee . 111-22 , the helping families save their homes act of 2009 , was enacted on may 20 , 2009 , and contains provisions with regard to sigtarp in the context of public - private investment funds . section 402 requires any public - private investment fund program ( ppip ) to , in consultation with sigtarp , impose conflict of interest rules on fund managers ; allows the sigtarp access to the books and records of such public - private investment funds ; requires the treasury secretary to consult with the sigtarp and issue regulations governing the interaction of the ppip , the term asset backed securities loan facility ( talf ) , and other similar public - private investment programs ; and mandates a report from the sigtarp 60 days after such a program is established .