despite these challenges , a number of analysts were optimistic about the summit . a number of analysts think that the most significant result of the port of spain summit of the americas may be an improvement in u.s. relations with the rest of the hemisphere . the final declaration expanded to 96 commitments , adopted more ambiguous language , and considerably reduced the number of measurable mandates . while the draft declaration had won praise from some analysts for its relative brevity and focus on implementation , a number of observers characterized the final declaration as largely meaningless . although the changes made to the document were done in hopes of achieving consensus , some countries remained unwilling to sign the declaration , asserting that it did not sufficiently address issues such as the international financial crisis and the reintegration of cuba into the inter - american system . as a result , the 34 heads of state and government attending the summit agreed to a compromise that resulted in prime minister patrick manning of trinidad and tobago , the summit chairman , signing the declaration on behalf of all participating countries . despite speeches from some leaders that criticized past and current u.s. policies in the region and a few other confrontational incidents , the summit was largely free of the contentious climate that characterized the previous summit in mar del plata , argentina . during his summit speech , president obama pledged to "seek an equal partnership" with the countries of the region , "based on mutual respect. he also met and listened to the concerns of the leaders of the countries of unasur , the central american integration system ( sica ) , and the caribbean community ( caricom ) during three side meetings and made a point of engaging leaders — such as president chávez of venezuela — who had poor relationships with the previous u.s. administration . although some critics asserted that president obama failed to advance u.s. ideals as a result of his unwillingness to confront leaders like president chávez , the president's actions were very well received by observers throughout latin america . indeed , leaders from a variety of countries and ideological backgrounds praised president obama and declared the summit a success and the beginning of a new era in hemispheric relations . while some concrete steps — such as president chávez's naming of a new ambassador to the united states — have been taken to build on the good will generated by the summit , most analysts caution that significant policy differences remain and continued engagement will be crucial to sustaining stronger hemispheric relations . in order to address growing security threats in the region , president obama announced a $30 million initiative to strengthen cooperation between the united states and the countries of the caribbean . as part of the initiative , the united states will work with the countries of the caribbean community and the dominican republic to develop a joint security strategy that addresses the shared concerns of transnational crime , illicit trafficking , and maritime and aviation security .