second , if so , is the search or seizure "reasonable" ? courts have uniformly held that compulsory dna collection and analysis constitutes a search , and thus triggers fourth amendment rights . although some courts have signaled that dna collection or storage might also constitute a seizure , courts have generally not addressed that question . thus , the question in cases brought is whether the collection of dna satisfies the fourth amendment reasonableness test . courts will likely wrestle with the questions raised by the divergent pool and marshall decisions in future cases involving pre - conviction dna collection . two fundamental questions arise in every fourth amendment challenge . first , does the challenged action constitute a search or seizure by federal or local government and thus trigger the fourth amendment right ? several additional issues are likely to affect courts' analyses in such cases , and might also impact the existing judicial consensus regarding the constitutionality of dna collection from persons who have been convicted of a crime . in particular , the emerging science regarding biological purposes for junk dna and the fbi's long - term storage of dna profiles are likely to play a role in future analyses . the two u.s. district court cases addressing pre - conviction dna collection pursuant to the federal law illustrate that outcomes in future cases involving arrestees may depend on courts' resolution of at least two key issues , namely: ( 1 ) what , if any , distinction exists between the reasonable expectation of privacy of an arrestee and a convict ; and ( 2 ) the degree of privacy intrusion perceived as a result of a dna sample . the latter question may turn on courts' framing of the role of dna collection — that is , whether it is analogous to the long - upheld practice of fingerprinting or whether it represents a greater privacy intrusion . existing expungement provisions might also become a factor in future challenges to pre - conviction dna collection . the government might argue that requirements that dna samples be expunged once an arrestee is discharged or acquitted offset the degree of privacy intrusion caused by such samples . although nearly all courts that have addressed the issue have upheld the compulsory collection of dna from persons who have been convicted , no judicial consensus has yet emerged regarding the constitutionality of such collection from persons who have been arrested or are facing charges prior to a criminal trial . to date , some federal courts have made note of the expungement provisions , but they generally have not addressed the effect of expungement requirements in fourth amendment analyses . the categories of individuals from whom law enforcement officials may require dna samples has expanded in recent years . the federal government and most states authorize compulsory collection of dna samples from individuals convicted for specified criminal offenses , including all felonies in most jurisdictions and extending to misdemeanors , such as failure to register as a sex offender or crimes for which a sentence greater than six months applies , in some jurisdictions . in addition , the federal government and some states now authorize compulsory collection from people whom the government has arrested or detained but not convicted .