how are such determinations made ? to what extent are awards and incentives being used to cope with increasing pay compression in civil service basic pay due to pay caps linked to the executive schedule ? or are they being used as salary enhancements for privileged segments of an agency's workforce ? in the case of awards , is the performance appraisal system that underlies an agency's award decisions "valid" ( the system measures aspects of performance under an employee's control that reflect relevant job characteristics and are free from contaminating factors outside the employee's control ) , "reliable" ( eg , different raters would agree on criteria and determinations ) , and "free from bias" ( eg , free from rating errors such as leniency , severity , central tendency , or "halo" effects ) ? the way in which systems of oversight and regulation are structured within agencies and the executive branch may help provide answers to questions like the ones posed above . several approaches have been used by congress to establish oversight and regulatory mechanisms within agencies and the executive branch . for example , congress frequently has provided for institutional checks within agencies and the executive branch . as noted earlier , an institutional check refers to the situation when congress delegates authority to an agency but also ensures that one or more additional agencies or entities can veto or block the delegate agency's actions . institutional checks were created with opm's roles in the implementation of chapter 57 incentive authorities , for example ( eg , 5 c.f.r . however , it is unclear whether opm has ever revoked or suspended an agency's authority to offer incentives . when well designed , an institutional check may produce information that might galvanize action to address problems , without need for congressional intervention , and involve other parties in decision making when one party may not be fully relied upon to act in the public interest when acting alone or behind closed doors . related issues for congress may involve whether and how to create institutional checks within an agency , or within the executive branch , to ensure that laws are executed faithfully to congressional intent . on one hand , institutional checks may create additional bureaucratic hurdles that result in some inefficiency and frustration . on the other hand , institutional checks may not result in unnecessary red tape and may be judged necessary in order to avoid abuses and management dysfunctions and promote the accomplishment of agency missions and goals . congress also has established oversight and regulatory capacity in agencies and the executive branch through the use of planning , transparency , and reporting requirements . such requirements also may address issues of congressional oversight . it has become widely recognized that congress does not have resources to pursue in - depth oversight and investigations into all areas of public policy and management that some observers might wish . with an increasingly customized and decentralized civil service "system," these issues may be especially relevant to hr authorities and practices , including those related to employee awards and incentives . how , then , might congress exercise oversight over a civil service system that is increasingly fragmented ?