these savings can be substantial . for example , american airlines estimates that the 18-year old md - 80s currently flying use 35% more fuel than the boeing 737-800 aircraft that are to replace them over the next two years . epa's inventory of u.s. greenhouse gas emissions and sinks shows that domestic flights of all kinds ( military , commercial aircraft , and general aviation ) accounted for about 10% of the ghg emissions from the u.s. transportation sector in 2006 — 2.6% of overall u.s. ghg emissions . aviation's impact on climate may be greater than these figures suggest , however , for two reasons . first , emissions resulting from international transportation are not currently included in the u.s. emission totals . these emissions totaled 52.7 million metric tons in 2007 . if they were included in the u.s. aviation statistics , emissions from aircraft of all types would have accounted for 3.4% of the u.s. ghg total . second , the bulk of the aviation sector's emissions occur high in the atmosphere , where their impact on climate is greater than that of emissions at ground level . according to a number of sources , the total impact of aviation could be around twice the impact of carbon dioxide alone when this factor is taken into account . emissions from jet aircraft also lead to the formation of cirrus clouds , as the condensation trails ( contrails ) of water vapor and sulfur particles emitted from engines at high altitudes form ice crystals that persist as clouds under some atmospheric conditions . scientists are uncertain how to measure the occurrence and impact of such clouds , but they are reasonably certain that the clouds add to the greenhouse effect of aircraft emissions , perhaps substantially . thus , while the precise share of aviation in total greenhouse gas emissions depends on what is included , and the impact of some emissions is unclear , there is little doubt that aviation is a significant contributor to u.s. and world ghg emissions . as policy makers consider whether the federal government should regulate aircraft ghg emissions ( versus continuing to rely solely on market forces to determine the level of emissions ) , some have turned their attention to the potential for regulation under the clean air act . in december 2007 , epa received two petitions requesting that it exercise that authority to regulate ghg emissions from aircraft engines . epa has not responded to these petitions , nor has it promulgated regulations to control co 2 from any source , to date . in 2003 , responding to an earlier petition to regulate ghgs from cars and trucks , the agency maintained that it did not have authority under the clean air act to do so . that determination was challenged by massachusetts and other petitioners , and in a 2007 decision , the u.s. supreme court found that ghgs are air pollutants within the clean air act's definition , and thus , epa has authority to regulate them if it finds that they "cause , or contribute to , air pollution which may reasonably be anticipated to endanger public health or welfare.