bush administration . table 6 shows that continuing appropriations acts were used in transition years during all five administrations . as required by the constitution , legislation affecting revenues originates in the house of representatives , but the senate has latitude to amend any revenue bills received from the house . most laws that establish revenue sources are permanent and continue each year without legislative action , but in most years , presidents propose changes in revenue law to alter tax rates , modify the distribution of the tax burden , or make other changes in revenue policy . revenue acts can also be initiated through the reconciliation process provided for in the congressional budget and impoundment control act of 1974 . the act provides for the adoption of a budget resolution ( discussed above ) , which may contain reconciliation directives instructing the relevant congressional committees to report changes to existing revenue legislation to meet the recommended levels of revenues . the reconciliation process was used to enact revenue legislation under the g.h.w . bush , clinton , and g.w . bush administrations . the timing of action on major revenue legislation may vary considerably from one measure to the next . some revenue measures may be enacted after only a few months of consideration , while the enactment of other revenue measures may not occur until well into the following year . this pattern also holds true for revenue measures considered under the reconciliation process . table 7 illustrates that a major revenue measure was enacted into law during the transition year of each of the five administrations . three of these revenue acts , under g.h.w . bush , clinton , and g.w . bush , were reconciliation measures . congressional action was fairly timely in four instances ( with enactment occurring between may and august ) , but the 1989 legislation ( under president g.h.w . bush ) was not enacted until november 22 . almost all borrowing by the federal government is conducted by the treasury department , within the restrictions established by a single , statutory limit on the total amount of debt that may be outstanding at any time . most adjustments to the debt limit have been increases , but sometimes the change has been a reduction . the annual budget resolution includes recommended levels of the public debt limit for each fiscal year covered by the resolution . because a budget resolution does not become law , congress and the president must enact legislation in order to implement budget resolution policies . the house and senate may develop and consider legislation adjusting the debt limit in any one of three ways: ( 1 ) under regular legislative procedures in both chambers , either as freestanding legislation or as a part of a measure dealing with other topics ; ( 2 ) pursuant to house rule xxvii ( the so - called gephardt rule ) ; or ( 3 ) as part of the budget reconciliation process provided for under the congressional budget act of 1974 .