these are detailed below . in addition , the parties to the unfccc continue to operate without rules on voting . as a result , decisions must be made by consensus ( without objection ) . this is increasing seen by some as a problem for further progress under the unfccc , as any one party may block an agreement . for the second time in unfccc history , the chair gaveled adoption of a decision over the objections of a party ( see bolivia's experience in discussion of the cancun agreements ) . the chair announced adoption of the doha amendment with language restricting sales of surplus aaus over a delegation trying to object . this incident has raised questions about whether and how voting and consensus may evolve . members of congress may seek to monitor and provide input to the doha platform ( adp ) negotiations , due to reach an agreement in 2015 to take effect in 2020 , with a vision of avoiding a 2 o c ( 3.6 o f ) increase of global average temperature above pre - industrial levels . the united states will be among the countries under most pressure also to provide financial and other assistance to low - income countries , to help them take on and adhere to commitments to ghg mitigation and adaptation . in preparation for the 2015 adp negotiations , congress may wish to provide advice regarding the united states' position at summit of world leaders , to be convened by un secretary general ban ki - moon in september 2014 ; he has challenged leaders to bring "bold pledges. members of congress hold divergent views about the value of international cooperation to address climate change . while some members are convinced that human - induced climate change is a high priority risk that must be addressed through federal actions and international cooperation , others are not convinced of significant risk . some are wary , as well , of international processes that could impose costs on the united states , undermine national sovereignty , or lead to trade advantages for other countries . regardless of current views , the united states is a party to the unfccc and has certain obligations , however unenforceable , under that treaty . the united states' behaviors in that context are likely to continue to draw great attention on the world stage . arguably , u.s. credibility is impaired to the degree that it has not followed through on earlier commitments , is unable to negotiate for unambiguous commitments due to lack of domestic consensus , and cannot assure others that any agreements made by an administration would be accepted by congress . the executive branch continues international negotiations and implementation of the unfccc obligations . committees of congress engage in oversight ( from home and at the international meetings ) , providing input to the administration formally and informally , and deciding program authorities and appropriations for these activities . given the continuing public and legislative debate over whether and how to address climate change , the 113 th congress may engage on the international aspects . international cooperation would be required to curtail human - induced climate change and to facilitate successful adaptation to its projected impacts .