other factors also have been at work . these include a general reluctance by most members of congress to address controversial environmental issues in view of the slim majorities held by political parties in the house and the senate ; and a lack of presidential initiatives on clean water issues ( neither the clinton nor the bush administration proposed cwa legislation ) . in addition , for some time after the terrorist attacks of september 11 , 2001 , congress was more focused on security , terrorism , and iraq war issues than on many other topics , including environmental protection . as a result of the 2006 mid - term elections and changed congressional leadership beginning in 2007 , many observers expected that the 110 th congress would pursue oversight of clean water and other environmental programs . greater interest in environmental issues was apparent , but no comprehensive legislation was enacted . a particular legislative focus was water infrastructure financing legislation , specifically reauthorization of the act's financial aid program ( discussed next in this report ) . also on the congressional agenda was consideration of the geographic reach of the clean water act over the nation's waters and wetlands , in light of court rulings — including two supreme court decisions — that have narrowed the law's regulatory jurisdiction , but in ways that are somewhat unclear . the 2008 election encouraged many policymakers and stakeholders to anticipate much greater attention to environmental issues , including clean water , by the 111 th congress and the obama administration . during the 2008 presidential campaign , candidate obama supported several issues , including preservation of wetlands , great lakes restoration legislation , water conservation , regulation of large animal feeding operations , and full funding of clean water infrastructure assistance programs . funding for water infrastructure projects , discussed next in this report , received early attention in the 111 th congress in light of interest in utilizing increased investment in public works projects — including wastewater — in order to stimulate the faltering u.s. economy , but the obama administration did not present specific legislative proposals concerning water quality . as discussed below , the 111 th congress considered a number of water quality issues through oversight and legislation . two bills amending the cwa were enacted and are discussed . one dealt with extending a moratorium for cwa permitting of certain vessels ( p.l . 111-215 ) , and the other dealt with ensuring that federal agencies and departments pay localities for reasonable costs associated with managing stormwater pollution from federal properties ( p.l . several other issues affecting efforts to achieve the goals and objectives of the clean water act drew interest during the 111 th congress through oversight and legislation . two bills were enacted — a bill concerning pollutant discharges from vessels , and another dealing with federal agencies' responsibility to pay for stormwater charges . clean water issues also were addressed by congress in the context of appropriations . president bush's fy2009 budget was presented on february 5 , 2008 . overall , the budget sought $7.1 billion for epa programs and activities , 5% less than congress appropriated for fy2008 . the request included a number of reductions for water quality programs .