who should the cto report to ? an overview of each is provided below . among the early challenges the cto may face are defining and communicating the roles of the position ; identifying and recruiting talent , from both inside and outside of government ; and negotiating domains of responsibilities , formal and informal , within the white house and with executive branch agencies that have overlapping missions . beyond these initial challenges , the cto will need to establish goals and milestones , set priorities , secure resources , and develop and execute a strategy . if the position or office of the cto is not established by congress and provided with statutory authorities and a dedicated budget , it may be difficult for the cto to affect change in individual federal agencies or systemically throughout the federal government . in such a case , the efficacy of the cto may depend largely on the mandate provided by president obama to the cto ( and agencies' perception of the mandate ) , the imprimatur of the white house , and the personal attributes of the cto ( eg , relationship with the president , past accomplishments , knowledge , professional reputation , persuasiveness ) . perhaps one of the most difficult and enduring challenges the cto may face could be "turf wars" associated with overlapping responsibilities with other executive agencies and their principals . these "turf wars" could involve issues such as technology and innovation policy , computer and network security , and intellectual property enforcement . for example , there are several organizations within the executive office of the president ( eop ) that have potentially overlapping authorities , including the office of management and budget ( as discussed on pages 6-7 of this report ) ; the national economic council ( nec ) , on issues related to technological innovation . for example , the nec might evaluate federal policies intended to promote technological innovation as an option for achieving the president's economic policy objectives ; the president's council on innovation and competitiveness , which is charged under the america competes act with providing advice to the president with respect to global trends in competitiveness and innovation and allocation of federal resources in education , job training , and technology research and development in the context of global trends in competitiveness and innovation , as well as making recommendations to the heads of executive agencies to improve innovation ; and the intellectual property enforcement coordinator , on technology - centered intellectual property rights ( eg , digital copyright ) . potential conflict between the cto and these offices might be magnified with the co - location of the cto within ostp . while assigning mr. chopra the dual roles of assistant to the president and cto and associate director of ostp may contribute to better coordination and integration of cto and ostp functions , it may also create reporting and issue jurisdiction issues , both within ostp and with other eop offices . for example , in his capacity as ostp associate director for technology , mr. chopra reports to the director of ostp , just as the position has in previous administrations .