it presumed to the contrary with respect to religious colleges . the court's decisions in agostini v. felton and mitchell v. helms , however , have recast these tests in a manner that has lowered the constitutional barriers to direct aid to sectarian schools . the court has abandoned the presumption that sectarian elementary and secondary schools are so pervasively sectarian that direct aid either results in the advancement of religion or fosters excessive entanglement . it has also abandoned the assumption that government must engage in an intrusive monitoring of such institutions' use of direct aid . the court still requires that direct aid serve a secular purpose and not lead to excessive entanglement . in roemer v. maryland board of public works , the court upheld a state program of noncategorical grants to all private colleges in the state , including ones that were church - affiliated , because the program included a statutory restriction barring the use of the funds for sectarian purposes . the court stressed that the church - related colleges that benefited were not "pervasively sectarian" and that the aid was statutorily restricted to secular use . in tilton v. richardson , the court upheld as constitutional a federal program that provided grants to colleges , including church - affiliated colleges , for the construction of needed facilities , so long as the facilities were not used for religious worship or sectarian instruction . the statute provided that the federal interest in any facility constructed with federal funds would expire after 20 years , but the court held that the nonsectarian use requirement would have to apply so long as the buildings had any viable use . subsequently , in hunt v. mcnair , the court upheld a program in which a state issued revenue bonds to finance the construction of facilities at institutions of higher education , including those with a religious affiliation . the program barred the use of the funds for any facility used for sectarian instruction or religious worship . in rosenberger v. the rector and board of visitors of the university of virginia , the court held that it would be constitutional for a state university to subsidize the printing costs of an avowedly religious student publication . the university made the subsidy available to non - religious student publications as a way of fostering student expression and discussion , and the court held that it would constitute viewpoint discrimination in violation of the free speech clause of the first amendment to deny the subsidy to a student publication offering a religious perspective . in two summary affirmances , the court has upheld the constitutionality of programs providing grants to students attending institutions of higher education , including religiously affiliated colleges . both smith v. board of governors of the university of north carolina and americans united for the separation of church and state v. blanton involved grants given on the basis of need for students to use in attending either public or private colleges , including religiously affiliated ones . in affirming the decisions , the supreme court issued no opinion in either case , but the lower courts reasoned that the religious colleges benefited from the programs only if the students independently decided to attend .