more recently , a division has emerged . at trial , a federal district court held that the warrant was not supported by probable cause ; thus , the search violated the fourth amendment . applying the exclusionary rule remedy , the district court suppressed the evidence of drugs found in the homes and cars . on appeal , the supreme court held that suppression is inappropriate in cases , such as leon , where the violation occurred despite a police officer's "objectively reasonable reliance" — for example , on a warrant that is actually invalid . by creating an exception to the exclusionary rule , the leon court arguably opened the door to permitting evidence in cases involving multiple types of fourth amendment violations . however , the leon decision itself addressed only the particular circumstance in which a warrant exists but was invalidly issued based on insufficient probable cause . the leon opinion , including several exceptions to the good - faith exception articulated in the case , evidences a holding that only addresses that particular context . to justify its holding , the leon court noted the logical inconsistency between exclusion in cases involving non - police errors and the rule's traditional deterrence rationale , stating: "penalizing the officer for the magistrate's error , rather than his own , cannot logically contribute to the deterrence of fourth amendment violations. based on the court's reliance on this rationale , one might argue that the court did not originally anticipate an extension of the good - faith exception to cases involving police error . the supreme court has extended the leon good - faith exception in relatively minor ways over the past several decades . in a 1995 case , illinois v. krull , the court applied the exception where police officers had searched an auto dealer's list of licenses pursuant to a statute that courts later struck down as unconstitutional . several years later , in arizona v. evans , the court applied leon to evidence obtained after an arrest based on a facially valid warrant that the clerk of the court had neglected to show had been quashed seventeen days earlier . until recently , these extensions had involved police reliance on errors made by actors — for example , the clerk of the court in evans and the legislative branch in krull — not the police themselves . furthermore , in a 2004 case , groh v. ramirez , the court seemed to draw an explicit line between police errors and errors made by other actors . police officers in groh searched a home where they suspected that the owners had stored illegal weaponry . the court of appeals held that the search warrant , which a magistrate had signed but the officers had themselves prepared , violated the constitutional requirement that property to be searched be described with particularity ; thus , the officers' search violated the homeowners' fourth amendment rights . on appeal , the supreme court declined to apply the good - faith exception to the exclusionary rule , because it found that the officers' search pursuant to a warrant that failed to list property to be searched was not a "reasonable" mistake .