those issues are discussed below . four of the questions congress may expect to face with respect to green building are how well are current federal green building programs working ? how effective are current methods for coordinating the green building activities of different agencies ? to what extent and by what means should congress extend federal efforts to facilitate and support adoption and implementation of green building measures throughout the united states ? what priorities should congress give to the different elements of green building , especially those such as siting that have received less attention in the past ? what actions should congress take to facilitate the growth of scientific and technical knowledge relating to green building ? if congress wishes to take additional action on such questions , it could do so through appropriations , new statutory requirements , and tax law . it could also review current and proposed agency programs , regulations , and policies . gao has released several reports over the last decade addressing various federal efforts relating to green building . gao recommended that agencies coordinate to assess the relative performance of the initiatives . congress may wish to examine how well — in terms of both performance and efficiency — federal agencies are implementing green building programs , and what impacts those efforts are having on the adoption of green building practices both within the federal government and nationwide . in addition to oversight of the activities of individual agencies , it may also be useful to examine how well agency efforts are being coordinated . in addition to programs and activities such as those described above , some federal agencies such as the federal housing administration and the department of veterans affairs also support the availability of mortgages that promote energy efficiency . lenders who provide such mortgages may also become energy star partners . if congress finds that such measures are not adequate , it could consider such steps as providing stronger mortgage and tax incentives , broadening the scope of mortgage and tax incentives to include elements of green building in addition to energy , funding the rebate program authorized by epact 2005 , and specific appropriations to speed adoption of green building in areas where market penetration has been lagging , such as residential renovation . congress could also consider regulatory actions , although such efforts might be complicated by federalism issues and differences in regional requirements relating to climate and other variables . congress could consider identifying ways in which current green building efforts in federal agencies could be further enhanced . in addition to accelerating green building for new and existing stock , congress might consider whether programs and activities are sufficiently integrated within agencies such as epa and doe , and whether activities across agencies are sufficiently harmonized , such as through participation in the wbdg ( see the text box " whole building design guide ," above ) . among the elements of green building discussed in this report , energy has received far more attention than any other .