what should be done in such instances ? some suggest that considerations other than species conservation should prevail ; others seek to change the current posture of the law by changing the role of science . these considerations are complicated by the cost and time required to acquire more complete data , particularly in connection with many lesser - known species . esa does not elaborate on this question , but some assert that , given the protective purpose of esa — to save and recover species — and the wording of "best scientific ... data available," species that may be dwindling are to be given the benefit of the doubt and a margin of safety . this is the position taken on pages 1-7 of the joint fws / nmfs endangered species consultation handbook , which states that efforts should be made to develop information , but if a biop must be rendered promptly , it should be based on the available information , "giving the benefit of the doubt to the species," with consultation possibly being reinitiated if additional information becomes available . this phrase is drawn from h.rept . 96-697 , p. 12 ( 1979 ) , which states that the "best information available" language was intended to allow fws or nmfs to issue biops even when information was incomplete , rather than being forced to issue negative biops for lack of data . the report also states that if a biop is rendered on the basis of inadequate information , the federal agency proposing an action has the duty to show that its actions will not jeopardize a species and a continuing obligation to make a reasonable effort to develop information , and that the statutory language "continues to give the benefit of the doubt to the species. section 515 of p.l . 106-554 , known as the information quality act or the data quality act , directs the office of management and budget ( omb ) to issue government - wide guidelines to federal agencies to ensure and maximize the quality , objectivity , utility , and integrity of information disseminated by federal agencies . omb published final guidelines on february 22 , 2002 . the department of the interior and fws have both issued additional guidelines that are available through their websites , and have established a process for interested persons to seek correction of information . even before these latest guidelines were issued , fws had promulgated guidance on information quality and peer review procedures — issues that also have been addressed in recent legislation . fws and nmfs developed an interagency cooperative policy on information standards under the endangered species act . under this policy , fws and nmfs are to receive and use information from a wide variety of sources , including individuals . submitted information may range from the informal — oral , traditional , or anecdotal — to peer - reviewed scientific studies , and hence the reliability of the information can vary widely .