the technical corrections include the following . other notable provisions included in wrera are the following . roth iras , a type of individual retirement arrangement , are a popular retirement savings vehicle . while contributions to a roth ira are not deductible , qualified distributions from a roth ira are not included in an individual's gross income . roth iras are subject to certain contribution limitations , however , these limitations do not apply to qualified rollover contributions . section 125 of the wrera permits a "qualified airline employee" who receives an "airline payment amount" to transfer any portion of this amount to a roth ira as a qualified rollover contribution . this transfer must occur within 180 days of receipt of the amount ( or , if later , within 180 days of the enactment of wrera ) . thus , if such amounts are transferred to the former employee's roth ira , the employee may benefit , as qualified distributions from roth iras are tax free . this section also provides that certain income limitations placed upon roth ira qualified rollover contributions should not apply to this transfer . in order to determine the minimum required contribution that must be made to a single - employer defined benefit plan , and the extent ( if any ) to which a plan is underfunded , the value of plan assets must be determined . for purposes of the minimum funding rules , the value of the plan's assets is , in general , the fair market value of the assets . however , the internal revenue code , as amended by the ppa , permits plans to calculate the value of the assets by averaging fair market values , but only if ( 1 ) the averaging method is permitted under regulations , ( 2 ) the calculation is not over a period of more than 24 months , and ( 3 ) the averaged amount cannot result in a determination that is at any time less than 90 percent or more than 110 percent of fair market value . this averaging method may be more beneficial for plan sponsors in an economic downturn , as an averaging approach can produce lower asset values when asset values are rising , and higher asset values when asset values are decreasing . section 121 of wrera provides that plans using the averaging method must adjust such averaging to account not only for the amount of contributions and distributions to the plan , but also for expected investment earnings , subject to a cap . it has been noted that this provision could result in smaller underfunded amounts and , therefore , smaller required contributions . the ppa created certain relaxed funding requirements for defined benefit plans maintained by a commercial airline or an airline catering service . under the ppa , plan sponsors of these plans could elect to amortize unfunded plan liabilities over an extended period of 10 years , or may instead follow special rules that permit these plan sponsors to amortize unfunded liabilities over 17 years .