it purposefully omitted a laboratory accreditation requirement . 5827 ) to the current lack of regulation . administrative responsibility for regulation of certain types of imported food is delegated to the fda under chapter viii of the federal food , drug and cosmetic act ( ffdca ) . generally , the ffdca provides that an article must be refused admission into the united states , with some exceptions , on the following bases: [i]f it appears from the examination of [samples of food , drugs , devices , and cosmetics which are being imported or offered for import into the united states] or otherwise that ( 1 ) such article has been manufactured , processed , or packed under insanitary conditions ... , or ( 2 ) such article is forbidden or restricted in sale in the country in which it was produced or from which it was exported , or ( 3 ) such article is adulterated , misbranded , or in violation of section 505 . under the ffdca , the fda can automatically detain a product without physically examining it . automatic detention occurs as a result of the issuance of import alerts , which "identify problem commodities and / or shippers and / or importers and provide guidance for import coverage," such as if "those products or shippers ... have met the criteria for automatic detention. importers whose products have been detained because of import alerts can petition for the release of their products by presenting testimony from private , or third - party , laboratories that shows that their products are compliant . in order to do this , they submit either their products or samples of their products for testing to the private laboratories . for the products to be released , the private laboratories must then present test results that indicate that the products do not violate the fda's entry standards . the test results can be returned to the importer , who will give it to the fda , or the lab can turn in the results directly to the fda . the fda may then use this data "to determine whether the imported food complies with the [ffdca] and can be released into the united states. the fda has recognized these private laboratories as an integral part of food import safety . according to the fda , the third - party labs help ensure that the food reaching the market complies with agency standards and allow agency laboratory resources to be devoted to other regulatory matters . however , there has been criticism regarding the autonomy given to the importers and private laboratories . industry observers have raised concerns about perceived gaps in food import safety over the past few years . one particular area of concern focuses on imported goods that are released into the united states market after the food and drug administration ( fda ) detains them under an import alert . generally , these goods may be released into the market after an importer "provides evidence that the entry is in compliance with federal laws and regulations. the proof can be provided by private laboratories that have tested samples of the detained imported goods , and importers can present results indicating that the goods are fda - compliant .