most states currently meet these criteria . hhs has released work participation data for fy2007 , finding that 12 states and three territories failed to meet the all - family standard and seven states and one territory failed to meet the two - parent standard . these jurisdictions are thus at - risk of being financially penalized . ( states could avoid the penalty by entering into and executing a corrective compliance plan with hhs ) . further , congress could either eliminate or defer these penalties to avoid tanf funding cuts in the midst of the recession . this has raised the profile of economic insecurity caused by the recession . individuals and families who were economically disadvantaged before the recession hit are particularly at - risk of economic insecurity . this report discusses the potential role that the temporary assistance for needy families ( tanf ) block grant to states may play in mitigating the effects of the recession for poor families with children . the tanf block grant is best known as a funding source for cash welfare . however , it also funds a wide range of benefits , services , and activities for disadvantaged families with children , as well as programs to achieve the goals of reducing out - of - wedlock pregnancies and promoting two - parent families . many children were in families that were already poor as the economy entered recession . the child poverty rate in 2007 , the last full year of an economic expansion that dated back to 2001 , stood at 18.0% — higher than the rate for the elderly ( 9.7% ) or that for non - aged adults ( 10.9% ) . in the recession year of 2008 , the child poverty rate rose to 19.0% . high poverty rates among families with children are correlated with certain characteristics . children in female - headed families are more likely to be poor than those in married couple families . to pay for increased costs in a recession , states either have to cut other human services funded through tanf or increase spending from their own funds . tanf funds have been used for a wide range of human services that either seek to address the root cause or ameliorate the effects of economic disadvantage among families with children . these initiatives — launched in better economic times — are at risk in states that need to reallocate tanf funds toward economic assistance during a recession . figure 3 shows the use of tanf grants and moe spending for fy2007 . as shown on the figure , basic cash assistance ( what most people call cash welfare ) accounted for only $9.1 billion ( 30% ) of all tanf and moe funds in that year . even when also counting expenditures on administration and work activities ( the other categories associated with traditional welfare programs ) , a little less than half of all tanf and moe funds are accounted for . a second major category of tanf funding is work supports — particularly child care . child care — either through expenditures or transfers to the child care and development fund — accounts for almost one - fifth ( 19% ) of total tanf and moe spending .