the delegates and the resident commissioner may not vote in or preside over the house . they may , however , sponsor and cosponsor legislation , participate in debate — including managing time — and offer any motion that a representative may make , except the motion to reconsider . a delegate or resident commissioner may raise points of order and questions of personal privilege , call a member to order , appeal rulings of the chair , file reports for committees , object to the consideration of a bill , and move impeachment proceedings . under the rules of the 115 th congress ( 2017-2018 ) , the delegates and the resident commissioner may not vote in the committee of the whole house on the state of the union . in a change from the rules of the prior congress , however , they may preside over the committee of the whole . under rules iii and xviii , as adopted in both the 110 th and 111 th congresses ( 2007-2010 ) , when the house was sitting as the committee of the whole , the delegates and resident commissioner had the same ability to vote as representatives , subject to immediate reconsideration in the house when their recorded votes had been "decisive" in the committee . these prior house rules also authorized the speaker to appoint a delegate or the resident commissioner to preside as chairman of the committee of the whole . these rules of the 110 th and 111 th congresses were identical in effect to those in force in the 103 rd congress ( 1993-1994 ) , which permitted the delegates and the resident commissioner to vote in , and to preside over , the committee of the whole . these provisions were stricken from the rules as adopted in the 104 th congress ( 1995-1996 ) and remained out of effect until readopted in the 110 th congress . they were again removed from house rules at the beginning of the 112 th congress ( 2011-2012 ) . at the time of the adoption of the 1993 rule , then - minority leader robert h. michel and 12 other representatives filed suit against the clerk of the house and the territorial delegates seeking a declaration that the rule was unconstitutional . the constitutionality of the rule was ultimately upheld on appeal based on its inclusion of the mechanism for automatic reconsideration of votes in the house . the votes of the delegates and the resident commissioner were decisive , and thus subject to automatic revote by the house , on three occasions in the 103 rd congress . there were no instances identified in the 110 th congress in which the votes of the delegates and the resident commissioner were decisive . in the 111 th congress , the votes of the delegates were decisive , and subject to an automatic revote , on one occasion . the prior rule governing voting in the committee of the whole by delegates and the resident commissioner was not interpreted to mean that any recorded vote with a difference of six votes or fewer was subject to automatic reconsideration .