eqip was amended and reauthorized in both the 2002 and 2008 farm bills . the u.s. department of agriculture's ( usda's ) natural resources conservation service ( nrcs ) administers eqip under an interim final rule . nrcs implemented eqip by establishing national priorities to reflect the most pressing natural resource needs and emphasize offsite benefits to the environment . the current national priorities set by nrcs are as follows: reductions of nonpoint source pollution , such as nutrients , sediment , pesticides , or excess salinity in impaired watersheds consistent with total maximum daily loads ( tmdls ) , where available ; the reduction of surface and groundwater contamination ; reduction of contamination from agricultural point sources , such as concentrated animal feeding operations ( cafos ) ; conservation of ground and surface water resources ; reduction of emissions , such as particulate matter , nitrogen oxides ( nox ) , volatile organic compounds , and ozone precursors and depleters that contribute to air quality impairment violations of national ambient air quality standards ; reduction of soil erosion and sedimentation from unacceptable levels on agricultural land ; and promotion of at - risk species habitat conservation . eqip continues to receive widespread support in the farm community and in congress , as it remains the major source of financial and technical assistance to help producers implement conservation practices that address specific resource and environmental problems . during the 112 th congress , several issues may attract congressional interest , including budgetary pressures , a continuing backlog of unfunded applications , program reauthorization , and measuring program accomplishments . the 2008 farm bill reauthorized eqip through september 30 , 2012 , with annual authorized funding levels of $1.2 billion in fy2008 , $1.34 billion in fy2009 , $1.45 billion in fy2010 , $1.59 billion in fy2011 , and $1.75 billion in fy2012 . as shown in figure 1 , the authorized funding level has continued to increase since the 2002 farm bill ; however , annual appropriations acts have reduced the actual funding levels by a total of nearly $1.8 billion from fy2005 through fy2011 . ceap was originally intended to account for the benefits from the 2002 farm bill's substantial increase in conservation program funding through the scientific understanding of the effects of conservation practices at the watershed scale . only a few initial results are currently available based on cropland in the upper mississippi river basin and the chesapeake bay watershed . initial findings show beneficial effects from conservation practices as well as additional application needs . eqip offers financial assistance to producers to implement many of the conservation practices analyzed in the ceap assessment ; however , the assessment does not correlate the effects and benefits of conservation practice to any one federal program . the average cost of an eqip contract has more than doubled from almost $7,800 per contract prior to 2002 to over $16,000 per contract since 2002 . on the other hand , the additional administrative measures required to write cap contracts could offset time savings devoted to technical assistance . this issue could be debated in the next farm bill as caps and their implementation are reviewed .