these procedures address . under the terms of eesa , a joint resolution must be enacted in order to disapprove the treasury secretary's plan . this means that not only would it have to pass both chambers , but it must also be signed by the president , or enacted over his veto by supermajority vote , to take effect . for this reason , some members have argued that resolutions of disapproval of this type generally put congress at an institutional disadvantage relative to the executive , in that a president is almost certain to veto the resolution and congress would have to muster significant super majorities for a successful override . during debate over the enactment of a different rulemaking statute which included a joint disapproval resolution , one member voiced this view of the power relationship between the branches , stating , a veto would , of course , be likely since the resolution would be disapproving what the executive has proposed . then it would take two - thirds majorities in both houses of congress to effectuate the congress' expression of disapproval . in other words , a resolution of disapproval would allow as few as 34 senators , working with one chief executive , to block the will of ... members of congress . conversely , others have argued that resolutions of disapproval give the president necessary flexibility to act , while still reserving the prerogative of congress to overrule him and influence important policy questions . the fact that an expedited procedure like that of eesa is contained in a rulemaking statute does not mean that another law must be passed in order to alter it . it is sufficient that a majority of members of either chamber agree to ignore or alter the expedited procedure in order to change the way in which its features apply in that chamber at a given time . because article i , section 5 of the constitution gives each chamber of congress the power to determine the rules of its proceedings , expedited procedure statutes like those contained in eesa can ( like all rules of the house or senate ) be set aside , altered , or amended by either chamber at any time . these changes can be accomplished by the house through the adoption of a special rule reported by committee on rules , by suspension of the rules , or by unanimous consent . in fact , prior practice suggests that the house of representatives routinely supplants the terms of rulemaking statutes by adopting special rules by majority vote . as is discussed above , the house chose to alter some features of the expedited procedure as it relates to the motion to proceed with the adoption on january 15 , 2009 , of h.res . the act immediately authorizes the secretary to have up to $250 billion outstanding at any one time under the program . this authorized maximum will automatically increase to $350 billion outstanding upon the president's submission to congress of a certification of need .