in olmstead v. l.c . , 527 u.s. 581 ( 1999 ) , the supreme court held that , under title ii of the ada and the integration regulation promulgated by the doj , state action to unjustly isolate people with disabilities is a form of prohibited discrimination . since then , appellate courts have more clearly articulated states' olmstead obligations . in addition to these judicial developments , the recent health care reform package , the patient protection and affordable care act ( ppaca , p.l . 111-148 ) as amended by the health care and education reconciliation act ( hcera , p.l . 111-152 ) ( collectively the affordable care act , or aca ) , has the potential to influence states' olmstead initiatives . section 2402 , which both gives states more flexibility to offer different packages of long - term care services to different target groups and creates a new eligibility pathway into medicaid for people who need long - term care services , particularly those who need only very limited long - term care assistance . section 2403 , which both extends funding for state money follows the person ( mfp ) demonstration projects and lowers the eligibility requirements for individuals who would like to participate in a state's mfp demonstration project so that more individuals are eligible to receive community - based support for their transition out of a long - term care facility . section 10202 , which allows qualifying states to receive temporary bonus payments for increasing their share of their medicaid long - term care spending for home and community - based services and supports and reducing their share of spending for institutional long - term care . aca also established the community living assistance services and supports ( class ) program to , inter alia , provide a financing mechanism for long - term care services and supports to empower individuals with functional limitations to live in the community . however , aca also contained provisions relating to the class program's solvency and financial independence , reflecting concerns about the program's long - term financial viability . pursuant to these provisions , the department of health and humans services ( hhs ) assessed the actuarial soundness of its options for implementing the class program and , in october 2011 , informed congress that it did "not see a viable path forward for class implementation" at that time . although some of aca's provisions have taken effect — for example , the community first choice option became effective in october 2011 — its implementation is not yet complete . nevertheless , many expect that the affordable care act will influence the future of states' olmstead initiatives by shifting medicaid spending away from institutional care to some degree . the ada's integration mandate may be enforced through a private action — a lawsuit brought by a private individual — or an action brought by the department of justice . congress has also vested the independent protection and advocacy system ( p&as ) with the duty and authority to , inter alia , investigate alleged violations of the rights of individuals with disabilities and pursue policy changes and legal remedies on their behalf .