for most of the time period there was a downward trend in the refugee population . yet in 2007 , the year - over - year growth number of refugees rose by 15% to approximately 11.4 million , due mainly to the conflicts in iraq and afghanistan . asylum - seekers experienced declining numbers during the latter half of the 10-year period . asylum - seekers dropped from a peak in 2001 of 1.1 million asylum - seekers to roughly 740,000 at the end of 2007 , a decline of 32% . the united states has adopted the principles of the convention in statute . after a state officially grants sanctuary to an individual under the 1951 convention and 1967 protocol , the state is obligated to provide law - abiding admitted refugees with many of the same rights and privileges that citizens enjoy , such as access to courts , the right to pursue gainful employment , public education , medical access , artistic expression , and the like . specifically , figure 7 maps out the average number of refugees per $1 gdp ( ppp ) per capita from 2002 to 2006 , thereby adjusting national income to both exchange rates and the size of the population . this measure makes no assumption about the long - term net cost / benefit of refugee because such factors are entirely dependent on how economically integrated into the host country this population becomes . the map in figure 7 demonstrates that when placed in the context of national income , the united states has taken on a larger refugee hosting burden than almost every other oecd country . only germany , with 26.3 refugees per $1 gdp ( ppp ) per capita , had a higher relative burden than the united states ( 10.9 ) . on a worldwide basis , both the united states and germany ranked in the top 35 for this same measure . moreover , the map shows that the majority of oecd countries had an average population of one refugee per $1 gdp ( ppp ) per capita or less . consequently , the united states had an average burden at least 11 times greater than most oecd countries for the 2002-2006 time period relative to national income . the lowest - ranked country in the oecd for this measure was iceland , which had over 100 times fewer refugees than the united states relative to national income . another way to contextualize burden sharing worldwide is to consider a given country's existing population . such an approach removes economic conditions and considers refugees in terms of the number of residents in a country . this measure serves as one type of indicator for the demographic impact of refugee inflows . depicted in figure 8 is a world map showing the 2002-2006 average cumulative number of refugees to every 1,000 inhabitants in each country . unlike the measure for national income , the united states — with 1.7 refugees per 1,000 inhabitants — figured more toward the median of oecd countries for this demographic measure . overall , the ratio for the united states was lower than that of 14 other oecd countries and ranked 56 th worldwide .