these are described below . liability for ffel and dl program loans is discharged in the case of borrowers who die , who become permanently and totally disabled , or who are unable to engage in any substantial gainful activity due to a physical or mental impairment that can be expected to result in death or that has lasted continuously or can be expected to last continuously for 60 months . borrowers who have been determined by the secretary of veterans affairs to be unemployable due to a service - connected condition shall be considered permanently and totally disabled for purposes of student loan discharge . in most instances , federal student loans may not be discharged through personal bankruptcy actions brought under either chapter 7 or chapter 13 of the bankruptcy code . however , if after filing for bankruptcy , a borrower successfully petitions a bankruptcy court and the court finds that repayment constitutes an undue hardship on the borrower and his dependents , federal student loans may be discharged in bankruptcy . a borrower's liability for a loan ( including any interest and collection fees owed by the borrower ) may be discharged under any of the following circumstances if the borrower received the loan on or after january 1 , 1986 . loans may be discharged if the student borrower ( or the student on whose behalf a parent borrowed ) was unable to complete an educational program because the school closed . any period of the student's attendance at the institution at which the student was unable to complete the course of study because of closure is not counted against the total period of the student's eligibility for additional student aid . borrowers are eligible for loan discharge if the school falsely certified the student's eligibility to borrow , including loans falsely certified as a result of identity theft . all or a portion of a borrower's loan liability may be discharged if an institution fails to refund the appropriate amount of loan proceeds to a lender or to the secretary on behalf of a borrower . in addition , title iv eligibility is restored for borrowers who may have defaulted on a loan discharged under any of the above circumstances . finally , the third higher education extension act of 2006 ( p.l . 109-292 ) authorized the discharge of the outstanding balance of loans made to individuals who were the spouses or parents of individuals who died or became permanently and totally disabled as a result of the september 11 , 2001 , terrorist attacks . the hea authorizes several programs through which borrowers may have some portion of their ffel or dl program loans forgiven , cancelled , or repaid as an incentive for entering certain occupations or professions , or for performing certain types of public service . some loan forgiveness provisions are entitlements to qualified borrowers , meaning that mandatory funding is provided for loan forgiveness . other loan forgiveness and repayment programs are discretionary and subject to the availability of funds made available in annual appropriations acts . in addition , borrowers may also be eligible to have their loans repaid through other non - hea programs .