this report does not cover the subject of transportation fuels . federal government initiatives aimed at reducing energy consumption can be traced back to the start of the federal energy management program ( femp ) in 1973 . the 1978 national energy conservation policy act ( necpa ) , public law ( p.l. ) 95-619 , began the program of retrofitting federal buildings to improve energy efficiency . the 1985 deficit reduction act ( p.l . 99-272 ) amended necpa by authorizing energy savings contracts of up to 25 years . the 1992 energy policy act further amended necpa by adopting energy savings performance contracts ( espcs ) that offered federal agencies a novel means of making energy efficiency improvements to aging buildings and facilities ( see discussion below ) . necpa required federal agencies , including dod , to report annually on the energy consumption by their buildings , operations , and vehicles . overall federal energy consumption is reported annually to congress by the department of energy ( doe ) federal energy management program ( femp ) . the federal energy management improvement act of 1988 ( p.l . 100-615 ) amended necpa by requiring each agency to achieve a 10% reduction in energy consumption in federal buildings by fy1995 when measured against an fy1985 baseline in terms of british thermal units per gross square foot ( btu / gsf ) of building area . more recently , two major energy bills have been enacted with provisions generally pertaining to all federal agency facilities — the energy policy act of 2005 ( epact – p.l . 109-58 ) and the energy independence and security act of 2007 ( eisa – p.l . annual dod appropriation bills have also included energy provisions specifically pertaining to defense facilities . legislation pertaining to the energy efficiency of federal and dod buildings is summarized below . for bills introduced since the 107 th congress , refer to the appendix of this report . in signing executive order ( eo ) 13423 - strengthening federal environmental , energy and transportation management , president bush revoked five earlier executive orders affecting federal agencies' energy and environmental management . section 11 of the order consolidates and strengthens the five executive orders and two memorandums of understanding ( mou ) and establishes new and updated goals , practices , and reporting requirements for environmental , energy , and transportation performance and accountability . in some cases the new executive order puts in place replacement energy and environmental efficiency goals for previous goals with target dates that have passed . the new executive order also implements and supplements provisions of the epact dealing with energy and environmental management by federal agencies . the combination of epact ( title i , part a ) and eo13423 define the current energy efficiency objectives for federal agencies . eo13423 directs all federal agencies , including dod , to improve energy efficiency and reduce greenhouse gas emissions through reduction of energy intensity ( 3% annually through the end of fy2015 , and 30% by the end of fy2015 , relative to each agency's baseline energy use in fy2003 ) .