some of these are discussed below as points of contention . the paper concludes with two options for proceeding with negotiations . one option would be to make another attempt to conclude a treaty based on the revised draft basic proposal . the other option would be to conclude a treaty based on the geneva phonograms convention of 1971 and the brussels satellite convention . this would depart from the existing documents and proposals under consideration by the sccr , but it would accomplish the goals of international protection for broadcast signals and prevention of piracy of signals . protection at the national level could be accomplished via copyright laws , unfair competition laws , or administrative laws and sanctions . if neither of these options or other possible options can lead to a decision on a new treaty , the paper ends by recommending that the sccr should expressly end current efforts to conclude a new treaty , remove it from its active agenda , and avoid spending further time , energy and resources . such a decision could include a timetable for revisiting the matter later . although further discussions occurred during the november 2008 sccr meetings , no decisions were made , and the proposed treaty remains an active item on the sccr agenda . given the current lack of consensus , it may be useful to consider some of the major points of contention for the treaty as expressed by various stakeholders . the principles expressed in various stakeholder statements are fairly representative of common objections raised by treaty opponents and also of some of the concerns or positions expressed by various wipo country - parties during negotiations . a joint statement distributed by 41 corporations , industry associations , and non - governmental organizations at the first special session of the sccr advocated several guidelines for a treaty text , while not conceding their position that a treaty is not necessary at all . this statement is similar to earlier statements issued by many of the same stakeholders at the september 2006 meeting of the wipo general assembly and to positions expressed at u.s. stakeholder roundtables held jointly by the u.s . copyright office and the u.s. patent and trademark office ( uspto ) in september 2006 , january 2007 , and may 2007 . the stakeholders issuing these statements at the sccr meetings and the u.s. roundtables comprise a range of international and national organizations representing internet service providers , computer technology companies , libraries and information professionals , content creators / owners , and consumer groups . first , the stakeholders assert there is no need for a treaty: "the united states has a flourishing and well - capitalized broadcasting and cablecasting sector , notwithstanding its decision not to accede to the [rome convention] . we see no necessity for the creation of new rights to stimulate economic activity in this area . [longstanding negotiations do not] justify the creation of rights that would be exceedingly novel in u.s. law and that are likely to harm consumers' existing rights , and stifle technology innovation.