many of these have to do with emissions from electric power plants . coal - fired power plants are among the largest sources of air pollution in the united states . regulations addressing these emissions were vacated by the d.c . the agency is also reviewing or has recently completed reviews of the naaqs for four other pollutants , notably particulates , which are emitted by a wide range of mobile and stationary sources . a revised particulate standard is to be proposed by february 2011 . early indications are that the agency may propose substantially more stringent standards . this report provides a brief overview of the climate change , power plant , and air quality standard issues . on june 22 , 2010 , the agency promulgated revisions to the naaqs for so 2 ; 59 counties would violate the new so 2 standard , based on the most recent monitoring data . none violated the old standard . more detailed information on most of the issues can be found in other crs reports , which are referenced throughout this report . epa's actions to regulate ghg emissions stem from more than a decade of petitions and litigation . power plants are also considered major sources of fine particles ( pm 2.5 ) , many of which form in the atmosphere from emissions from a wide range of stationary and mobile sources . in addition , power plants account for about 40% of u.s. anthropogenic emissions of the greenhouse gas carbon dioxide . with new ambient air quality standards for ozone , fine particles , and so 2 taking effect , emissions of nox and so 2 will necessarily have to be reduced to meet standards . ( these standards are discussed below under " air quality standards ." for more than a decade , mercury emissions have also been a focus of concern: 48 states have issued fish consumption advisories due to mercury pollution , covering 14 million acres of lakes , 882,000 river miles , and the coastal waters of 13 entire states . the continuing controversy over the interpretation of new source review requirements for existing power plants ( also discussed below ) has exerted pressure for a more predictable regulatory structure , as well . thus , some in industry , environmental groups , congress , and the last two administrations have said that legislation addressing power plant pollution in a comprehensive ( multi - pollutant ) fashion would be desirable . such legislation would address the major pollutants on a coordinated schedule and would rely , to a large extent , on a system such as the one used in the acid rain program , where national or regional caps on emissions are implemented through a system of tradable allowances . the key questions have been how stringent the caps should be and whether carbon dioxide ( co 2 ) , the major gas of concern with regard to climate change , would be among the emissions subject to a cap .