coastal zone regulation varies significantly among the states . the czma itself establishes three generally acceptable regulatory frameworks: ( 1 ) "state establishment of criteria and standards for local implementation , subject to administrative review and enforcement" ; ( 2 ) "[d]irect state land and water use planning and regulation" ; and ( 3 ) regulation development and implementation by local agencies , with state - level review of program decisions . within these frameworks several states , including new jersey , california , and rhode island , consolidate authority for their programs in one agency . in new jersey , for instance , the state department of environmental protection ( through the coastal management office within the commissioner's office of policy , planning , and science ) is the lead agency for coastal zone management under several state laws . the majority of states , however , operate coastal zone management programs under "networks" of parallel agencies , with various roles defined by policy guidance and memoranda of understanding ( mous ) . based on a series of mous , each agency is obligated to issue and apply state regulations and permits consistently with the state's coastal zone management program . thus , offshore wind energy projects could be subject to comprehensive regulation with permitting authority spread among multiple state and local agencies . use of federal and federally controlled lands , including the ocs , requires some form of permission , such as a right - of - way , easement , or license . for onshore wind projects on federal public lands , the department of the interior ( doi ) , through the bureau of land management , has created a regulatory program under the federal land policy and management act , but a federal statute expressly governing offshore wind energy development was not enacted until august 2005 as part of the energy policy act of 2005 ( epact ) . before enactment of epact , some permitting in support of offshore wind energy development had taken place under laws existing at that time . use of these authorities proved controversial and was the subject of a lawsuit challenging preliminary permitting actions . the first 12 nautical miles comprise the u.s. territorial sea . under the 1982 united nations convention on the law of the sea ( unclos ) , a coastal nation may claim sovereignty over the air space , water , seabed , and subsoil within its territorial sea . u.s. supreme court precedent and international practice indicate that this sovereignty authorizes coastal nations to permit offshore development within their territorial seas . although the united states has not ratified unclos , it generally acts in alignment with its terms . the u.s. contiguous zone extends beyond the territorial sea to 24 nautical miles from the baseline . in this area , a coastal nation may regulate to protect its territorial sea and to enforce its customs , fiscal , immigration , and sanitary laws . the jurisdiction of the federal government with respect to individual states is also of importance . the submerged lands act of 1953 assured coastal states title to the lands beneath coastal waters in an area stretching , in general , 3 geographical miles from the shore .