this follows from two points . first , even if sizeable repatriations occur , the rate of return on u.s. investment will be unaffected by the repatriations . assuming firms are not liquidity - constrained , it is possible that the bulk of the repatriations will be used as dividends to stockholders or used to pay down corporate debt . this scenario is especially likely for large firms . second , when the repatriations occur , those that are denominated in foreign currencies will be converted to dollars . the corresponding increase in the demand for dollars would be expected to drive up the price of the dollar in world currency markets . as a result , u.s. net exports would be expected to decline from levels that would otherwise occur , and the repatriation holiday could contract rather than stimulate the u.s. economy . during 2012 , interest declined in a repatriation holiday for the purposes of providing a stimulus . however , proposals to adopt a phased - in repatriation at a lower tax rate have been coupled with proposals to make a permanent more to a territorial tax , where active earnings of foreign operations would not be subject to u.s. tax . the united states bases its jurisdiction to tax international income on residence . as a result , u.s. - chartered corporations are taxed on their worldwide income , but foreign corporations are taxed only on their u.s. - source income . accordingly , a u.s. firm with overseas operations can indefinitely postpone its u.s. tax on its foreign income by operating through a foreign subsidiary . using the same principle , u.s. taxes are deferred as long as its foreign earnings remain in the control of its foreign subsidiary and are reinvested abroad . the u.s. firm pays taxes on its overseas earnings only when they are paid to the u.s. parent corporation as intra - firm dividends or other income . another prominent feature of the u.s. tax system is the foreign tax credit . the foreign tax credit is designed to alleviate double taxation where u.s. and foreign governments' tax jurisdictions overlap — that is the u.s. firm pays taxes at the higher of the u.s. or foreign tax rate . with respect to repatriated dividends , u.s. firms can claim foreign tax credits for foreign taxes paid by their subsidiaries on the earnings used to pay the repatriated dividends . the ability to defer u.s. tax , thus , poses an incentive for u.s. firms to invest abroad in countries with low tax rates . proposals to cut taxes on repatriations are based on the premise that even this deferred tax on intra - firm dividends discourages repatriations and encourages firms to reinvest foreign earnings abroad and that a cut in the tax would stimulate repatriations . the repatriated earnings provision included in the american jobs creation act ( p.l . 108-357 ) reduced the taxes due on repatriated earnings . in particular , the provision provided a deduction equal to 85% of the increase in foreign - source earnings repatriated . for a firm paying taxes at the 35% corporate tax rate , this reduced the tax rate on repatriated earnings to the equivalent of 5.25% .