provisions applicable to each of these programs are discussed below . the workforce investment act of 1998 ( p.l . 105-220 ) provides job training and related services to unemployed and underemployed individuals . wia programs are administered by the dol , primarily through its employment and training administration ( eta ) . the house had previously passed its version of h.r . 1 ( hereafter referred to as the "house bill" ) on january 28 , 2009 , while the senate passed s.amdt . 570 , an amendment in the nature of a substitute to h.r . 1 ( hereafter referred to as the senate bill ) , on february 10 , 2009 . under the house bill and the senate bill , funds would have been provided to several existing workforce development programs administered by the u.s. department of labor ( dol ) , including programs authorized by the workforce investment act ( wia ) . the conference version provides $4.81 billion in funding for these workforce development programs . this report provides a brief overview of the key provisions related to workforce development programs administered by dol that were included in the conference version under division a , title viii , department of labor . both the house and senate bills would have provided a total of $1.0 billion for formula grants to states for employment and training activities for dislocated workers , which would have been available for obligation on the date of enactment of the arra . the house bill would have provided a total of $500 million for the dislocated workers national reserve for grants to eligible entities serving areas of high unemployment or high poverty and experiencing major economic dislocations . additionally , the house bill would have directed the secretary of labor to ensure that applicants for these funds demonstrate the manner in which supportive services ( e.g . income support , child care ) necessary for participation in job training would be provided . the senate bill would have provided a total of $450 million for the dislocated workers national reserve , $200 million of which would have been for national emergency grants . additionally , the senate bill would have directed the remaining $250 million for competitive grants to train workers for high growth and emerging industry sectors ( see details in section on " title i - d grants for high growth and emerging industry sectors ," below ) . the conference version provides a total of $1.25 billion for formula grants to states for employment and training for dislocated workers . in addition , the conference version provides $200 million for the dislocated workers national reserve , which is used for technical assistance , projects , and emergency grants . appendix table a - 3 provides estimated state grants under this program . this competitive grant program funds projects that provide education and construction skills training for disadvantaged youth . since its inception in 1992 , the program was administered by the department of housing and urban development , but was moved to dol by the youthbuild transfer act ( p.l . 109-281 ) , effective for fy2007 . participating youth work primarily through mentorship and apprenticeship programs to rehabilitate and construct housing for homeless and low - income families .