( pdf ) . the house passed h.r . 4890 , the legislative line item veto act of 2006 , on june 22 , 2006 , by a vote of 247-172 ; the senate did not act on the measure . the senate considered a legislative line - item veto proposal in the 110 th congress , in the form of an amendment offered by senator judd gregg , first to s. 1 and then to minimum wage legislation , h.r . 2 ; in both instances , the gregg amendment ultimately was withdrawn . as part of the budget process proposals included in his fy2010 and fy2011 budget submissions , president obama asked congress to establish expedited legislative procedures for the consideration of certain rescission proposals offered by the president . on may 28 , 2010 , representative john spratt introduced the president's proposal as h.r . 5454 , the reduce unnecessary spending act of 2010 . although advocates of the item veto or expanded rescission powers for the president contend that such tools will enhance budgetary discipline , critics suggest that their usefulness for budgetary discipline is overstated and that they may adversely affect the balance of power between congress and the president over budget decisions . considerable attention has been focused recently on the large imbalances projected in the federal budget over the long term , particularly with respect to the social security , medicare , and medicaid programs . one device advocated by some as a means of compelling action on long - term budgetary issues is a bipartisan commission or task force empowered to recommend legislative changes that would correct or mitigate the imbalances . advocates of the commission or task force approach argue that it would be an effective means of surmounting political opposition and achieving an end result because of the bipartisan nature of the group , the avoidance of preconditions with respect to policy options ( i.e. , all options would be "on the table" ) , and the action - forcing nature of expedited legislative procedures . adherents to the use of regular legislative procedures to deal with these issues maintain that while they may entail a more time - consuming and difficult route , they afford more openness and participation in the decision - making process and are more likely to lead to widespread acceptance of the results . during the 110 th congress , a leading example of such a proposal was the bipartisan task force for responsible fiscal action act of 2007 ( s. 2063 , introduced by senators kent conrad and judd gregg , and h.r . 3655 , introduced by representatives jim cooper and frank wolf ) . the bill would have established a bipartisan , 16-member task force ( including the treasury secretary and another member from the executive branch , and seven members each from the house and senate ) . the task force would have been charged with developing legislative recommendations ( by december 9 , 2008 ) to significantly improve the long - term balances in the federal budget , including the balances in social security and medicare ; the recommendations would have needed to be approved by at least 12 of the task force members .