it applies only to the sale of goods ( i.e. , it does not apply to the sale of services ) and only where each sale is of goods purchased for resale within the united states ( i.e. , it does not prohibit price differentials between goods sold for resale within the united states and those sold for export ) . since its enactment in 1936 , the robinson - patman act has been less than enthusiastically viewed by the department of justice , which believes that the act is not beneficial to consumers . in its 1977 report on the robinson - patman act , the antitrust division noted that it should not be surprising ... that robinson - patman can be shown to have many adverse effects on the economy . to be sure , there are some who do not recognize these effects or who argue that they are outweighed by benefits to specific sectors of the economy , notably small business ; to competition by preventing increased concentration in a line of commerce ; and to public values in general by establishing as a legal norm the concept of 'fair dealing' in pricing . but any discussion of the benefits of robinson - patman can be made only with a clear understanding of the burdens that the statute places on american economic activity . government enforcement of the act , therefore , has always been entrusted to the federal trade commission ( ftc ) , which over the years has acted inconsistently with respect to r - p actions . the bulk of r - p cases have generally been brought by disfavored buyers . if none of the affirmative defenses set out above justifies a challenged price differential , and the non - profit exemption is unavailable to the defendant , price discrimination in violation of the robinson - patman act is proved . that the successful plaintiff is entitled to damages in the amount of the unlawful price differential is not , however , a foregone conclusion . in j.truett payne company , inc. v. chrysler motors corporation , the supreme court , deciding "the appropriate measure of damages in a suit brought under ยง 2 ( a ) of the clayton act," rejected the contention that "once [a plaintiff] has proved a price discrimination in violation of ยง 2 ( a ) it is entitled at a minimum to so - called 'automatic damages' in the amount of the price discrimination:" to recover treble damages [the measure of antitrust damages under 15 u.s.c . ยง 15 , which requires as a prerequisite to recovery that one have been 'injured in his business or property'] , then , a plaintiff must make some showing of actual injury attributable to something the antitrust laws were designed to prevent . previously , the court had noted that "[t]he automatic - damages theory has split the lower courts," but found more persuasive the opinions that rejected it , noting that robinson - patman "is violated merely upon showing that 'the effect of such discrimination may be substantially to lessen competition.'