the house bill did not include any such funding . a provision in the senate stimulus measure , deleted by house - senate conferees , raised an issue of longstanding priority for many animal activists — what they view as mistreatment of animals at livestock markets and slaughterhouses . in particular , these activists have sought legislation for years to ban "downers" or nonambulatory animals from being used for food and / or to require that they be humanely euthanized , as an incentive for better treatment . some food safety advocates also have supported such measures as a means of keeping diseased animals out of the food supply . the top has not been funded since 2004 . between 1994 and 2004 , top managed a relatively small grants program ( 610 grants totaling $233.5 million ) that supported demonstrations of new telecommunications and information technologies . the new $4.7 billion program of loans and grants will be a major undertaking for top and the ntia . the enacted arra does not provide the broadband investment tax credits that were proposed in the senate bill . tax credits in the senate bill were valued at 10% - 20% of broadband expenditures in the respective tax year . the amount of the tax credit was based on a company's expenditures for "current generation" broadband technologies and "next generation technologies," with the latter receiving larger credits for expenditures . the arra also does not authorize funding for the rural distance learning and telemedicine ( dltm ) program administered by rus . the senate bill proposed $100 million in supplemental budget authority for the dltm program , which supported a program level of $497 million in loans and grants for the dltm program . the arra authorizes $1.380 billion for the usda water and waste water loan and grant program , $5 million more than the senate bill and $120 million less than the house bill . the enacted funding will support a program level of $3.8 billion ( $2.8 billion in direct loans and $968 million in grants ) . rural water and waste water disposal loans and grants are administered by usda's rural utilities service ( rus ) . funds support construction of and improvements to community drinking water and wastewater treatment projects serving rural households and businesses . on an annual basis , the enacted funding is more than double the regular annual appropriations for rus water and waste water programs , which in fy2008 received about $560 million in budget authority to support about $1.2 billion of loans . similar to the backlog in other rural development programs , $2.4 billion in applications for water and waste loans and $990 million for water and waste grants went unfunded in fy2008 . the enacted arra authorizes $200 million in supplemental budget authority for rural housing , the same as proposed by the senate bill . the house - passed bill proposed $500 million . the arra's $200 million of budget authority will support a program level of $11.5 billion of direct and guaranteed loans . within this loan authorization level , $10.5 billion is for section 502 guaranteed single - family home loans , and $1.0 billion is for section 502 direct single - family home loans .