the world now has changed . like a child's neural network , the global economy is constantly organizing and reorganizing itself with new linkages , supply networks , manufacturing chains , and marketing channels that rise in response to market forces and government policies . this integrated world economy raises both challenges and opportunities for u.s. policymakers . how u.s. policy responds to this new reality directly affects the well - being of americans . the existing paradigm based on geographical boundaries , country - to - country trade , vertical integration of manufacturing , and retailers acting as market takers rather than as market makers seems to be in need of updating . a new policy paradigm should account for the evolving world of business in which large u.s. manufacturers and providers of services have become part of increasingly complex international chains in which parts and components are made in multiple locations and assembled in others . in the delivery of services , some still require face - to - face contact ( eg , airline passenger travel or food services ) but other business services can be delivered through high speed internet connections ( eg , computer programming , data analysis , customer relations , or ticket sales ) . international trade now is less between countries than it is within a global supply network that may include headquarters , design , branding , and engineering in the united states but manufacturing in china with parts from singapore , japan , and the european union and call center services in india . for example , a u.s. company may make a computer in shanghai , but it could have been assembled from chips designed in texas with a motherboard from taiwan and manufactured according to specifications by the u.s. brand - name holder in california with software from washington state and shipped through hong kong directly to a retailer either in the american market or abroad . the product service department might be located partly in india or the philippines . does it create jobs in the united states or merely shift them from one foreign country to another ? how does the united states ensure the security and integrity of products assembled offshore from components that are procured from a variety of markets around the world ? other policy issues include how to target fiscal policy to generate the largest possible beneficial effects , the degree to which the government should act to retain industries and related job opportunities in the united states , the extent to which american jobs are being "outsourced" overseas , the role of u.s. policy in promoting overseas investment , competition by governments ( including state governments ) to attract foreign investment , and the arguably declining manufacturing base in the united states . congressional interest in this issue stems from the aforementioned national interests as well as its constitutional mandate to regulate commerce with foreign nations . congress also deals with the variety of policies that arise with respect to international trade , import competition , investments and capital flows , market access , currency misalignment , intellectual property rights , product safety , shipping security , labor , and the environment .