chile is in the midst of a political and economic transition . following the return to democracy in 1990 , chilean leaders and institutions prioritized political stability and economic growth , eschewing ambitious structural reforms in favor of consensus - based politics , orthodox economic policies , and incremental social change . nevertheless , many chileans have expressed discontent with the socioeconomic situation in their country . they are dissatisfied with the country's high level of inequality and believe that the country's economic gains have not translated into better living conditions and public services for most chileans . chile ultimately restored democratic governance in 1990 . a center - left coalition of parties , known as the "coalition of parties for democracy" ( concertación ) , governed chile for two decades after the return to democratic rule . the country declared independence from spain in 1810 but did not achieve full independence until 1818 . chile enjoyed mass electoral democracy from 1932 until 1973 , when the chilean military , under the control of general augusto pinochet , deposed the democratically elected marxist government of president salvador allende ( 1970-1973 ) . more than 3,200 people were killed or "disappeared" and some 38,000 people were imprisoned and / or tortured during pinochet's 17-year dictatorship . while the concertación governments were significantly constrained by authoritarian provisions in the pinochet - era constitution , they were able to enact incremental political , economic , and social reforms . they largely maintained the market - oriented economic framework they inherited from pinochet and built upon it by negotiating a broad network of trade agreements designed to foster export - led development . chile has implemented trade agreements with some 60 countries and now has open and reciprocal access to major consumer markets , such as china , japan , the european union , and the united states . the concertación also institutionalized countercyclical fiscal policies and gradually strengthened chile's social safety net . sebastian piñera of the center - right "alliance for chile" ( alianza ) coalition broke the concertación's hold on power , serving as president from 2010-2014 , but his administration largely maintained the same policy mix . analysts credit chile's policy framework for the significant economic and social gains that the country has made over the past 25 years . real annual economic growth has averaged over 5% since 1990 , lifting chile's gross domestic product ( gdp ) to $258 billion and per capita gdp to $14,480 in 2014 . the percentage of chileans living below the national poverty line fell from 39% in 1990 to 8% in 2013 , and the percentage of chileans living in extreme poverty fell from 13% to 2.5% during the same time period . the gini coefficient , which is used to measure income concentration , has barely changed over the past decade , remaining near 0.53 . although it falls to 0.50 when taxes and government transfers are taken into account , it is well above the organisation for economic cooperation and development ( oecd ) average of 0.31 . moreover , intergenerational social mobility is low since the education system tends to replicate existing class disparities .