in section 701 of p.l . 109-479 , congress called for an 18-month comprehensive national study by the national research council of the national academies of science on how co 2 emissions absorbed into the oceans may be altering fisheries , marine mammals , coral reefs , and other natural resources . this study was commissioned by noaa and nsf in october 2008 , and a summary of ocean acidification: a national strategy to meet the challenges of a changing ocean was released in late april 2010 ; the full report was published in september 2010 . the federal ocean acidification research and monitoring act of 2009 ( foaram ; p.l . 111-11 ) established the interagency working group on ocean acidification ( iwgoa ) . the iwgoa is chaired by a representative from the national oceanic and atmospheric administration and includes representatives from the national science foundation , bureau of ocean energy management , u.s. department of state , environmental protection agency , national aeronautics and space administration , u.s. geological survey , u.s . fish and wildlife service , and u.s. navy . the iwgoa was charged with developing a strategic research and monitoring plan to guide federal research on ocean acidification . in 2012 , a draft of the strategic plan for federal research and monitoring of ocean acidification was released and sent to the national research council for review . the strategic research plan attempts to provide a common vision and specific goals to coordinate activities of federal agencies . the plan is organized into the following seven themes , 1. monitoring of ocean chemistry and biological impacts , 2. research to understand responses to ocean acidification , 3. modeling to predict changes in the ocean carbon cycle , 4. technology development and standardization of measurements , 5. assessment of socioeconomic impacts and development , 6. education , outreach , and engagement strategy , and 7. data management and integration . foaram also directed the iwgoa to submit a report to congress every two years that summarizes federally funded ocean acidification activities . the most recent report for fy2010 and fy2011 identifies funding levels by agency and by the strategic themes used in the strategic research plan . in fy2011 , total funding for ocean acidification activities was approximately $29 million . funding for activities with a primary focus on ocean acidification was approximately $21 million and funding for activities related to ocean acidification was approximately $8 million . in comparison to previous sessions of congress , legislative interest in ocean acidification expanded significantly in the 110 th congress . congressional attention focused primarily on addressing the cause of ocean acidification — increasing atmospheric co 2 . to date , legislative attention to ocean acidification has focused on authorizing , funding , and coordinating research to increase knowledge about ocean acidification and its potential effects on marine ecosystems . in the 111 th congress , foaram directed the secretary of commerce to establish an ocean acidification program within noaa , established an interagency committee to develop an ocean acidification research and monitoring plan , and authorized appropriations through fy2012 for noaa and the national science foundation .