each source has its own unit of energy . oil consumption , for instance , is measured in million barrels per day ( mbd ) , coal in million short tons per year , natural gas in trillion cubic feet ( tcf ) per year . to aggregate various types of energy in a single table , a common measure , british thermal unit ( btu ) , is often used . by the 1980s , however , oil consumption by utilities dropped sharply , and in 2013 less than 1% of power generation was oil - fired . annual power generation is 10 times what it was in 1950 . consumption by the electric power industry increased gradually as access by pipeline became more widespread . figure 13 illustrates the trend . throughout this period , until recently , coal was used to generate about half the rapidly increasing amount of electricity consumed . petroleum became briefly important as a source of power generation in the late 1960s because it resulted in lower emissions of air pollutants , and consumption continued in the 1970s despite the price surge because natural gas was presumed to be in short supply . natural gas generation has a more complicated history . with the price increase in oil in the 1970s , demand for gas also increased , but interstate prices were regulated , and gas availability declined . in addition , federal energy policy viewed generation of electricity by gas to be a wasteful use of a diminishing resource . the fuel use act of 1978 prohibited new power generators from using gas and set a timetable for shutting down existing gas - fired plants . gas prices were later deregulated , resulting in increased production , and the fuel use act was repealed , but in the meantime generation of electricity from gas fell from 24% in 1970 to 12% in 1985 . in the 1990s gas became more popular as technology improved , and as electricity producers faced tighter clean air act requirements . by 2000 16% of total electric generation was gas - fired , and by 2013 the figure reached 27% . most capacity additions since 1995 have been gas - fired , as illustrated in figure 14 . nuclear power started coming on line in significant amounts in the late 1960s , and by 1975 , in the midst of the oil crisis , was supplying 9% of total generation . however , increases in capital costs , construction delays , and public opposition to nuclear power following the three mile island accident in 1979 curtailed expansion of the technology , and many construction projects were cancelled . the chernobyl disaster in april 1986 also contributed to anti - nuclear sentiment . continuation of some construction increased the nuclear share of generation to 20% in 1990 , where it remains currently . recently , some new projects have entered the licensing and construction stage , but the future of nuclear power remains in question . the accident at fukushima , japan , in march 2011 contributed a further consideration regarding future construction . ( for more details on u.s. nuclear power activity , see crs report rl33558 , nuclear energy policy , by [author name scrubbed]. )