criminal conduct is also not protected . laws shielding volunteers from liability have been enacted on both the federal and state level ; the statutes discussed in this section apply in non - emergency as well as emergency situations . on the federal level , congress passed the volunteer protection act ( vpa ) in 1997 . this statute provides immunity for ordinary negligence to volunteers ( not only medical volunteers ) of nonprofit organizations or governmental entities so long as ( 1 ) the volunteer was acting within the scope of his or her responsibilities ; ( 2 ) the volunteer was licensed or certified in the state where the harm occurred , if licensure or certification was required ; ( 3 ) the harm was not the result of willful action , grossly negligent behavior , etc . ; and ( 4 ) the harm was not caused by the volunteer's operation of a vehicle . the act does not prohibit the nonprofit or governmental entity from bringing a civil action against its own volunteers , nor does the act shield from liability the nonprofit or governmental entity for the actions of its volunteers . furthermore , the vpa expressly preempts state standards that provide less protection than the act . on the state level , all 50 states and the district of columbia have enacted their own volunteer protection statutes that provide varying degrees of liability protection . these state statutes are not preempted by federal law so long as they provide greater liability protections . mississippi , for instance , provides broad civil liability protection to any volunteer who qualifies under the statute by providing services or goods to a volunteer agency , unless the injury complained of was the result of ( a ) conduct that was intentional , grossly negligent , etc. , or ( b ) the operation of a motor vehicle . texas also provides immunity to volunteers of a charitable organization for any act or omission resulting in death , damage , or injury if the volunteer was acting in the course and scope of the volunteer's duties or functions . many states , in addition to having vpa - type laws , have enacted statutory provisions geared specifically toward volunteer health professionals ( vhps ) . these statutes are like the vpa in that they provide immunity from civil liability and are not dependent on , or triggered by , an emergency situation . often immunity is provided so long as certain conditions are met . for example , as discussed above , texas has statutory provisions that provide immunity to ordinary volunteers of charitable organizations , but texas law also shields from civil liability a vhp who serves as a direct service volunteer of a charitable organization . for the vhp to be eligible for such immunity , the patient or party responsible for the patient must sign a written statement that acknowledges ( 1 ) that the volunteer is providing care that is not administered for or in expectation of compensation , and ( 2 ) the limitations on the recovery of damages from the volunteer in exchange for receiving health care services .