nmfs revised the interim policy and issued a final hlp in 2005 . a summary of major esa actions and litigation is presented in the appendix and discussed below . other litigation has affected the way in which the esa has been applied to columbia river anadromous fish . when the u.s court of appeals for the tenth circuit ruled that the fws's method of determining critical habitat under the esa was flawed , nmfs agreed to settle a suit that challenged its critical habitat determination for the columbia river . nmfs had used a methodology similar to fws in determining how economic factors were used in its determination of critical habitat . litigants have also challenged whether hatchery - raised salmon and steelhead should be listed as threatened under the esa under nmfs's hatchery listing policy ( hlp ) . issued as interim policy in 1993 , the hlp provides guidance on how nmfs treats stocks of hatchery salmon and steelhead when deciding which species should be listed as protected under the esa . in the interim policy , nmfs concluded that certain hatchery fish could be included in the same evolutionary significant unit ( esu ) as wild fish , which were listed , but it nevertheless excluded stocks of hatchery fish in its listing . a federal court found this approach violated the esa by listing distinctions below the species level . if hatchery and wild salmon were in the same esu , the court reasoned , they should have the same listing status . when determining whether to list a species as threatened or endangered , the final hlp requires nmfs to consider the status of the esu as a whole rather than the status of only the wild fish . it also states that an entire esu would be listed , rather than just the wild fish . this revised approach resulted in a downlisting of certain fish , such as steelhead trout , from endangered to threatened . two suits were filed in two federal district courts challenging the final hlp . a suit in the western district of washington addressed the hlp's application to steelhead ( the "steelhead case" ) , and a suit in the district of oregon challenged its effect on salmon ( the "salmon case" ) . in the steelhead case , a diverse set of plaintiffs challenged both sides of the hatchery argument: one group argued that hatchery steelhead should be considered distinct from wild steelhead , while another argued that nmfs should make no distinction between places of origin . the district court concluded nmfs erred in downlisting steelhead based on the condition of the entire esu — both hatchery and wild — rather than focusing on the "benchmark of naturally self - sustaining populations that is required under the esa[.] the u.s. court of appeals for the ninth circuit reversed that portion of the district court's ruling and concluded that the final hlp complied with the esa . the ninth circuit gave discretion to nmfs's analysis and concluded that the downlisting was based on "substantial ... scientific data , and not mere speculation[.] in the salmon case , nmfs distinguished between hatchery stocks of salmon and wild or "natural" salmon .