"policy" will give way when it has to . 111-259 , provided that in cases where findings or notifications are not made available to all members of the intelligence committees , within 180 days the president shall notify all committee members that notification has been provided only to the gang of eight , and provide all intelligence members a general description of the activity planned . the executive branch generally does not routinely provide with congress four general types of intelligence information: 1. the identities of intelligence sources ; 2. the "methods" employed by the intelligence community in collecting and analyzing intelligence ; 3 . in 2001 , and again in 2002 , the senate select committee on intelligence ( ssci ) directed that the director of central intelligence prepare a comprehensive report that would examine the role of congress as a consumer of intelligence , and explore the development of mechanisms that would provide members tailored intelligence products in support of their policymaking responsibilities . crs is unaware whether the director produced such a report . subsequently , both intelligence committees attempted to ensure that the full membership of each committee were kept fully and currently informed of that intelligence viewed by executive branch as being the most sensitive . in its version of the fy2010 intelligence authorization bill , the house intelligence committee replaced the current gang of eight statutory provision , by adopting a statutory requirement that each of the intelligence committees establish written procedures as may be necessary to govern such notifications . the senate intelligence committee , in its version of the fy2010 intelligence authorization bill , left the gang of eight statutory structure unchanged , adopting instead , language requiring that the full membership of the intelligence committees be informed of all covert actions and that all members of the two intelligence committees be notified when the executive branch notified the gang of eight of any covert action activities . the enacted version of the legislation , p.l . "raw" intelligence , which can be unevaluated or "lightly" evaluated intelligence , which in the case of human intelligence , sometimes is provided by a single source , but which also could consist of intelligence derived from multiple sources when signals and imagery collection methods are employed ; and 4. certain written intelligence products tailored to the specific needs of the president and other high - level executive branch policymakers . included is the president's daily brief ( pdb ) , a written intelligence product which is briefed daily to the president , and which consists of six to eight relatively short articles or briefs covering a broad array of topics . the pdb emphasizes current intelligence and is viewed as highly sensitive , in part , because it can contain intelligence source and operational information . its dissemination is thus limited to the president and a small number of presidentially - designated senior administration policymakers . although congress generally has not had access to information pertaining to intelligence sources and methods , raw intelligence , or to intelligence products tailored to high - level policymakers — including pdbs — notably , congress occasionally has successfully obtained such intelligence information from the executive branch .