enforcement" ) . with the passage of the wilberforce act , it is now a federal crime to obstruct , or attempt to obstruct , or in any way interfere with or prevent the enforcement of section 1583 ( enticement into slavery ) , 1584 ( holding another in involuntary servitude ) , 1590 ( trafficking with respect to peonage , slavery , involuntary servitude , or forced labor ) , 1591 ( sex trafficking using force , fraud , coercion or children ) , or 1592 ( document abuse relating to peonage , slavery , involuntary servitude , or forced labor ) . the penalties for doing so are the same as those for the underlying offense . conspiracy to violate any federal felony provision is a separate offense punishable by imprisonment for not more than five years . nevertheless in a number of instances , congress has elected to punish equally conspiracy and the underlying offense which is its object . none of the trafficking sections contained such a feature prior to enactment of the wilberforce act . the wilberforce act authorizes the same punishment for the substantive offense or for conspiracy to commit it in case of: ( 1 ) 18 u.s.c . 1583 ( enticement into slavery ) , ( 2 ) 18 u.s.c . 1584 ( holding another in involuntary servitude ) , ( 3 ) 18 u.s.c . , "whoever knowingly – ( 1 ) in or affecting interstate or foreign commerce , or within the special maritime and territorial jurisdiction of the united states , recruits , entices , harbors , transports , provides , obtains , or maintains by any means a person . with the knowledge , or in reckless disregard of the fact , that the person will be used for commercial sexual purposes and either is a child or will be induced to participate through the use of force , the threat of force , fraud , coercion , or some combination of such inducements . second , the wilberforce act expands the mens rea or knowledge element of both section 1591 offenses . the offenses shared two knowledge elements prior to the wilberforce act . the government had to prove ( a ) that the defendant knew that an individual had been recruited , transported , or harbored , or knew that he was benefitting from such activity , and ( b ) that the defendant knew either that the individual was a child to be used for commercial sexual purposes or that force , fraud or coercion was to be used to exploit the individual for such purposes . the wilberforce act enlarges the second knowledge element , the commercial sexual purposes element , to include instances where the defendant acts with "reckless disregard" of the fact that a child , force , fraud or coercion will be used for commercial sexual purposes . a similar reckless disregard standard has been part of the prohibition against harboring illegal aliens for some time . there , the courts have explained that "reckless disregard" means "deliberate indifference to facts which , if considered and weighed in a reasonable manner , indicate the highest probability that the alleged aliens were in fact aliens and were in the united states illegally.