some are proprietary . some are unknown: schedules may slip and costs rise , or technical advances may cause the opposite to occur . developers of a technology tend to be its advocates , and see the strengths of their technology and a path to overcome its weaknesses . even if these data can be obtained , it is necessary to weight data elements to support a choice among contending technologies . which alarms are to be resolved on - site and which are to be referred to off - site experts ? under what circumstances would a port or border crossing be closed ? while terrorists might attempt to smuggle in a nuclear weapon by other means , developing technology to scan containers at seaports is a reasonable place to start . container - scanning technology can be modified for use in other situations , such as monitoring air cargo containers or passenger cars , which are easier to scan because they can contain much less shielding . developing and deploying detection equipment for use at seaports ensures ruggedness and ease of use adequate for real - world applications , and forces governments at all levels to plan conops . more generally , some could argue that it is impossible to prevent terrorists from smuggling nuclear weapons into the united states , so there is no point in spending large sums in a futile effort . congress has rejected that approach , and has appropriated , in total , billions of dollars to deploy available systems and to support r&d on advanced technologies . supporters of the r&d and deployment approach assert that it offers several advantages . it has provided some capability quickly , increasing the odds of detecting weapons or snm . an important example of this is the rapid deployment of passive radiation detectors to scan maritime cargo containers . this limited detection capability would help deter terrorists and would complicate plans to smuggle in weapons or snm . initial deployments provide data of use to subsequent deployments . they help refine what throughput , robustness , etc. , front - line inspectors require of a system . they help refine conops . they help define desirable features of an architecture . these results can make future technologies , systems , and architectures more effective . it has created an r&d pipeline that is intended to generate a steady stream of new technologies and systems . the resulting improvements in individual technologies , operations , and architectures can improve overall system effectiveness . as technologies become more capable , they can plug gaps in the current architecture . for example , remote detection might offer a way to monitor choke points in the united states or overseas that terrorists might pass through in transporting snm or weapons . congress may wish to address gaps and synergisms in this portfolio . for example: gaps: several systems may use helium - 3 tubes for neutron detection , yet the supply is limited . alternatives are available , but the longer developers take to switch to these alternatives , the longer it would take to deploy their systems because of the need to incorporate different detectors , modify algorithms , and test the revised system .