these are not the only periodicals so affected . since 2006 , revenue shortfalls have compelled many other magazines to cease publication or to become web - only publications . in the late 1960s , the post office was widely recognized to be in crisis . the department had been running deficits for years . as the above review of postage subsidy policy indicates , none has worked perfectly . postage subsidies policies inevitably have raised two contentious questions: ( 1 ) which periodicals should receive these subsidies ? ; and ( 2 ) who should pay for these subsidies ? the sheer diversity and plenitude of periodicals — from the atlantic monthly to people to sports illustrated to zymurgy — has made enacting periodical postage subsidies a challenging and , frequently , expensive undertaking . should congress wish to consider attempting to assist periodicals publishers , it may wish to consider the following seven issues: ( 1 ) are the conditions that are negatively affecting periodicals likely to continue ? ( 2 ) does the closure of some periodicals negatively affect the health of the u.s.'s democratic republic ? ( 3 ) is the transformation of periodicals from paper publications to online publications a positive or negative development ? ( 4 ) would increased postage subsidies greatly decrease the probability that more publishers will cease publication ? ( 5 ) would some other form of governmental aid — such as below market loans — be more helpful to periodicals publishers ? as before , taxpayers made up the shortfalls through annual appropriations . congress addressed this problem and many others afflicting the post office by enacting the postal reorganization act of 1970 ( pra ; 84 stat . 101 et seq. ) the statute abolished the post office department , replacing it with the u.s . postal service ( usps ) , an "independent establishment of the executive branch. this new entity was designed to be financially self - sufficient , that is , it was to operate without annual congressional appropriations . to this end , the pra provided the usps with greater authority over its operations so that it could control its costs and boost its revenues . the law also had effects on periodicals , which had continued to fail to provide the usps with revenues that covered the cost of their delivery . the enactment of the postal accountability and enhancement act ( paea ; p.l . 109-435 ; 120 stat . 3198-3263 ) in december 2006 made the future of the postage subsidy for periodicals less clear . the paea requires the new postal regulatory commission ( prc ) to devise a new postage rate - setting system . the statute states that an "objective" of the new system is that it will allocate "the total institutional costs of the postal service appropriately between market - dominant and competitive products" ( 120 stat .