the authority has not yet been implemented . there is not consensus that this should be a federal responsibility . nonetheless , if faced with a mass casualty incident , hospitals , physicians , and other providers could face considerable pressure to deliver care without a clear source of reimbursement . congress or the bush administration provided special assistance to address this concern three times in response to recent disasters . following the september 11 , 2001 terrorist attacks , hhs provided funding to hospitals , clinics , and other health care facilities ( including privately owned facilities ) near the three affected sites ( in ny , pa , and va ) , that either provided unreimbursed health care services to victims , or suffered other economic hardship as a result of road closures or other infrastructure effects . through intermittent appropriations , congress has funded a program to provide medical screening , monitoring , and treatment services to responders and others who were exposed to hazards at the world trade center site in ny following the 2001 terrorist attack , and who are now experiencing health problems that are believed to have resulted from those exposures . following hurricane katrina , congress provided $2 billion to cover the state share of medicaid costs associated with evacuees and individuals living in declared disaster areas ( for states with approved federal waivers ) , and to restore access to care in affected areas . legislative proposals in the 110 th congress would have: authorized the hhs secretary to use a special fund to provide temporary emergency health care coverage for uninsured individuals affected by public health emergencies ( h.r . 6569 / s. 3312 ) ; or addressed the health care needs of responders and others who are ill purportedly as a result of exposures at world trade center ( wtc ) site in ny following the 2001 terrorist attack ( for example , h.r . none of these proposals was enacted . 847 , the james zadroga 9 / 11 health and compensation act of 2009 , has been introduced in the 111 th congress to address wtc - related illnesses . after the 2001 terrorist attack on the world trade center , some responders developed chronic health problems believed to have resulted from hazardous exposures during the rescue , recovery , and clean - up operations . efforts to track and address these problems were hampered because , at the outset , no central registry was established to identify all responders and other on - site workers , and no program was established to monitor their health going forward , in order to quickly detect common or unusual illness patterns in the cohort . following hurricane katrina , the 109 th congress enacted the safe port act ( p.l . one of its provisions authorizes the president , acting through the secretary of hhs and pursuant to a major disaster declaration under the stafford act , to establish medical monitoring programs , if needed , to track the health status of individuals ( not limited to responders ) who may experience hazardous exposures as a result of the disaster . according to gao , as of may 2008 , hhs had not articulated a plan for doing so .