the length of the deployment . as the length of a deployment increases , the number of soldiers in stop loss status will increase ( eg , the army increased deployments for oif from 12 to 15 months during the "surge" in iraq ) . the number of units deployed . as more units are deployed , the number of soldiers affected by stop loss will increase ( eg , the 2007 "surge" in iraq from 15 to 20 brigade combat teams ( bct ) ) . the distribution of separation dates within a unit . a somewhat random factor , the more soldiers in the unit with separation dates after their scheduled redeployment , the fewer who would be affected by stop loss . units alerted for out - of - cycle deployments . as more units are notified of deployment dates that are sooner than what was originally planned , the more soldiers who could be affected by stop loss . the relationship between the number of deployed brigade combat teams ( bct ) and the length of the deployment has been modeled by dod to demonstrate the impact of stop loss on individual soldiers . the model shows that if there are 15 bcts deployed on a 12-month rotation cycle , the average soldier impacted by stop loss will be involuntarily extended by 4.8 months . if the number of deployed bcts increases from 15 to 20 and if the rotation cycle increases from 12 to 15 months , the average soldier retained by stop loss will spend an average of 6.6 additional months on active duty . the need for stop loss is directly linked to the army's rotation methodology for oif / oef which emphasizes the rotation of units rather than individuals . the army , in particular , has long struggled with the issue of using individual or unit replacements , attempting to balance the benefits of unit cohesion with a personnel system that emphasizes individual career development . it has long been believed that stabilizing personnel in units would improve readiness and allow the unit to operate more effectively as a team . however , from world war ii through vietnam , units were initially deployed to the combat theater and individual replacements were then used to compensate for those who were killed , wounded or rotated out for various reasons . the unit remained in the combat theater but its composition and identity changed dramatically over time with this personnel turnover . during wwii , individual replacements were trained by replacement centers , shipped to a replacement depot and called forward into combat units as necessary . with no prior unit affiliation , these replacements were "military orphans" with little esprit de corps and cohesion . with no previous combat experience , these replacements struggled to be integrated into the pre - existing "band of brothers" in the unit and many quickly became casualties themselves , in part because they were unfamiliar with unit operations . once a soldier was wounded or separated from his unit during wwii , there was little chance of returning to the same unit .