the state of the union address originates in the constitution . as part of the system of checks and balances , article ii , section 3 , clause 1 requires that the president "shall from time to time give to the congress information of the state of the union , and recommend to their consideration such measures as he shall judge necessary and expedient. historians also speculate that jefferson was a poor public speaker and did not want to deliver it orally since his inaugural address had been barely audible and was unfavorably received . between 1801 and 1913 , presidents fulfilled their constitutional duty by sending their yearly report as a formal written letter to congress . these written messages contained information about the state of the nation , including policy recommendations . during this time period , the annual message swelled in length , with several exceeding 25,000 words . president woodrow wilson altered historical precedent when he delivered the 1913 annual message in the house chamber before a joint session of congress . although wilson's action "stunned official washington," he had written extensively in constitutional government about his disagreement with jefferson's decision to submit the address in writing . instead , wilson read the constitution as providing the president with the broad authority to serve as a national spokesman . wilson altered presidential rhetoric , using it as an intermediary tool to draw widespread public attention to the policies he supported . the public's endorsement served as political leverage that could compel members of congress to support his legislative agenda . from 1913 until 1934 , the annual message entered a transitional phase in which presidents occasionally issued the address orally . the opposition response is usually broadcast immediately after the completion of the president's state of the union address . wilson delivered six of his eight annual messages in person , and warren harding presented his two addresses orally . calvin coolidge gave one address in the house chamber , and became the first president to broadcast the annual speech on radio . during his presidential terms , franklin roosevelt solidified the oral tradition of the annual message . roosevelt also applied the constitutional language "state of the union," both to the message and the event , which became the popular nomenclature from his presidency forward . given its oral rather than written delivery , the length of the address decreased to between 5,000 and 7,000 words . roosevelt also ushered in the modern tradition of using the collective words "we" and "our" with greater frequency than his predecessors . figure 1 displays the length of state of the union addresses across american presidential history . it shows the sudden drop in 1913 , when woodrow wilson resuscitated the oral mode of delivery . the spikes after wilson are instances in which presidents issued the final state of the union of their term in writing , such as franklin roosevelt in 1945 and carter in 1981 . after winning reelection in 1972 , richard nixon issued a series of written messages in 1973 instead of giving an overview speech . barack obama's 2015 speech contained 6,718 words , which was slightly shorter than his 2014 speech of 6,989 words .