figure 1 . potential co2 reductions in electric powersource: adapted from barbara tyran , electric power research institute , "the power to reduce co2 emissions: the full portfolio," slide presentation ( may 15 , 2008 ) : 7. http: / / www.iea.org / textbase / work / 2008 / roadmap / 2a_tyran_epri%20roadmaps.pdf this report examines key uncertainties associated with the co 2 emissions abatement measures identified in figure 1 . the report briefly describes each measure and discusses expectations for its potential in the context of past experience , technical challenges , infrastructure requirements , or other factors which may inform performance expectations . for each measure , it identifies and discusses a critical uncertainty which may influence its overall viability . plug - in hybrid electric vehicles — how much "low carbon" electricity would be available to charge their batteries ? distributed energy resources — would carbon costs change distributed energy economics enough to spur deployment ? policy makers and interest groups recognize these uncertainties , and have put forth numerous proposals to address them . it is beyond the scope of this report to examine each of these proposals , but they include the broadest range of policy instruments at government's disposal: higher efficiency standards , new regulatory authorities , tax incentives , direct subsidies , research and development ( r&d ) grants , environmental rules , public information campaigns , and a host of other policy instruments . specific examples include calls for more federally - funded ccs demonstration projects and proposals for federal preemption of state siting authority to promote new transmission development . while they run the gamut , it remains to be seen which proposals may be pursued by congress and what effects they would have . consequently , the overall success of a multi - measure co 2 mitigation scheme such as that proposed by epri in figure 1 , and its economic underpinnings , is inherently unpredictable . the cost of building and operating coal plants with and without ccs systems , the cost of natural gas , nuclear power and renewable sources of power , the cost of emissions offsets from outside the utility sector , and ultimately the market price of co 2 itself are all variables that will dictate the decisions of future power plant developers . these variables are all highly uncertain from today's perspective and may create a set of economic drivers dramatically different from those anticipated by policymakers . reducing u.s. emissions of manmade co 2 is a priority of both the president elect and leaders in congress . comprehensive policies have been proposed to achieve these reductions . most envision aggressive implementation of a portfolio of major carbon reduction measures , with the goal of reducing u.s. co 2 emissions to 1990 levels by 2020 or 2030 . numerous studies support the potential of specific measures to lower co 2 emissions , but also identify key implementation uncertainties which may impact their overall viability . congress is considering policies to address these uncertainties , but which policies may be implemented and how effective they may be cannot be known at this time . as the nation's co 2 mitigation policies continue to develop , the inherent uncertainty associated with specific carbon measures may be a critical concern .