the transfer of detainees into the country may also have immigration consequences . litigation addressing these matters is ongoing in the d.c . circuit , with several rulings being issued by the circuit court of appeals . these rulings have generally been favorable to the legal position advanced by the government . soon thereafter , the departments of justice and defense made an announcement regarding the forums in which 10 other guantanamo detainees , who had previously been charged before military commissions , would be tried . the attorney general and secretary of defense determined that military commission proceedings against five guantanamo detainees may be resumed however , the department of justice stated that it intended to bring charges against five detainees in the u.s. district court for the southern district of new york for criminal offenses related to the 9 / 11 terrorist attacks , and the charges brought before these individuals before military commissions were withdrawn without prejudice in january 2010 . the decision to try some guantanamo detainees in federal civilian court proved controversial . plans to bring charges in federal court against khalid sheik mohammed , the alleged mastermind of the 9 / 11 attacks , were placed on hold until the attorney general announced in april 2011 that the administration had reversed course and the 9 / 11 conspirators would be tried before military commissions . the november 2010 conviction of ahmed ghailani for one of the more than 280 charges he faced in connection to the 1998 embassy bombings has fueled the debate over terrorism trials . while some have characterized ghailani's conviction as demonstrating that federal civilian courts serve as an appropriate forum for the prosecution of some guantanamo detainees , others view ghailani's acquittal of most charges as evidence that civilian courts are an inappropriate forum for the criminal prosecution of wartime detainees . on january 22 , 2010 , the guantanamo task force issued its final report concerning the appropriate disposition of each detainee held at guantanamo . the task force concluded that 36 detainees remained subject to active criminal investigations or prosecutions ; 48 detainees should remain in preventive detention without criminal trial , as they are "too dangerous to transfer but not feasible for prosecution" ; and the remaining detainees could be transferred , either immediately or eventually , to a foreign country . the supreme court has denied certiorari with respect to all such decisions thus far , but may prove willing to take on another guantanamo case in the future . in the meantime , it appears that the circuit court's rulings will remain controlling . on january 22 , 2009 , president barack obama issued executive order 13492 , requiring that the guantanamo detention facility be closed as soon as practicable , and no later than a year from the date of the order . any persons who continue to be held at guantanamo at the time of closure were to be either transferred to a third country for continued detention or release , or transferred to another u.s. detention facility .