, twice a year ) . under medicaid , states must adopt a dental periodicity schedule , which can be state - specific based on consultation with dental groups , or may be based on nationally recognized dental periodicity schedules , such as the aapd's guidelines . one goal of the healthy people 2010 initiative , a federal effort to increase quality and years of healthy life and eliminate health disparities , is that at least 66% of low - income children receive a preventive dental visit each year . most medicaid children under age 21 are entitled to early and periodic screening , diagnostic , and treatment ( epsdt ) services . receipt of any dental services among medicaid children eligible for epsdt ranged from 18.9% ( in north dakota ) to 55.7% ( in west virginia ) . receipt of preventive dental services ranged from 6.7% ( in utah ) to 51.0% ( in vermont ) . classification into one of these measures is based on specific dental procedure codes recorded on provider claims . across states in fy2006 , use of dental services among medicaid children was generally low , as shown in table 1 . guidance from the american academy of pediatrics for well - child visits during 2006 ( in effect since 2000 ) called for initial dental referrals at age three years , or as early as one year of age when indicated . table 2 provides a more detailed analysis of the receipt of preventive dental services by age in fy2006 . across age groups within each state and for all reporting states as a whole , utilization patterns resembled a bell - shaped curve ( see figure 1 ) . finally , receipt of dental treatment services ranged from 6.4% ( in nevada ) to 40.8% ( in west virginia ) . during routine immunization and well - child visits , there are a number of opportunities for physicians to inform parents about the need for dental services for their children . that is , children at the age extremes tended to receive fewer preventive dental services than children in the middle of the age range . among nearly all states , the highest rates of preventive dental care were observed for the six - to nine - year - old age group . for this age group , 10 states had preventive dental rates over 50% , and one state ( vermont ) met the healthy people 2010 goal that at least 66% of such children receive a preventive dental visit . the higher rates of preventive dental care among children aged six to nine may be related in part to school entry requirements for childhood immunizations . in order to attend kindergarten at ages five and six , for example , all states require that children have received common childhood immunizations ( eg , vaccinations for diphtheria , tetanus , and acellular pertussis , or dtap ; measles , mumps , and rubella , or mmr ; and polio ) .