they too rejected it by the same vote margin . in response to the ec's explicit prohibition of these four prts and the importation of poultry treated with such substances , the united states requested wto consultations in january 2009 . the outgoing bush administration expressed its frustration with the eu's decision not to allow u.s. poultry processed using these prts , given what it characterized as several favorable european scientific opinions that prts pose no risk to human health . the bush administration expressed concern that even the rejected changes represented a "heavily conditioned" proposal , including requirements for labeling , a limitation on prt use to carcasses , not parts , and a limitation to use of a single prt ( not a combination of them ) to be followed by potable water rinses . ustr concluded that this issue could not be resolved through further negotiation and initiated its request to establish a wto panel to determine whether the eu is acting consistently with its wto obligations . the u.s. poultry industry supported the wto filing by the ustr and encouraged the obama administration to continue to pursue the case . the united states and the eu continued to hold consultations starting again in february 2009 . the u.s. request for wto consultations on the poultry matter was filed on january 16 , 2009 . it states that the eu ban on prts in poultry processing violates the eu's wto obligations under both the agreement on the application of sanitary and phytosanitary ( sps ) measures and the agreement on technical barriers to trade ( tbts ) . ( for more information on these two agreements , see text box on next page. ) specifically , the u.s. filing states that the ban by the eu on prts for poultry appears to violate the following wto obligations: article 2.2 of the sps agreement , which permits only those measures necessary to protect human , animal , and plant life or health and that are based on scientific principles ; sps article 5 , which governs risk assessment and determination of the appropriate level of sps protection , with the objective of minimizing trade impacts ; sps article 8 , on control , inspection , and approval procedures , which are aimed at treating imports no less favorably than domestic products ; and article 2 of the tbt agreement , which is intended to assure that tbt measures do not discriminate against imports or create unjustified barriers to trade . in october 2009 , despite initial consultations between the united states and the eu , the ustr asked the wto to establish a dispute settlement panel regarding the eu's restrictions on imports of u.s. poultry . the united states has asked the panel to review whether the eu's ban on the import and marketing of poultry meat and poultry meat products processed with prts violates the eu's wto obligations . ustr and the u.s. poultry industry remain actively engaged in this case . a panel was established in november 2009 , but this case has not moved forward . formal wto cases can take many years to be resolved to the satisfaction of either party .