the annual distribution is the same amount in each succeeding year . the risk to the account owner who chooses the amortization method is that a declining account balance might result in the account being exhausted in fewer years than he or she had expected when the distributions began . the annuitization method under the annuitization method , the distribution amount is determined by dividing the account balance by an annuity factor . one of the proposals has been enacted into law . in december 2008 , the house and senate passed h.r . 7327 , which suspends the rmd requirement for calendar year 2009 . on december 23 , 2008 , president george w. bush signed this bill into law ( p.l . workers benefit from tax - advantaged accounts because they are funded with pre - tax income . the u.s. treasury estimates that the amount of the tax deduction in fy2012 to fy2016 received by 401 ( k ) plan participants will be $356.2 billion and by ira holders will be $80.5 billion . because the accounts are funded with pre - tax income , the accounts then have a larger base from which to accumulate investment returns compared to non - tax advantaged accounts . the distributions also ( 1 ) must be paid at least once each year ; ( 2 ) must be based on the life expectancy of the plan participant or the joint life expectancy of the participant and a designated beneficiary ; and ( 3 ) must not be modified before the later of five years after the first distribution or the date on which the plan participant reaches the age of 59½ . the internal revenue service has defined in regulation the forms of distribution that it will consider to be "substantially equal periodic payments" and therefore will not be subject to the 10% tax penalty otherwise applicable to early withdrawals . the irs has approved three methods for calculating substantially equal periodic payments . they are the minimum distribution method , also called the life expectancy method ; the amortization method , which amortizes an account balance using life expectancy tables and a "reasonable" interest rate ; and the annuitization method , which divides the account balance by an annuity factor based on a "reasonable" mortality table and interest rate . for any individual , each of the three methods may produce a different distribution amount . as its name implies , the minimum distribution method will usually result in the smallest annual distribution . it is also the only one of the three methods in which the amount of the distribution is likely to vary from year to year . the distribution amount varies both because of changes in the remaining account balance and changes in the account owner's remaining life expectancy . the amortization method and the annuitization method usually produce distributions that are similar in size because the same economic and demographic variables determine the distribution amounts under both of these methods . the distribution amount is calculated annually under the minimum distribution method . under the amortization and annuitization methods , this calculation is typically performed only before the first distribution and the distribution remains unchanged from year to year .