appendix a . conditions on fy2008 supplemental assistance for mérida mexico the fy2008 supplemental appropriations act ( p.l . 110-252 ) , which includes the first tranche of funding provided for the mérida initiative , has softer human rights conditions than earlier house and senate versions , in large part because of mexico's objections that some of the conditions would violate its national sovereignty . the secretary of state , after consultation with mexican authorities , is required to submit a report on procedures in place to implement section 620j of the foreign assistance act ( faa ) of 1961 . that section of the faa "prohibits assistance to any unit of the security forces of a foreign country if the secretary of state has credible evidence that such unit has committed gross violations of human rights. an exception to this prohibition is provided in section 620j if the secretary of state determines and reports to congress that the government of such country is taking effective measures to bring the responsible members of the security forces unit to justice . 110-252 , human rights conditions require that 15% of incle and fmf assistance be withheld until the secretary of state reports in writing that mexico is taking action in four human rights areas: improving transparency and accountability of federal police forces ; establishing a mechanism for regular consultations among relevant mexican government authorities , mexican human rights organizations , and other relevant mexican civil society organizations , to make consultations concerning implementation of the mérida initiative in accordance with mexican and international law ; ensuring that civilian prosecutors and judicial authorities are investigating and prosecuting , in accordance with mexican and international law , members of the federal police and military forces who have been credibly alleged to have committed violations of human rights , and the federal police and military forces are fully cooperating with the investigations ; and enforcing the prohibition , in accordance with mexican and international law , on the use of testimony obtained through torture or other ill - treatment . central america , haiti and the dominican republic p.l . 110-252 includes similar conditions on assistance provided to central america , haiti and the dominican republic . as with mexico , the secretary of state is required to submit a report on procedures in place to implement section 620j of the foreign assistance act ( faa ) of 1961 in order for mérida funding to be released . other human rights conditions require that 15% of incle and fmf assistance be withheld until the secretary of state reports in writing that the governments of the countries in central america , haiti , and the dominican republic are taking action in three areas: establishing police complaints commissions with authority and independence to receive complaints and carry out effective investigations ; implementing reforms to improve the capacity and ensure the independence of the judiciary ; and investigating and prosecuting members of the federal police and military forces who have been credibly alleged to have committed violations of human rights . according to h.rept . 111-187 , addressing drugs and crime in central america requires a longer term commitment than the three - year mérida program .