, end of december 2009 ) . these funds were to be allocated at the discretion of the ihs director . those plans are posted on the hhs recovery plans website . funds for facilities maintenance and improvement , sanitation , construction , and medical equipment were to be obligated in fy2009 and fy2010 . obligations for fy2009 through january 29 , 2010 are included in table 3 . the table also includes information on the scheduled completion data of projects and estimates on the number of jobs created or saved as of the end of the first quarter of fy2010 ( i.e. for a list of the ihs construction projects and equipment , organized by state and type of project , see the hhs recovery website , tribal pre - award funding by state . ihs has existing hit operations for both personal health services and public health activities , funded chiefly through the hospital and health clinics budget in ihs's health services account . arra directed that the additional $85 million in hit funds be allocated by the ihs director . ihs distributed the hit funds for the development of existing management and ehr software , and to telehealth infrastructure and development , with 20% allocated to hardware . ihs identified non - localized hit projects , with $61.4 million going for ehr development and deployment , $2.45 million for personal health record development , $16.96 million for telehealth and network infrastructure , and $4.0 million for administration . of the hit funds , ihs obligated $53.55 million as of january 29 , 2010 , with the remainder to be obligated by the end of fy2010 . unlike the rest of hhs , ihs received its appropriations under arra's title for interior and environment appropriations ( title vii ) . the hitech act also provides for a 100% federal match for payments to certain qualifying medicaid providers who acquire and use certified ehr technology . finally , the hitech act included a series of privacy and security provisions that amended and expanded the current federal standards under the health insurance portability and accountability act ( hipaa ) . among other things , it established a breach notification requirement for health information that is not encrypted , strengthened enforcement of the hipaa standards , placed new restrictions on marketing activities by health plans and providers , and created transparency by allowing patients to request an audit trail showing all disclosures of their electronic health information . for more information , see crs report r40161 , the health information technology for economic and clinical health ( hitech ) act . arra provided $1 billion to the secretary for a prevention and wellness fund , for three specified activities: ( 1 ) $300 million to the centers for disease control and prevention ( cdc ) for phs act "section 317" immunization grants ; ( 2 ) $50 million for state activities to reduce health care - associated infections ( hais ) ; and ( 3 ) $650 million for evidence - based clinical and community prevention and wellness programs that address chronic diseases .