the u.s. farm sector is vast and varied . it encompasses production activities related to traditional field crops ( such as corn , soybeans , wheat , and cotton ) and livestock and poultry products ( including meat , dairy , and eggs ) , as well as fruits , tree nuts , and vegetables . in addition , u.s. agricultural output inc ludes greenhouse and nursery products , forest products , custom work , machine hire , and other farm - related activities . the intensity and economic importance of each of these activities , as well as their underlying market structure and production processes , vary regionally based on the agro - climatic setting , market conditions , and other factors . the farm debt - to - asset ratio is forecast to be higher in 2017 , at 12.7% , still a relatively low value by historical standards ( figure 24 ) . farm household wealth is derived from a variety of sources . a farm can have both an on - farm and an off - farm component to its balance sheet of assets and debt . thus , the well - being of farm operator households is not equivalent to the financial performance of the farm sector or of farm businesses because of other stakeholders in farming , such as landlords and contractors , and because farm operator households often have nonfarm investments , jobs , and other links to the nonfarm economy . the following set of eight charts ( figure 28 to figure 35 ) presents usda data on monthly farm prices received for several major farm commodities — corn , soybeans , wheat , upland cotton , rice , milk , cattle , hogs , and chickens . the data is presented in both nominal and indexed formats to facilitate comparisons . three tables at the end of this report ( table 1 to table 3 ) present aggregate farm income variables that summarize the financial situation of u.s. agriculture . in addition , table 4 presents the annual average farm price received for several major commodities , including the usda forecast for the 2016 / 2017 marketing year . as a result , farm income and rural economic conditions may vary substantially across the united states . however , this report focuses singularly on aggregate national net farm income and the status of the farm debt - to - asset ratio as reported by the u.s. department of agriculture's ( usda's ) economic research service ( ers ) . annual u.s. net farm income is the single most watched indicator of farm sector well - being , as it captures and reflects the entirety of economic activity across the range of production processes , input expenses , and marketing conditions that have prevailed during a specific time period . when national net farm income is reported together with a measure of the national farm debt - to - asset ratio , the two summary statistics provide a quick and widely referenced indicator of the economic well - being of the national farm economy . according to ers , net farm income is forecast at $63.4 billion in 2017 , up 3% from last year ( table 1 ) .