this provision has since expired . the cobra subsidy , as amended by subsequent laws , was available to individuals who met the income test and who were involuntarily terminated on or after september 1 , 2008 , and before june 1 , 2010 . the individuals had to pay the remaining balance . health insurance coverage for these affected workers and their families was not consistently available . "cobra" refers to title x of the consolidated omnibus budget reconciliation act of 1985 , p.l . the regulations for cobra are written by the department of labor ( dol ) and the internal revenue service ( irs ) . this section provides a simplified explanation of who qualifies and how , what the responsibilities of the employer are , and what the employee is responsible for . more detailed information is available from dol's cobra continuation coverage , employee benefits security administration , at http: / / www.dol.gov / ebsa / cobra.html . currently , there is no legislation in the 113 th congress to amend cobra . in the 112 th congress , legislation to extend cobra coverage to additional people , domestic partners for example , or expand cobra coverage , to span the time between retirement and medicare eligibility for example , was introduced , but no major action was taken . throughout 2008-2009 , the unemployment rate in the united states climbed from 5% to a peak of 10% in october 2009 . a slow recovery was predicted and many who lost their jobs anticipated a long period of being either underemployed or unemployed . as a result , many who were eligible to continue their employer - sponsored health insurance did not elect coverage under cobra , leaving their families at risk . the 111 th congress addressed this problem by creating a temporary cobra premium subsidy under title iii of the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 ( arra ; p.l . the subsidy was limited to 15 months and covered 65% of the cobra premium . the law affects private sector employer group health plans through amendments to the employee retirement income security act ( erisa ) and the internal revenue code . congress enacted the legislation to expand access to coverage for at least those people who became uninsured as a result of changes in their employment or family status . although the law allows employers to charge 102% of the group plan premium , this can be less expensive than similar coverage available in the individual insurance market . cobra continuation coverage for employees of state and local governments is required under amendments to the public health service act . women were especially vulnerable to loss of insurance coverage if they became unemployed , widowed , or divorced . continuation coverage similar to cobra is provided to federal employees and employees of the washington , dc , district government through the law authorizing the federal employees health benefits program under title 5 of the u.s. code . before enactment of cobra , if an employee's job was terminated ( voluntarily or involuntarily ) , the insurance offered by the employer also ceased , usually within 30 to 60 days .