appendix a . countries requiring assistance to improve food security , july 2008 appendix b . world food program responses to the global food crisis wfp , which annually provides humanitarian assistance to more than 80 million people in 80 countries , has been in the forefront of the international response to food price increases . wfp uses its commodity and cash resources to address the nutrition , health , and education implications of high food prices in poor countries . wfp depends entirely on voluntary contributions of commodities and cash to fund its feeding programs around the world . in 2007 , donor contributions to wfp totaled $2.8 billion , including $1.1 billion of commodity food aid contributed by the united states — about 44% of all donor contributions . the united states provides almost all of its food aid contribution to wfp in the form of u.s. agricultural commodities while other donors provide mainly cash . to maximize the commodity value of the cash at its disposal and to mitigate the increased commodity and transports costs it faces , wfp has allocated more than 80% of its cash available in 2008 to local and regional purchase of food aid commodities in developing countries . local / regional purchases , according to wfp , result in savings on food and transport costs and help local farmers from whom the food was purchased break the cycle of hunger at its root . in august 2008 , wfp announced that it would direct a $214 million food security assistance package to 14 countries , the palestinian territories , and the horn of africa , which are seriously affected by high food prices ( appendix a ) . the package will use commodities and cash to provide food rations to highly vulnerable groups ; feed school - aged children ; supplement nutritional intake of pregnant women and children ; expand food aid to urban areas hardest hit by high food prices ; and support small farmers and markets through local food purchase . the following month , it launched purchase for progress ( p4p ) to help small farmers access markets . p4p will be launched in 21 countries over the next five years and will work in cooperation with organizations , such as the alliance for a green revolution in africa ( agra ) , who help small farmers improve productivity through the use of improved seeds and farm management techniques . the bill & melinda gates foundation committed $66 million to fund pilot p4p projects in 10 countries in africa , the howard g. buffett foundation committed $9.1 million , and the government of belgium contributed $750,000 . wfp expects p4p to significantly increase the incomes of some 350,000 farmers in the pilot projects . appendix c. unicef and who responses to the global food crisis unicef unicef responses focus on: bolstering nutrition security in emergencies ; improving the nutritional status of pregnant women ; monitoring infant growth rates ; supporting infant and child feeding and care ; providing micronutrients ; meeting the nutritional needs of people living with hiv / aids and supporting community - based programs .