loans are repaid to the states . in addition , the u.s. department of agriculture provides assistance through grant and loan programs for communities with populations of fewer than 10,000 persons . only airports will be discussed in this section . overall , only about one - quarter of airports are publicly owned , typically by state and local governments , yet these airports represent the vast majority of utilized airport capacity , particularly that used for commercial aviation operations . privately owned airports predominantly serve general aviation . according to the federal aviation administration ( faa ) , there were 20,341 airports in the united states at the end of 2007 . consideration of economic stimulus proposals raises a number of issues pertinent to the water sector . a key issue concerns the funds distribution mechanism . 7110 ( 110 th congress ) anticipated using the dwsrf program as the means for delivering stimulus funds . such an approach would have benefits , as it would take advantage of an established federal - state program structure that includes criteria for project priorities and eligibilities , and contains fiscal safeguards , such as auditing requirements . yet , some local water utility representatives have noted that the distribution of funds by states under this program can be sluggish . others have noted that federal program requirements can pose time - consuming hurdles for projects , slow down project starts , and ultimately could reduce the effectiveness of economic recovery efforts . also , how well do projects identified as "ready to go" complement state funding priorities ? similarly , some projects viewed as priorities by cities may be outside program eligibility or priority criteria . one policy question is whether such projects might be made eligible for stimulus funding . similarly , should some federal requirements be relaxed , and if so , what might be the public health , environmental or other trade - offs in doing so ? as an alternative or complement to the epa program , the national rural water association advocates using the usda program which has an estimated $3 billion backlog of water and wastewater projects , and which the association argues distributes funds more quickly . however , this program is limited to small communities . regardless of distribution mechanism , many questions arise . for example , how will priorities be set: in view of multiple considerations , including speed and efficiency in creating jobs , public health need , economic need , or ensuring urban / rural or state equity ? a broader question concerns the long - term federal role in water infrastructure financing and how stimulus efforts might affect it . for example , how might stimulus funding impact congressional efforts to develop a sustainable funding source to replace or supplement federal appropriations , such as a water infrastructure trust fund ? electric transmission the electric power transmission grid for the lower 48 states consists of approximately 160,000 miles of high voltage lines used to move electricity from power plants to load centers . the system is owned primarily by investor - owned utilities ( ious ) ; other owners include municipal and other public power entities ( including federal entities ) , rural cooperatives , and independent transmission companies .