two circumstances might make such action easier here than in the senate . first , the general rules of the house always entail limits on debate and amendment or permit their imposition by a voting majority . second , inasmuch as the cra provides no expedited procedure for the house anyway , the house would lose no procedural advantage by considering a consolidated measure that failed to comport with the requirements of section 802 ( a ) . one approach might be for the house to consider a consolidated measure that comprised sections each of which disapproved a rule in the terms required by section 802 ( a ) ) , and that also contained language providing that each disapproval section would have the same effects as if separately enacted under the cra . even if the disapproval provisions did not conform to the requirements of section 802 ( a ) , it still might be possible to provide that each section had the effect of a cra disapproval resolution . in its consideration of such a vehicle , the house might preserve the intent of the statutory mechanism by adopting a special rule that prohibited amendment to the text of any section , but permitted amendments that would only strike a section , or that would only add a section reflecting the text required for a disapproval resolution . language could also be included directing that the respective issuing agency be precluded from issuing a substantially similar regulation in the absence of subsequent statutory authority . alternatively , each section disapproving a rule could be couched in terms conforming to section 802 ( b ) , and the measure could include additional provisions specifying that each section disapproving a rule was to have force and effect as if enacted as a separate disapproval resolution under the cra . a provision of this sort would presumably suffice to permit the measure to achieve the desired effects even if it were introduced outside the period prescribed by section 802 ( b ) . in addition , given that a consolidated measure would in any case not be subject to consideration under the cra , its use might also give congress more latitude in framing its individual provisions . for example , the text required by the cra permits disapproval under the act only of a single regulation in its entirety . acting outside the requirements of the cra , congress could provide for the disapproval only of the specific parts of a proposed regulation to which it objected , or could include language replacing or otherwise modifying certain provisions of the regulation . further , inasmuch as consideration of a consolidated joint resolution of disapproval would not be covered by the cra to begin with , either chamber could consider and adopt amendments to the measure without incurring any additional consequences for violating cra requirements . as long as the measure still contained provisions specifying that the effects of the disapproval provisions were to include retroactive vitiation and prohibition on proposing a similar rule , its lack of the form required by the cra would not prevent its enactment from having the same effects as provided by the cra .