two plans were under consideration . one favored by many policy makers envisioned the oil transiting canada to a chicago - area destination . proponents of this plan pointed out that the midwest had no indigenous source of crude ; those opposing it cited the high cost of such a lengthy and expensive pipeline construction project . the other plan , which ultimately became the route of choice for the trans - alaska pipeline system ( taps ) , was to transport crude oil to the southern alaska seaport of valdez , where it would be shipped to refiners by tanker . proponents cited large cost savings and the timeliness of the smaller construction project . opponents of this plan contended that taps sponsors' true intent was to export north slope crude , a contention denied by taps supporters . midwest destination proponents asserted that exports would run counter to the principle that u.s. oil should be used domestically and remain available for consumption in the united states as a matter of energy security . a pipeline from prudhoe bay required transiting a route where much of the right - of - way was on federal lands . the 1973-74 arab oil embargo brought a new sense of urgency to the debate , and legislation was required to end the stalemate over the route . the compromise , the trans - alaska pipeline act ( p.l . 93 - 153 ) , authorized right - of - way for the shorter pipeline to valdez . however , the law included a proviso that crude oil transiting the right - of - way granted by congress would not be exported . taps was completed in 1977 , and initial oil shipments began to flow by year - end . with continued oilfield development on the north slope , production climbed steadily for 10 years , peaking at 2.0 million barrels per day ( mbd ) in 1988 . in subsequent years , alaska north slope ( ans ) output declined , falling to 1.5 mbd in 1995 and continuing downward to current flows of roughly 700,000 bd . during the mid - 1990s , california produced about 800,000 bd of crude oil . the combination of california's indigenous production , ans crude , and foreign oil imports resulted in a regional oil surplus , in part because the west coast market is isolated from the rest of the country . the local glut depressed prices for both california and ans producers . since more crude was available on the west coast than was needed there at that time , about 300,000 bd of crude were shipped via the panama canal to the u.s. gulf coast and u.s. virgin islands . the west coast oil glut elicited persistent expressions of concern from oil producers who argued that the ban on the export of alaskan oil production was distorting the market and causing a decline in the price of west coast production . however , this was a much different oil market than witnessed in 2008.the price for u.s. production on the mainland had fallen to $15.30 per barrel by 1993 ; california production was roughly $2-$3 per barrel cheaper .