this provision has since expired . the cobra premium subsidy was not available for those who lost their jobs after may 31 , 2010 . one advantage of further expanding eligibility for cobra premium subsidies is that the legislative and regulatory frameworks ( including administrative procedures and legal interpretations ) are already in place . a disadvantage for the unemployed is that cobra subsidies are limited to only a portion of those out of work , and they do not apply to those who may be just entering or re - entering the workforce after an extended absence . in addition , some employers find changes to cobra administratively burdensome , and the extensions would add expenditures to an already strained federal budget . in addition to extending the cobra premium subsidy , another possible option is to extend the cobra eligibility period , which now is generally limited to 18 months . an extension could help individuals who need more time in a prolonged recession ( or in its after effects ) to find jobs that provide health insurance . as noted earlier , a limitation of unsubsidized cobra for the unemployed has been that covered individuals usually have to pay 102% of the health plan's full premium . if so , what are the advantages and disadvantages of providing assistance ? for those considering assistance , what are the advantages and disadvantages to giving higher priority to some groups ? several issues are involved: given that many people will receive assistance in 2014 , is it preferable to maintain the status quo until then ? among those who support more assistance and / or immediate assistance: in general , there appears to be a trade - off between concerns about cost and concerns about equity . providing assistance to all the groups mentioned above would cost more than helping just those who lost employer - sponsored coverage , but on grounds of equity it may be difficult to justify not helping all . however , if the immediate goal is not to allow the number of uninsured individuals to increase , there is something to be said for giving higher priority to those who recently had coverage . if assistance is given to those who did not have employer - sponsored coverage , what form of coverage should they have ? should they be enrolled in public programs such as medicaid or medicare , or should they be permitted private insurance options ? if the latter were allowed , what benefit and consumer protection standards might apply ? one approach is not to provide subsidies , but instead to fully fund the program by charging premiums for individuals aged 62 to 64 . individuals who do not have employer - sponsored health insurance or medicaid could voluntarily enroll in medicare . while comprehensive health care reform has been enacted , it will not provide immediate health insurance coverage to all currently unemployed individuals . cbo estimated that the annual premium for single coverage would be $7,600 in 2011 . cbo also estimated that this would indirectly increase mandatory spending for social security , as it may encourage some individuals to retire earlier than they otherwise would have .