under the house and senate versions of h.r . after making reservations from the appropriation , including a $5 billion reservation for the secretary of education to provide state incentive grants and establish an innovation fund , $48.318 billion will be provided to governors through formula grants to each state that chooses to apply for funding through this program . table 1 , below , provides appropriations for fy2008 , fy2009 , and the arra for all ed programs that received funding through the arra . note in particular that table 1 includes vocational rehabilitation programs administered by ed , although these programs are not discussed further in this report . the house bill would have provided $16.276 billion in discretionary funding for the federal pell grant program , the fws program , and the teacher quality partnership grant program , and for the administration of federal student aid programs . it would also have provided $1.474 billion in mandatory funding for the federal pell grant program . the house bill would have amended the federal student loan programs by increasing borrowing limits on stafford loans made to undergraduate students . in addition , the house bill would have provided $6 billion in discretionary funding for a new program of grants to state higher education agencies ( seas ) for higher education facility modernization , renovation and repair . the senate bill would have provided $13.980 in discretionary funding for the three hea programs ( the federal pell grant program , the federal perkins loan program , the teacher quality enhancement grant program ) , but would not have provided any funding for higher education modernization , renovation , and repair . funding for higher education as proposed under the house and senate bills , and as enacted under the arra , is briefly discussed below . ies is charged with conducting research , evaluation , and dissemination activities in areas of demonstrated national need . its activities are designed to inform education practice and policy . only the house bill would have provided $250 million in fy2009 to carry out section 208 of the educational technical assistance act ( etta ; p.l . section 208 authorizes a competitive grant program for seas to support the design , development , and implementation of statewide longitudinal data systems to enable states to use , manage , and analyze individual student data in ways consistent with the esea . the house bill specified that these statewide data systems could include data systems that contain postsecondary and workforce information . up to $5 million of the funds could have been used for state data coordinators or for awards to public or private organizations to improve data collection . both the house and senate bills would have provided supplemental fy2009 appropriations for a state fiscal stabilization fund . the total amount provided would have been $79 billion under the house bill and $39 billion under the senate bill . the house bill would have made $39.5 billion available on july 1 , 2009 , and another $39.5 billion available on july 1 , 2010 , while the senate bill would have made $39 billion available in fy2009 .