relatively few health care providers have adopted hit . the most recent estimate suggests that only about 5% of physicians have a fully functional ehr that incorporates all or most of the recommended capabilities , including electronic documentation of physicians' notes , electronic viewing of lab test results and radiological images , electronic prescribing , clinical decision support , and interoperability with other systems . after the adoption of an initial set of standards by the end of 2009 , the national coordinator must make an ehr available at a nominal fee , unless it is determined that the needs and demands of providers are being adequately met by the marketplace . second , the hitech act authorizes funding for several grant programs to support hit infrastructure , ehr adoption , training , dissemination of best practices , telemedicine , and inclusion of hit in clinical education . funds also are provided to states for low - interest loans to help health care practitioners finance hit . in addition , the legislation provides financial incentives through the medicare and medicaid programs to encourage doctors , hospitals , health clinics , and other entities to adopt and use certified ehrs . medicare incentive payments are phased out over time and replaced with financial penalties for providers that are not using ehrs . finally , the hitech act expands the hipaa privacy and security standards . among other things , it establishes a breach notification requirement for health information that is not encrypted , strengthens enforcement of the hipaa standards by increasing penalties for violations and provides greater resources for enforcement and oversight activities , places new restrictions on marketing activities by health plans and providers , and creates transparency by allowing patients to request an audit trail showing all disclosures of their electronic health information . the hitech act appears in two separate arra titles , each of which is described in the tables below . table 1 provides a summary of the hitech act provisions in division a , title xiii of the economic stimulus bill . those provisions include onchit and the development and adoption of standards , the grant and loan programs , and the privacy and security requirements . table 2 summarizes the hitech act's medicare and medicaid provisions , which are in division b , title iv of the stimulus bill . for each provision , as appropriate , the tables include additional information on existing federal requirements and other relevant administrative activities . each mention of the secretary in the tables refers to the secretary of health and human services . it can also improve the quality of care by identifying harmful drug interactions and helping physicians manage patients with multiple conditions . moreover , the widespread use of hit would provide large amounts of clinical data for comparative effectiveness research , performance measurement , and other activities aimed at improving health care quality . the most important barriers to hit adoption include the high implementation and maintenance costs , the limited financial incentives for using hit , and the lack of interoperability . the hitech act includes three sets of provisions to promote hit adoption .