[sec . 222 ( e ) ( 2 ) ] 18 u.s.c . fraud in foreign labor contracting whoever knowingly and with intent to defraud recruits , solicits or hires a person outside the united states for purposes of employment in the united states by means of materially false or fraudulent pretenses , representations or promises regarding that employment shall be fined under this title or imprisoned for not more than 5 years , or both . enticement into slavery ( a ) whoever — ( 1 ) kidnaps or carries away any other person , with the intent that such other person be sold into involuntary servitude , or held as a slave ; ( 2 ) entices , persuades , or induces any other person to go on board any vessel or to any other place with the intent that he or she may be made or held as a slave , or sent out of the country to be so made or held ; or [ sec . 222 ( b ) ( 1 ) ] ( 3 ) obstructs , or attempts to obstruct , or in any way interferes with or prevents the enforcement of this section , shall be fined under this title , imprisoned not more than 20 years , or both . ( b ) whoever violates this section shall be fined under this title , imprisoned for any term of years or for life , or both if — ( 1 ) the violation results in the death of the victim ; or ( 2 ) the violation includes kidnaping , an attempt to kidnap , aggravated sexual abuse , an attempt to commit aggravated sexual abuse , or an attempt to kill . sale into involuntary servitude [sec . 222 ( a ) ( 2 ) ] ( a ) whoever knowingly and willfully holds to involuntary servitude or sells into any condition of involuntary servitude , any other person for any term , or brings within the united states any person so held , shall be fined under this title or imprisoned not more than 20 years , or both . if death results from the violation of this section , or if the violation includes kidnapping or an attempt to kidnap , aggravated sexual abuse or the attempt to commit aggravated sexual abuse , or an attempt to kill , the defendant shall be fined under this title or imprisoned for any term of years or life , or both . ( b ) whoever obstructs , attempts to obstruct , or in any way interferes with or prevents the enforcement of this section , shall be subject to the penalties described in subsection ( a ) . forced labor [ sec .