bush . the graph compares the median number of days from election day to the announcement of the president - elect's nominees or , in a limited number of instances , his decision to retain the incumbent appointee . this suggests that , for this group of appointments , a president - elect could move as rapidly in 2008 as during any other transition in the preceding 30 years . president - elect george w. bush announced his selections later , on average , than did the other four presidents - elect . this finding is not surprising , perhaps , given the unique circumstances of the 2000 presidential election and the truncated transition period that followed . the graph on the right side of figure 1 shows that the median cabinet appointment was finalized — in most cases confirmed — within days of inauguration day during four of the five transitions . it shows that , for each of these four transitions — reagan , clinton , george w. bush , and obama — the median cabinet appointment was finalized within 77-79 days of election day . this finding , when paired with the graph on the left , indicates that , on average , the senate confirmed these four presidents' cabinet members within days of inauguration regardless of the average pace of a president - elect's announcements . the median cabinet appointment was finalized less quickly — about a week later — during the transition from president reagan to president george h.w . bush . notably , this transition was the sole instance among the five in which an incoming president was of the same party as the outgoing president . in addition , it is the only instance among the five in which the incoming president had been part of the previous administration . these dynamics might have influenced the pace of this transition . other factors , including opposition among some senators to specific nominations — including the first nominee to be secretary of defense , who was rejected — might also have contributed to this higher median . in addition , three department heads serving at the end of the reagan administration — the attorney general , the secretary of education , and the secretary of the treasury — continued to serve through the beginning of the incoming bush administration , a fact not reflected in the median shown in figure 1 . the statistics presented in table 2 can be used to draw comparisons of the pace of appointment of the various cabinet positions without regard to administration . these statistics bear out the key finding seen in figure 1 : looking at the entire pool of cabinet appointments across the five transitions , the median cabinet nomination was confirmed within 79 days of the election — that is , within a few days of inauguration . the statistics in table 2 also show , however , that all cabinet - level nominees do not move through the process at the same pace . on average , department head nominees go through the process more quickly ( median election to final disposition = 79 days ) than do cabinet - rank nominees ( median = 84 days ) .