strategy names broad objectives . plans — working backwards from those objectives — lay out the specific steps , sequenced over time , by which those objectives will be achieved . and then a well - crafted system of assessments indicates to practitioners and outside audiences whether and to what extent the plans are working and the strategy remains valid . each of these may have its own — or even competing sets of — interests and priorities . military strategy , in turn , is not easily separable from broader grand strategy for afghanistan , since security is essential for progress in other areas , and since military forces play key supporting roles in non - security activities . second , the process is complicated by the wide range of activities many stake - holders undertake . these include not only security but also , for example , civilian capacity - building , the rule of law , and economic development . those fields , in turn , are closely linked empirically — for example , long - term development requires a relatively stable environment , and successful local law enforcement efforts must be predicated on some form of rule of law . practitioners and observers suggest that afghanistan faces critical challenges from more than a single insurgency . the insurgencies themselves are multiple with varying degrees of cohesion , various aims , various links to al qaeda , and various ties across the border into pakistan . criminal patronage networks — including drug lords , powerbrokers , and some government officials — empower the insurgencies directly through funding and other forms of support , and indirectly by alienating the afghan people . finally , many of the practices of the international community , over time , have inadvertently empowered malign actors and frustrated the afghan people , further bolstering at least tacit support for the insurgencies . over time , since the removal of the taliban regime , the complex and multi - faceted international effort in afghanistan has evolved in scope , scale , participation , and focus . the overall campaign broadly aimed at the stabilization of afghanistan is multi - faceted in both participation and focus . the campaign is joint , combined , and civil - military , and includes governance , development and security efforts . it addresses conflict settlement as well as current counter - insurgency and stabilization efforts — including the transition process by which afghans assume lead responsibility for security , and the twin processes of reintegration and reconciliation which may bring former insurgents at all levels back into peaceful afghan society . in general , the campaign is afghan - led , particularly in the sense of priority - setting . in theory , orchestrating a complex contingency operation has at least three major facets . for the war in afghanistan , congress has pressed the executive branch to assess progress on the ground by means of a clear system of metrics , and to report regularly on those results to the congress . the obama administration , for its part , has also undertaken unilateral assessments and reviews .