title x of h.r . 146 , which passed the senate march 19 , 2009 , contains a san joaquin river restoration settlement implementation provision ; the legislation had previously been considered and passed the senate as title x of s. 22 . under the settlement and implementing legislation , increased water flows for restoring fisheries would reduce diversions of water for off - stream purposes , such as irrigation , hydropower , and municipal and industrial uses . the quantity of water used for restoration flows and the quantity by which water deliveries would be reduced are related , but the relationship would not necessarily be one - for - one . for instance , in some of the wettest years , flood water releases could provide a significant amount of the restoration flows , thereby lowering the reduction in deliveries to agricultural and municipal users . under the settlement , no water would be released for restoration purposes in the driest of years ; thus , no reductions in deliveries to friant contractors would be made due to the settlement in those years . additionally , in some years , the restoration flows released in late winter and early spring may free up space for additional runoff in millerton lake , potentially minimizing reductions in deliveries later in the year — assuming millerton lake storage is replenished . consequently , how deliveries to friant water contractors might be reduced in any given year would depend on many factors . regardless of the specifics of how much water might be released for fisheries restoration vis - à - vis water diverted for off - stream purposes , there will be impacts to existing surface and groundwater supplies in and around the friant division service area and adjustments in local economies . although some opposition to the settlement and its implementing legislation remains , the largest and most directly affected stakeholders ( i.e. , the majority of friant water contractor organizations , and environmental , fisheries , and community groups ) support proceeding with the settlement agreement , in lieu of going to trial . for some groups , going to trial risks considerable uncertainty and expense ; others may be more willing to take such risks . congressional authorization and appropriations are required for full implementation of the settlement . if congress does not act on the legislation , some fear that the court will order a remedy , which may differ from the settlement , and which may have more severe consequences for area water users and third parties . a key legislative issue is how to finance settlement implementation , specifically how to resolve congressional pay - as - you - go ( paygo ) issues . other challenges are how to achieve the settlement's dual goals of fisheries restoration and water management , and how to address concerns of stakeholders not party to the settlement , without disrupting the negotiated agreement . this report provides a brief overview of the settlement , its legal history , and the legislative context in which implementing legislation is being considered . for more information on fisheries restoration , water management , funding , economic , and third party issues , see crs report rl34237 , san joaquin river restoration settlement .