negligence . breach of a duty to exercise duty care ; it is the traditional nonintentional tort standard in cases not based upon strict liability . no - fault recovery . recovery permitted in the absence of fault ; it is not the law in any state with respect to products liability . if adopted in the products liability context , it would permit recovery in the absence not only of negligence ( as strict tort liability does ) , but in the absence of a product defect . noneconomic damages . damages payable for items other than out - of - pocket expenses such as pain and suffering or punitive damages . statutory caps on noneconomic damages , however , are generally distinct from statutory caps on punitive damages . patent danger rule . the rule that a manufacturer is not liable for an injury caused by a design defect if the danger should have been obvious to the product user . periodic payments of future damages . payments by a defendant for a plaintiff's future expenses on a periodic basis rather than in lump sum . post - manufacturing improvements . improvements in a product's design that occur after an injury and which plaintiffs seek to introduce in court as evidence that an injury - causing product was defective . punitive damages . damages awarded , in addition to economic damages and other noneconomic damages , to punish a defendant for willful or wanton conduct . ( also called "exemplary damages." restatement ( second ) torts . a statement of tort law written by legal scholars ; section 402a , which provides for strict tort liability for injuries caused by defective products , has been adopted by most states . on may 20 , 1997 , the american law institute adopted restatement of the law ( 3d ) , torts: product liability , which is intended to replace section 402a . state of the art defense . the defense that permits a defendant to avoid liability in a design defect case if at the time of manufacture there was no feasible safer design available , or in a failure - to - warn case if at the time of manufacture there was no reasonable way that the defendant could have known of the danger he failed to warn against . statute of limitations . a statute specifying the number of years after injury occurs , or is discovered , or its cause is discovered , within which suit must be filed . statute of repose . a statute specifying the number of years after a product is first sold or distributed within which suit must be filed ; it supplements the statute of limitations . manufacturers favor statutes of repose because they preclude recovery when products are old ; consumers oppose them because they result in suits being barred before injuries even occur . strict tort liability . liability established if a plaintiff proves that a product defect caused an injury ; the plaintiff need not prove that the defendant was negligent . subrogation .