who should pay , and how much ? should the bureau be involved in environmental mitigation or is this best handled through new institutional arrangements ( eg , calfed , delta vision ) or other existing agencies ( eg , fish and wildlife service and / or the environmental protection agency ) ? the most recent wrdas were enacted in 2000 and 2007 . interest in authorizing new studies and projects is likely to prompt consideration of a wrda bill in the 111 th congress . however , the effect of additional authorizations on the agency and its existing "backlog" of projects may continue to be an issue . debate over whether policy and program changes are needed to set priorities among the corps' backlog of construction projects and maintenance activities may arise in the context of either wrda deliberations or consideration of appropriations . related to this discussion is past congressional concern over the corps' financial management , particularly the reprogramming of funds across projects and the use of multiyear continuing contracts for projects . the economic stimulus discussions have included funding corps water resources projects without identifying specific projects . which water resources activities may be funded as part of a stimulus is central to the types of benefits that may be expected and whether these investments would be controversial . without information on which corps projects or project types would receive stimulus funding , analysis of potential efficiency , equity , and long - term economic growth and environmental effects is highly constrained . the universe of corps authorized projects is heterogeneous across purpose ( i.e. , the types of benefits to be produced by ecosystem restoration , flood damage reduction , improved navigation ) , size , and economic effect . moreover , many corps projects are highly controversial and proceeding with these could be politically problematic . implementation of numerous policy changes included in wrda 2007 may be the subject of congressional oversight ─ revision of corps project planning guidelines , independent review requirements for corps studies , and status of the national levee database , inventory , and inspections . wrda 2007 called for numerous reports to be completed during the 111 th congress . results of the national flood risk assessment and the recommendations of the national levee safety committee may also lead to congressional action or oversight . hurricane katrina in 2005 and midwest flooding and hurricane ike in 2008 have raised many questions about the national flood risk and federal actions to reduce that risk . in particular , the disasters brought attention to the trade - offs between approaches to distributing federal appropriations among competing water resources projects , and the benefits , costs , and risks of the current division of responsibilities between local , state , and federal entities . for a discussion of flood policy issues , see crs report rl33129 , flood risk management and levees: a federal primer , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] . the 111 th congress also may provide oversight over certain corps activities . for instance , the corps is responsible for much of the repair and fortification of the hurricane protection system of coastal louisiana , particularly in the greater new orleans area .