this report focuses specifically on the rfs . it describes the general nature of the biofuels rfs and its implementation , and outlines some of the emerging issues related to the sustainability of the continued growth in u.s. biofuels production needed to fulfill the expanding rfs mandate , as well as the emergence of potential unintended consequences of this rapid expansion . this report does not address the broader public policy issue of how best to support u.s. energy policy . congress first established a renewable fuel standard ( rfs ) — a mandatory minimum volume of biofuels to be used in the national transportation fuel supply — in 2005 with the enactment of the energy policy act of 2005 ( epact , p.l . the initial rfs ( referred to as rfs1 ) mandated that a minimum of 4 billion gallons of renewable fuel be used in the nation's gasoline supply in 2006 , and that this minimum usage volume rise to 7.5 billion gallons by 2012 ( table 1 ) . two years later , the energy independence and security act of 2007 ( eisa , p.l . 110-140 ) superseded and greatly expanded the biofuels mandate to 36 billion gallons by 2022 . in addition to gasoline , the expanded rfs ( referred to as rfs2 ) applies to most transportation fuel used in the united states — including diesel fuel intended for use in highway motor vehicles , non - road , locomotive , and marine diesel ( mvnrlm ) . rfs2 directly supports u.s. biofuels production by providing a mandatory market for qualifying biofuels — fuel blenders must incorporate minimum volumes of biofuels in their annual transportation fuel sales irrespective of market prices . by guaranteeing a market for biofuels , rfs2 substantially reduces the risk associated with biofuels production , thus providing an indirect subsidy for capital investment in the construction of biofuels plants . as such , the expanding rfs is expected to continue to stimulate growth of the biofuels industry , particularly for the advanced and cellulosic biofuels categories that are potentially in short supply relative to their growing rfs mandates . eisa was passed on december 19 , 2007 , and epa issued its final rule to implement and administer the rfs2 on february 3 , 2010 . the new rule builds upon the earlier rule for rfs1 . however , there are four major distinctions between rfs1 and rfs2: first and foremost , rfs2 increases the mandated usage volumes and extends the time frame over which the volumes ramp up through at least 2022 ( table 1 ) . second , rfs2 subdivides the total renewable fuel requirement into four separate but nested categories — total renewable fuels , advanced biofuels , biomass - based diesel , and cellulosic biofuels — each with its own volume requirement or standard ( described below ) . third , biofuels qualifying under each nested rfs2 category must achieve certain minimum thresholds of lifecycle greenhouse gas ( ghg ) emission performance , with exceptions applicable to facilities existing or under construction when eisa was enacted ( table 2 ) . fourth , under rfs2 all renewable fuel must be made from feedstocks that meet a revised definition of renewable biomass , including certain land use restrictions .