all are discussed below . as a threshold matter , it is important to note that while the supreme court's decision in citizens united invalidated the federal ban on corporate treasury funding of independent expenditures and electioneering communications , it did not appear to affect the ban on corporate contributions to political candidates and parties . feca defines a contribution to include "anything of value" that is given , made available , or rendered to a candidate or political committee . in contrast , an independent expenditure is defined to include "anything of value" that is spent expressly to advocate the election or defeat of a clearly identified candidate and is not made in concert or cooperation with or at the request or suggestion of a candidate or a political party . in an exception to the prohibition , corporations are permitted to use their treasury funds to establish , administer , and solicit contributions to a separate segregated fund — also known as a pac — and may use such pac funds for contributions . as a result , 501 ( c ) ( 4 ) organizations that are incorporated are still prohibited from using their treasury funds to make contributions to candidates and parties , and would still be required to establish a pac in order to do so . in addition , no 501 ( c ) ( 4 ) organization — regardless of corporate status — can serve as a conduit for corporate or labor union treasury funds to make such contributions . 501 ( c ) ( 4 ) organizations must comply with requirements in the irc in order to maintain their tax - exempt status . for those groups choosing to engage in campaign activity , two restrictions stand out . first , under a treasury regulation , campaign activity ( along with any other non - exempt purpose activity ) cannot be the organization's primary activity . second , the irs has ruled that a group which primarily benefits partisan interests could jeopardize its 501 ( c ) ( 4 ) status . allegations that a specific 501 ( c ) ( 4 ) organization has violated the law often include the claim that the organization should be required to register as a political committee under feca . whether an entity is required to register as a political committee is important because registered political committees must raise and spend funds subject to feca contribution limits , source restrictions , and disclosure requirements . feca and applicable supreme court precedent regulate "political committees," defining them to include "any committee , club , association , or other group of persons that receives contributions or makes expenditures aggregating in excess of $1,000 during a calendar year" whose major purpose is to elect federal candidates to office . feca further defines "contribution" and "expenditure" as monies or anything of value "for the purpose of influencing any election for federal office. under feca , political committees must register with the fec and file periodic reports identifying contributions , expenditures , and the identity of any person who contributes more than $200 during a calendar year .