this recommendation is then submitted to the president in writing . this view has adhered in the modern era . in nixon v. united states , for instance , the court determined that "the granting of a pardon is in no sense an overturning of a judgment of conviction by some other tribunal ; it is an executive action that mitigates or sets aside punishment for a crime. this restricted view of the effect of a pardon was further reinforced in two cases stemming from the pardons of officials involved in the iran - contra affair . in in re north , the united states court of appeals for the district of columbia held that a pardon did not remove an indictment from a former cia official's criminal record , precluding the recovery of attorneys fees under the ethics in government act . a similar result was reached in in re elliott a br ams , where the d.c. court of appeals , sitting en banc , held that a pardon did not preclude an individual from being disciplined for professional misconduct . these recent decisions seem to represent an implicit rejection of the sweeping language employed in garland , in favor of a return to the view that a pardon only nullifies the punishment for an offense , with the underlying guilt remaining in effect . regarding the legal nature of warrants of pardon and their delivery and acceptance , it appears that pardons must be physically delivered before they become legally effective . in united states v. wilson , chief justice marshall , writing for the court , stated: "a pardon is an act of grace , proceeding from the power entrusted with the execution of the laws , which exempts the individual , on whom it is bestowed , from the punishment the law inflicts for a crime he has committed . it is the private , though official act of the executive magistrate , delivered to the individual for whose benefit it is intended ..." the court further declared: "a pardon is a deed , to the validity of which delivery is essential , and delivery is not complete , without acceptance. chief justice marshall went on to explain that a warrant of pardon must be pleaded like any other private instrument before any court may take judicial notice thereof . this standard was reiterated in burdick v. united states , where the court stressed that the contention that pardons have automatic effect by their "mere issue" was rejected in wilson "with particularity and emphasis. the court further stressed in burdick that a pardon may be refused , since its acceptance may involve "consequences of even greater disgrace than those from which it purports to relieve. it also appears that a pardon may be revoked at any time prior to acceptance or delivery . in in re de puy , the district court for the southern district of new york addressed a situation where a pardon issued by president johnson on march 3 , 1869 was revoked on march 6th , 1869 by incoming president grant .