sec . payment of medicare liability to states as a result of the special disability workload project . under this provision , within three months after enactment of this law , the secretary , in consultation with the social security commissioner , would negotiate an agreement on a payment amount to be made to each state for the medicare special disability workload ( sdw ) project . payments to states would be subject to certain conditions: states would waive the right to file or be a part of any civil action in any federal or state court where payment was sought for liability related to the medicare sdw project ; states would release the federal government from any further claims for reimbursement of state expenditures arising from the sdw project ; states that are parties to civil actions in any federal or state court seeking reimbursement for the sdw project , would be ineligible to receive payment under this provision while such action is pending or if it is resolved in a state's favor . in negotiating with states , the secretary and ssa commissioner would use the most recent federal data available , including estimates , to determine the amount of payment to be offered to each state that elects to enter into an agreement with the secretary . the payment methodology would consist of the following factors: the number of sdw cases that were eligible for benefits under medicare and the month when these cases initially became eligible ; the applicable non - federal share of medicaid expenditures made by states during the period these cases were eligible ; and other factors determined appropriate by the secretary and the ssa commissioner in consultation with states . however , as a condition of payment under a negotiated agreement for sdw cases , states would not be required to submit individual paid medicaid claims ( data ) . to make payments to states for the sdw project , $3 billion would be appropriated for fy2009 from money in the treasury not otherwise appropriated . aggregate payments to states could not exceed $3 billion . sunset . 570 , all of the provisions in title iii , subtitle d , other provisions , would sunset at the end of the recession period , december 31 , 2010 , including indian protections ( sec . 3301 , 3302 , 3303 ) and nursing home prompt pay requirements ( sec . for a discussion of the medicaid provisions approved in the joint house and senate conference agreement , see crs report r40223 , american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 ( arra ) : title v , medicaid provisions , coordinated by [author name scrubbed] . the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 ( arra , h.r . 1 ) is intended to stimulate additional economic activity in selected industrial sectors to save existing and create new jobs , reduce taxes , invest in future technologies , and fund infrastructure improvements .