several crs reports on specific chemicals and sources are referenced where relevant . chemicals with the potential to disrupt endocrine systems are frequently present in the environment , particularly in rivers and streams , and in some consumer products . exposure to high levels of some of these chemicals has been shown to harm insects , some vertebrate wildlife , and aquatic life by affecting reproductive and other hormone - dependent processes . in controlled laboratory experiments , some scientists have found that relatively low levels of certain chemicals harm the endocrine systems of fish and wildlife , particularly when exposure is continuous , chemicals bioaccumulate , or animals are exposed simultaneously to several chemicals with similar effects . fish studies provide the most compelling evidence that endocrine disruption might be occurring due to environmental exposures to contaminants . reproductive or developmental problems potentially resulting from hormone exposure also have been observed in birds , polar bears , florida panthers , alligators , river otters , mink , and marine invertebrates . some scientists have hypothesized that existing environmental levels of chemical pollutants might be harming human health by disrupting endocrine functions . they point to increased rates of certain human health problems , demonstrated harm to human endocrine systems when people have been exposed to high levels of certain chemicals , and epidemiologic studies that have found statistical associations between exposure to environmental levels of potential endocrine disruptors and diabetes , malformations , sexual function , cognitive development , thyroid function , and other potentially hormone - mediated effects . the environmental endocrine disruptor hypothesis is disparaged by other scientists , because known potential disruptors of endocrine function generally are present in the environment at very low levels , especially compared to the levels of hormones that are naturally present in the human body , as well as in some of the plants that humans eat . many scientists who are not convinced there is an environmental problem nonetheless are concerned about the issue , because there are no measurements at all of environmental concentrations for most chemicals , people are known to be exposed to low levels of multiple environmental contaminants with endocrine - disrupting potential for which potential cumulative effects have not been assessed , and some studies suggest the public health consequences of exposure might be significant . congress might be asked to consider various issues connected to the endocrine disruptor hypothesis . in 1996 , congress mandated chemical screening for endocrine - disrupting potential . the screening program has not yet been launched , and some argue that it should not be launched until the complete test battery is validated . others are concerned about the extent to which epa might rely on animal experimentation in its screening program . once the program is implemented , congress might consider whether statutes and regulations provide adequate authority and direction with respect to the influence of any findings of endocrine disruption on the regulation of specific chemicals , chemical groups , uses , or products . the report is intended to support congress as it considers legislation to control potential endocrine disruptors and as it oversees epa's programs .