some human services are provided by community or nonprofit organizations . the current recession is straining the budgets of state and local governments , putting pressure on many jurisdictions to cut spending or raise taxes . on average , child support constitutes about 17% of family income for households who receive it . among poor households who receive it , child support constitutes about 30% of family income . in fy2007 , the cse program collected $24.9 billion in child support payments and served nearly 15.8 million child support cases . a centerpiece of the federal antipoverty campaign was the community action program , under which a nationwide network of local , mostly non - profit , community action agencies ( caas ) was developed . child welfare agencies seek to ensure the well - being of children and their families , including protecting children from abuse or neglect and ensuring that they have safe and permanent homes . the federal government provides support to state child welfare agencies primarily through programs that are authorized under title iv - b and title iv - e of the social security act . title iv - e of the social security act authorizes the foster care , kinship guardianship , and adoption assistance program . the term "additional funding" is used to denote appropriations above those in the regular appropriations for the program . at this point , fy2009 regular appropriations are contained in the fy2009 continuing resolution ( p.l . the first part of the report provides a summary of each grant or program's purpose , current funding , and the proposed changes in the enacted version of the arra . the community services block grant ( csbg ) program provides federal funds to states , territories and indian tribes for distribution to local agencies in support of a variety of antipoverty activities . the origins of the community services block grant date back to 1964 and lyndon johnson's war on poverty . csbg funds are used for activities designed to have a "measurable and potentially major impact on causes of poverty. a key feature is the direct involvement of low - income people in the design and administration of antipoverty activities , through mandatory representation on the caas' governing boards . there is no typical caa , since each agency designs its programs based on a local community needs assessment . examples , however , of csbg - funded services include emergency assistance , home weatherization , activities for youth and senior citizens , transportation , income management and credit counseling , domestic violence crisis assistance , parenting education , food pantries , and emergency shelters . the tanf block grant is best known as a funding source for cash welfare programs that provide assistance to needy families with children . however , tanf also funds a wide range of benefits and services for disadvantaged families with children , as well as activities to further the goals of reducing out - of - wedlock pregnancies and promoting the formation and maintenance of two - parent families . the child care and development block grant ( ccdbg ) is the primary source of federal funding dedicated solely to child care subsidies for low - income working families ( regardless of welfare status ) .