these considerations are discussed below . market - based mechanisms that limit greenhouse gas ( ghg ) emissions can be divided into two types: quantity control ( eg , cap - and - trade ) and price control ( eg , carbon tax ) . to some extent , a carbon tax and cap - and - trade program would produce similar effects: both would place a price on carbon , and both are estimated to increase the price of fossil fuels , which would ultimately be borne by energy users , particularly households . in an economically efficient market with perfect information , either a price ( carbon tax ) or quantity control instrument ( cap - and - trade system ) could be designed to achieve the same outcome . because this market ideal does not exist , preference for a carbon tax or a cap - and - trade program ultimately depends on which variable one prefers to control — emissions or costs . although there are several design mechanisms that could be included with either program that would blur the distinction , the gap between price control and quantity control can never be completely overcome . compared to a cap - and - trade system , a carbon tax may both offer several advantages as well as present several possible disadvantages . a known price on carbon would not add to the volatility of energy prices , such as electricity and household fuels , unlike what may occur under a cap - and - trade program . moreover , with a set price , industry would have better information to guide investment decisions ( eg , energy efficiency improvements and / or equipment upgrades ) , unless the tax rate was subject to periodic adjustment to achieve ghg emission reduction goals . economists often highlight the relative economic efficiency advantage of a carbon tax , but this advantage rests on assumptions about the expected costs and benefits of climate change mitigation , both of which contain considerable uncertainty and some controversy . some contend that a carbon tax may provide implementation advantages , including greater transparency , reduced administrative burden , and relative ease of modification . in addition , some argue that a carbon tax approach may make it easier to reach a ghg reduction agreement with developing nations . however , some counter that a cap - and - trade approach is best suited to meet this objective . the primary disadvantage of a carbon tax is that it would yield uncertain emissions . for some this concern may present a non - starter , precluding a carbon tax as an option to control ghg emissions . some argue that the potential for irreversible climate change impacts necessitates the emissions certainty that is only available with a quantity - based instrument ( eg , cap - and - trade ) . however , depending upon its design , a cap - and - trade program may also include a risk of uncertain emissions . for example , if offsets are allowed as a compliance option , there is some concern that they would not represent real emission reductions . emissions leakage offers another threat to the certainty of the emissions cap .