b . during hurricanes gustav and ike in 2008 , the following ships were pierside at ngsb avondale and ngsb ingalls and did not sustain any damage: i. lpd 20 ( green bay ) ii . when the uss kennedy ( cv 67 ) left navsta mayport in 2007 , much of the existing carrier - support infrastructure was decommissioned . if creating a new cvn homeport is of strategic importance , as some have indicated , why would the navy decommission existing support infrastructure at mayport only to rebuild much of it a few years later ? what specific capabilities must be re - established and at what cost ? precisely what cvn maintenance will be supported at navsta mayport after all facilities have been constructed ? how often and for how long will the navy need to return the cvn to norfolk for maintenance availabilities that are beyond the capability of fly - away teams ? ddg 103 ( truxtun ) iii . what conventional maintenance will be done by the maintenance personnel at navsta mayport ? ddg 105 ( dewey ) question / request: historically , how have hurricanes negatively affected cvn operations on the east coast ? response: hurricanes can and have affected aircraft carrier operations during all phases of the carrier schedule . cvns inport will sortie when directed by the fleet commander and conduct hurricane avoidance . cvns underway for training will suspend or cancel training evolutions and maneuver to avoid the hurricane's predicted track . question / request: compare the amount of time required to sortie ships from norfolk and mayport . response: following issuance of the sortie order , ships in mayport require approximately 1 hour to reach the open sea and ships in norfolk require between 4 to 4.5 hours to reach open sea . question / request: when , if ever , has the navy not been able to sortie ships ? response: ships in maintenance at norfolk naval shipyard and northrop grumman newport news shipbuilding do not sortie since the shipyards are considered safe havens for ships during hurricanes . no records exist that indicate any aircraft carriers not in safe havens were unable to sortie . appendix e. examples of views from members this appendix presents examples of views from members regarding the navy's desire to homeport a cvn at mayport . these views are presented as examples only . views of members from florida an october 23 , 2009 , press release from the office of representative ander crenshaw states: washington , dc — united states senators george lemieux ( r - fl ) and bill nelson ( d - fl ) and representatives ander crenshaw ( r - jacksonville ) and corrine brown ( d - jacksonville ) signed and mailed the following letter to president obama in advance of his trip to north florida on october 26 . the letter ( 10 / 22 ) underscores the importance of having two east coast aircraft carrier homeports and calls on president obama to reaffirm his commitment to strategic dispersal of critical assets such as aircraft carriers . the full text of the document reads: dear president obama: we are happy to hear you are traveling to the great state of florida soon .