, broadband ) services . others however , have expressed concern over the uncertainty and costs associated with mandating nationwide deployment of such services as a universal service policy goal . just how are consumers using the internet today ? how did the internet evolve from a government experiment to share computer resources to a consumer "destination" ? the question of what , if any , action should be taken to ensure "net neutrality" has become a major focal point in the debate over broadband regulation . access to e - mail , text messages , and social networks have become at least as imperative for a significant number of users as the original intent of the cell phone – voice calls . in the days leading up to and following the 2008 presidential election , the press made much of then - senator barack obama's reliance on his blackberry . commentators wondered aloud whether he would become the first "connected president. president obama initially said that he would reluctantly relinquish his blackberry upon assuming office due to security concerns , but eventually reached a compromise and will have a new secure blackberry for his correspondence . president obama's decision illustrates the extent to which americans have come to rely on "24-7" access to their information . when early - adopting consumers downloaded mosaic , the first widely - available web browser in december 1993 , it gave them access to "the internet:" the world wide web ( web ) . previously , the internet had been the domain of a small cadre of defense and university researchers . the web , however , provided a graphical , "what - you - see - is - what - you - get" ( wysiwyg ) experience to information previously available only as plain text , as well as the ability to refer a reader to another page via a "hyperlink" that the reader would "click" on with her computer mouse . browsers also provided a more user - friendly interface to file transfer protocol ( "ftp" ) , gopher , and similar information sources . these early - adopters could not have foreseen how much the web would transform the way they worked , shopped , searched for information on current events , and conducted other day - to - day activities – in short , how the web would change their lives . in the early days of the web , most web and e - mail use took place at work , where internet connections were provided via dedicated high - speed circuits . most people did not have any internet access at home ; those who did had dial - in access to a corporate network , usually to access e - mail . accessing the web was excruciatingly slow via dial - up and there wasn't that much content of interest on the web . further , there was not much information on the web that consumers would be interested in accessing at home: the earliest information available on the web was not aimed to appeal to a broad audience and tended towards national , local , and technology news .