no such repository is currently authorized . a recent doe report on the need for a second repository concludes that all existing and anticipated spent fuel and high - level waste could be physically accommodated at yucca mountain . legislation to lift the 70,000-ton limit proposed by the bush administration was introduced during the 109 th ( h.r . 5360 ) and 110 th ( s. 37 ) congresses but not acted upon . as amended in 1987 , nwpa provides no backup plan for spent fuel management if the yucca mountain repository were to be halted . during such an indefinite time period , how would the licensing of new nuclear power plants be affected ? would spent nuclear fuel and other highly radioactive waste remain at commercial reactors and other existing nuclear facilities , or would it be moved to centralized interim storage ? previous u.s. efforts to develop interim central nuclear waste storage facilities have drawn fierce opposition . since the 1970s , u.s. nuclear waste policy has been based on the "once through" fuel cycle , in which nuclear fuel is to be used once in a reactor and then permanently disposed of . the major alternative is the "closed" fuel cycle , in which spent nuclear fuel would be reprocessed into new fuel for advanced reactors or particle accelerators . fast reactors or accelerators would destroy the longest - lived radioactive components of the fuel , leaving only relatively short - lived radioactive isotopes , which would decay to background levels within 1,000 years , for permanent disposal . under that scenario , spent fuel could be stored at reprocessing facilities while awaiting its turn to be made into new fuel , and the relatively short life of the resulting waste could make it easier to site a permanent repository . however , the material for nuclear fuel that results from reprocessing ( primarily plutonium ) can also be used for nuclear explosives , raising concerns about nuclear weapons proliferation . because current law specifies that yucca mountain is the sole candidate site for a high - level waste repository , legislation would probably be needed if a major change in direction in the nuclear waste program is sought . but the obama administration does have authority under current law to withdraw the yucca mountain license application , propose reductions in the program's funding , and take other administrative actions to delay or halt the development of a repository at the yucca mountain site . this report discusses those options and the likely impact of indefinite delays in the waste program . in particular , what type of long - term disposal solutions could be considered ? every option for handling nuclear waste ultimately requires a method of long - term isolation from the environment . if yucca mountain were rejected , it would appear that a new repository site search would need to be undertaken at some point . given the criticism that doe has drawn over its handling of the waste program , pressure may intensify for such a search to be handed over to a new organization entirely .