but because the infrastructure funds in p.l . the general provisions of p.l . 111-5 concerning preference for projects that can start quickly , obligation deadlines , and buy american and prevailing wage requirements , described above , also applied to all of these water resources projects and activities . the infrastructure funding provisions of the recovery act raise some general issues . funding infrastructure is a long - term investment , not quick - fix spending , that should lead to something durable , useful , and financially productive . water infrastructure projects often involve complicated planning and construction efforts that span multiple years . the long - term nature of such investments can be at odds with the stimulus goal of quickly injecting money into the economy . thus , one question in debating infrastructure spending as part of economic recovery is , what is truly stimulative ? critics have contended that the haste to fund "ready to go" projects would likely to result in spending on many projects with marginal value , such as projects with plans that have been backlogged for some time because they lack sufficient merit , but were provided opportunity for funding when arra was enacted . assessing the economic and environmental benefits of arra projects will take place for some time in the future , particularly because capital projects typically are multi - year investments . arra includes a number of oversight measures . these appear to be focused on the important issues of identifying waste , fraud , and abuse , and ensuring compliance with applicable standards and competition requirements in contracts and grants , but not necessarily on evaluating or ensuring the quality of funded projects . that responsibility resides with officials at all levels of government , including those who are making project funding decisions , and those charged with providing oversight and monitoring of grants and contracts . federal agencies are likely to face challenges in managing recipients' activities in order to achieve arra's goals and requirements , while ensuring that expenditures begin quickly . arra provided emergency supplemental appropriations for fy2009 and fy2010 for a number of existing federal programs . the law was unusual in many respects , including the fact that the fy2009 supplemental funds in the legislation were enacted before resolution of the regular fy2009 appropriations for most agencies , which were contained in a full - year omnibus appropriations bill that the president signed on march 11 , 2009 ( p.l . the regular fy2009 appropriations for water infrastructure programs provided in that legislation were about the same as in fy2008 . as described in this report , some of the water infrastructure funds included in the recovery act represented a significant increase above recent program funding levels — for some , from three to four times higher than the fy2009 regular appropriation amount . many infrastructure stakeholder groups then urged congress to sustain similar high levels in regular appropriations in fy2010 and beyond , because infrastructure projects typically involve outlays over multiple years . they argued that individual project planning and implementation would be disrupted if federal assistance is uneven or unpredictable , very large one year and much lower the next year .