after the enactment of p.l . 108-487 , the intelligence authorization act for fy2005 , on december 23 , 2004 , until september 2010 , the two intelligence committees reported authorization bills ( of which some have been passed by the respective chambers and one of which — that for fy2008 — passed by both houses only to be vetoed by the president ) . each of these bills was accompanied by a report that provided extensive guidance for intelligence agencies and addressed a number of issues that the committees considered important . such issues included a requirement for senate confirmation of the deputy cia director as well as the directors of the national reconnaissance office ( nro ) , the national geospatial - intelligence agency ( nga ) , and the national security agency ( nsa ) ; the establishment of a space intelligence center ; and providing additional authorities to the dni along with a provision that requires reports when acquisition costs for intelligence systems pass certain cost growth thresholds . important to some members was the inclusion of provisions establishing an inspector general for the entire intelligence community . the senate bill for fy2009 , s. 2996 , sought to provide the dni greater flexibility to coordinate the intelligence community response to an emerging threat that "should not depend on the budget cycle and should not be constrained by general limitations in appropriations law ( eg , 31 u.s.c . 1346 ) or other prohibitions on interagency financing of boards , commissions , councils , committees , or similar groups. these bills did not become law and intelligence programs were instead authorized by defense appropriations legislation between december 2004 and october 2010 . in 2009 , both the house and senate intelligence committees reported intelligence authorization bills for fy2010 ( h.r . 2701 and s. 1494 , respectively ) . each contained provisions that would require senate confirmation of additional intelligence leaders and establish a statutory inspector general for the entire intelligence community . however , provisions in h.r . 2701 that would require more extensive notifications of covert actions drew strong objections from the administration . s. 1494 passed the senate on september 16 , 2009 , by a voice vote , but floor consideration of the house bill did not occur . fy2010 intelligence authorization legislation did become law , albeit without specific authorization of intelligence programs ; it is discussed below . in recent years the u.s. intelligence community has begun a transformation from the agency - centric practices to "a true intelligence enterprise established on a collaborative foundation of shared services , mission - centric operations , and integrated mission management. in addition to well - known threats from terrorist groups and hostile regional powers , the intelligence community also confronts "a growing array of emerging missions that expands the list of national security ( and hence , intelligence ) concerns to include infectious diseases , science and technology surprises , financial contagions , economic competition , environmental issues , energy interdependence and security , cyber attacks , threats to global commerce and transnational crime. such a configuration of the intelligence community , if achieved , will involve systems and capabilities that extend well beyond dod .