appendix a . data table appendix b . gill. ) the most significant permanent foreign aid authorization laws are the foreign assistance act of 1961 , covering most bilateral economic and security assistance programs ( p.l . 2151 ) ; the arms export control act ( 1976 ) , authorizing military sales and financing ( p.l . 2751 ) ; the agricultural trade development and assistance act of 1954 ( p.l . 480 ) , covering food aid ( p.l . 1691 ) ; and the bretton woods agreement act ( 1945 ) , authorizing u.s. participation in multilateral development banks ( p.l . in the past , congress usually scheduled debates every two years on omnibus foreign aid legislation that amended these permanent authorization measures . congress has not enacted into law a comprehensive foreign assistance authorization measure since 1985 , although foreign aid authorizing bills have passed the house or senate , or both , on numerous occasions . foreign aid bills have frequently stalled at some point in the debate because of controversial issues , a tight legislative calendar , or executive - legislative foreign policy disputes . u.s. contributions to multilateral development banks are within the jurisdiction of the senate foreign relations committee and the house financial services committee . the large nontraditional aid programs funded by dod , such as nunn - lugar cooperative threat reduction programs and the military aid programs in afghanistan and iraq , come under the jurisdiction of the armed services committees . some global health assistance , such as research and other activities done by the centers for disease control and prevention , may fall under the jurisdiction of the house energy and commerce and senate help committees . traditionally , most foreign aid appropriations fall under the jurisdiction of the sfops subcommittees , with food assistance appropriated by the agriculture subcommittees . as noted earlier , however , certain military , global health , and other activities that have been reported as foreign aid have been appropriated through other subcommittees in recent years , including the defense and the labor , health and human services , education and related agencies subcommittees . 7601 ) ; the tom lantos and henry j. hyde united states global leadership against hiv / aids , tuberculosis , and malaria reauthorization act of 2008 ( p.l . 110-293 ) ; the millennium challenge act of 2003 ( division d , title vi of p.l . 108-199 ) ; the enhanced partnership with pakistan act of 2009 ( p.l . 8401 ) ; the global food security act of 2016 ( p.l . ( for current information on sfops appropriations legislation , see crs report r45168 , department of state , foreign operations and related programs: fy2019 budget and appropriations , by susan b. epstein , marian l. lawson , and cory r . in contrast , dod assistance is authorized in annual national defense authorization legislation . in lieu of approving a broad state department / usaid authorization bill , congress has on occasion authorized major foreign assistance initiatives for specific regions , countries , or aid sectors in stand - alone legislation or within an appropriation bill . among these are the seed act of 1989 ( p.l .