market. however , milk producers in alaska and hawaii were opposed to any definition change that required them to contribute to the program . dairy importers and processors are opposed to the import assessment , contending that it is an unfair tax on imported products which they say could be challenged as trade - distorting in the world trade organization , regardless of whether alaska and hawaii are included . the argument is that because some imported products are subject to quantity limits under tariff rate quotas , importers will not benefit from the assessment in terms of building additional demand for their product . in may 2009 , usda held a public hearing on proposals to amend federal milk marketing orders ( fmmos ) regarding producer - handler provisions . producer - handlers are dairy farmers who process milk from their own cows in their own plants and market their packaged fluid milk and other dairy products themselves . currently , dairy farmers who qualify as producer - handlers under federal milk marketing orders are exempt , as handlers , from the pricing and pooling provisions of the orders . the provisions require handlers to pay minimum prices to dairy farmers for milk depending on its use ( eg , fluid milk , cheese ) . the pooling process redistributes revenue among producers from across a marketing area ( 10 regions in total ) so that all producers receive the same "blend" price . thus , as handlers , the producer - handlers can produce and sell their milk without being required to participate in the pool , and therefore not be subject to paying minimum prices as other handlers must do . as a result , producer - handlers may have a cost advantage over other handlers . this possibility helped motivate proposals to eliminate the producer - handler exemption . the proposed changes would eliminate or modify who is exempt from federal marketing orders . some of the proposals allow for continued exemptions for producer - handlers based on the size of the operation , ranging from milk production of 450,000 pounds of milk per month ( equivalent to about a 275-cow operation ) to 3 million pounds per month ( about 1,750 cows ) . nationwide , about 15 producer - handlers fall into that range of production . three other firms are larger yet . on october 21 , 2009 , usda issued a recommended decision that would limit exemption from pooling and pricing provisions of federal orders to those producer - handlers with total route disposition of fluid milk products of 3 million pounds or less per month . after a 60-day comment period , usda will issue a final decision . a referendum is then conducted among individual producers ( or as represented by cooperatives ) and , if approved by two - thirds of producers , the amendment to the order is made effective by final rule in the federal register . a negative vote on an amended order would eliminate the order . each is discussed in sections below . a change in federal milk marketing orders could also be used for boosting dairy farm returns .