4254 ( royce ) . imposes financial and immigration sanctions on certain vietnamese who are complicit in human rights abuses . requires the president to submit to congress a list of individuals complicit in certain human rights abuses . introduced march 14 , 2014 ; referred to the house foreign affairs committee , ways and means committee , financial services committee , and judiciary subcommittee on immigration and border security . 116 ( kinzinger ) / s.j.res . 39 ( reid ) . states that congress favors the u.s. - vietnam nuclear cooperation agreement . except for certain allied countries and institutions , prohibits issuance of any export license pursuant to a nuclear cooperation agreement 30 years after the agreement's entry into force . introduced may 22 , 2014 ; referred to senate foreign relations committee . contains a presidential waiver provision . introduced april 23 , 2013 ; referred to house ways and means committee . 1897 ( smith ) / s. 1649 ( boozman ) . vietnam human rights act of 2013 . prohibits increases in many forms of u.s. non - humanitarian assistance to vietnam over fy2012 amounts unless ( a ) vietnam's human rights conditions are certified as improving , or ( b ) the president issues a waiver . states that the sense of congress is that the united states should not reduce vietnamese language services of the voice of america and radio free asia ; that vietnam should be redesignated as a country of particular concern for religious freedom ; and that vietnam's activities to combat human trafficking are insufficient to justify its elevation to "tier 2" status in the state department's annual trafficking in persons report . requires the secretary of state to submit an annual report to congress on various matters . 1897 was introduced may 8 , 2013 ; passed by the house 405-3 ( roll call 435 ) on august 1 , 2013 ; referred to senate foreign relations committee . s. 1649 was introduced november 5 , 2013 ; referred to senate foreign relations committee . 2519 ( lee ) . directs the departments of state and veterans affairs to provide assistance and support research to help "covered individuals" affected by agent orange . defines "covered individual" as a vietnam resident who is affected by health issues related to agent orange exposure between january 1 , 1961 , and may 7 , 1975 , or who lives or had lived in or near geographic areas in vietnam that continue to contain high levels of agent orange , or who is affected by such health issues as the child or descendant of such resident . introduced june 26 , 2013 ; referred to house subcommittee on disability assistance and memorial affairs . 4495 ( forbes ) . the asia - pacific region priority act . contains a number of provisions regarding maritime disputes in the south china sea and various countries' actions there . states that the united states has an interest in "maintaining freedom of navigation , freedom of the seas , respect for international law , and unimpeded lawful commerce" in the south china sea . states that u.s. policy urges all parties to the disputes to "refrain from engaging in destabilizing activities.