( sec . prior law provided that the volume of fha - insured home loans held by a lending institution could not exceed 10% of the dollar volume of all home loans held by the institution . the act amends the national housing act to provide that , except for manufactured home loans , the volume of fha - insured home loans held by a lending institution may not exceed 10% of the dollar volume of all home loans held by the institution . the intent of the legislation is to encourage lenders to make manufactured home loans . ( sec . the loan limits for fha - insured loans on manufactured homes had not been changed since 1992 . the remainder of this report discusses these two subtitles . the purposes of this part of the act are ( 1 ) to provide adequate funding for fha - insured manufactured housing loans for low - and moderate - income homebuyers during all economic cycles in the manufactured housing industry ; ( 2 ) to modernize the fha title i insurance program for manufactured housing loans to enhance participation by ginnie mae and the private lending markets ; and ( 3 ) to adjust the loan limits for title i manufactured home loan insurance to reflect the increase in costs since such limits were last increased and to index the limits to inflation . the act increases the loan limits for manufactured homes as follows: ( 1 ) a loan to finance the improvement , alteration , or repair of an existing manufactured home is increased from $17,500 to $25,090 ; ( 2 ) a loan to finance the purchase of a manufactured home is increased from $48,600 to $69,678 ; ( 3 ) a loan to finance the purchase of a manufactured home and lot is increased from $64,800 to $92,904 ; ( 4 ) a loan to finance the purchase of a lot by an owner of a manufactured home is increased from $16,200 to $23,226 . the act provides that these loan limits will be adjusted annually by hud from an index to be developed based on manufactured housing price data collected by the census bureau . ( sec . under prior law , fha was authorized to charge borrowers an annual insurance premium of up to 1% of the loan amount . the act requires borrowers to pay an upfront insurance premium of up to 2.25% of the loan amount and annual insurance premiums of up to 1% of the loan balance . the act directs hud to adjust the insurance premiums as required to maintain a negative credit subsidy for the program . ( sec . prior law was silent regarding hud authority to handle manufactured housing when the borrowers defaulted . the act provides hud with general authority to handle and dispose of manufactured housing properties in the case of loan default by the borrower , which is similar to authority hud now has with regard to fha single family home loans . ( sec . the act directs hud is to establish underwriting criteria that will ensure the financial soundness of the manufactured housing program . ( sec .