appendix a . major acronyms used in this report anilca: alaska national interest lands conservation act anwr: alaska national wildlife refuge blm: bureau of land management dod: department of defense doi: department of the interior esa: endangered species act eis: environmental impact statement flpma: federal land policy and management act of 1976 fs: forest service fws: fish and wildlife service lwcf: land and water conservation fund mbcf: migratory bird conservation fund nepa: national environmental policy act of 1969 nfma: national forest management act of 1976 nfs: national forest system nha: national heritage area nps: national park service nwrs: national wildlife refuge system o&c: oregon and california ( grant lands ) pilt: payments in lieu of taxes ( act and program ) pria: public rangelands improvement act of 1978 rpa: forest and rangeland renewable resources planning act of 1974 usda: united states department of agriculture wcas: wildlife coordination areas wpas: waterfowl production areas appendix b . definition of selected terms acquired lands : land obtained by the federal government from a state or individual , by exchange , or through purchase ( with or without condemnation ) or gift . one category of federal lands . entry : occupation of public land as first step to acquiring title ; can also mean application to acquire title . federal land : any land owned or managed by the federal government , regardless of its mode of acquisition or managing agency . homesteading : the process of occupying and improving public lands to obtain title . almost all homesteading laws were repealed in 1976 ( extended to 1986 in alaska ) . impoundment : man - made impediment to the free flow of rivers or streams , such as a dam or diversion . inholdings : state or private land inside the designated boundaries of lands owned by the federal government , such as national forests or national parks . land and water conservation fund : the primary source of federal funds to acquire new lands for recreation and wildlife purposes to be administered by federal land management agencies . the fund is derived largely from receipts from the sale of offshore oil and gas ( 16 u.s.c . § 460 1 ) , but funds must be appropriated annually . land withdrawal : an action that restricts the use or disposition of public lands , eg , for mineral leasing . leaseable minerals : minerals that can be developed under federal leasing systems , including oil , gas , coal , potash , phosphates , and geothermal energy . lease : contractual authorization of possession and use of public land for a period of time . mining claim : a mineral entry and appropriation of public land that authorizes possession and the development of the minerals and may lead to title . multiple use land : federal lands which congress has directed be used for a variety of purposes . patent : a document that provides evidence of a grant from the government — usually conveying legal title to public lands . payments in lieu of taxes : a program administered by the doi which provides payments to local governments which have eligible federal lands within their boundaries .