like h.r . 699 , s. 796 would limit the issuance of patents to federal lands to claimants whose patent applications were filed with the secretary of the interior on or before september 30 , 1994 , and met appropriate statutory requirements by that date . a royalty rate ( varying according to the mineral ) of not less than 2% and not greater than 5% would be based on the value of production on federal land but would not apply to mining operations already in commercial production or those with an approved plan of operations . royalty revenues would be deposited into a newly established hardrock minerals reclamation fund . the fund would be administered by the secretary of the interior and used for restoration and reclamation of land and water resources impacted by past mining in abandoned hardrock mining states ( 14 western states including alaska ) and on indian land within those states . an abandoned mine land reclamation fee would be set at between 0.3% and 1.0% of the gross value of production of current mining operations on federal lands , imposed on each mine operator ( as defined in the bill ) , and deposited into the reclamation fund . further , s. 796 would amend flpma to include a complete "review of land" not later than three years after enactment . the secretary would have the authority to withdraw land from entry under the general mining law of 1872 based on specified criteria and would revise land use plans as appropriate to allow for a withdrawal from operations under the 1872 mining law . the locatable mineral royalty and reclamation act of 2009 ( h.r . 3201 ) , introduced on july 14 , 2009 , also would limit the issuance of patents as under h.r . an annual abandoned locatable mine land fee ( $25 / claim ) and maintenance ( $125 / claim ) would be established as well as a $35 / claim location fee . a royalty rate of 2% of net proceeds of mineral production would be established but would be waived for producers that generate net proceeds of less than $100,000 . the secretary of the interior also could waive , suspend , or reduce the royalty . an abandoned locatable mine reclamation fund would be created in the treasury and administered by the secretary of the interior for the proposed abandoned locatable minerals mine reclamation program created by the bill . revenues from the fees and royalties created by the bill would be among those deposited in the reclamation fund . 3201 also would establish an office of economic geology ( oeg ) within doi , under the supervision of the usgs . the oeg would conduct all policy , planning , and program direction for mineral and energy activities within the usgs . doi would be required to conduct mineral assessments within the united states and insular areas , identify critical commodities , update mineral resource models , provide a historical analyses of mineral deposits , and update a usgs paper entitled united states mineral resources .