as authorized by p.l . 110-351 , and beginning with fy2011 , states may also seek reimbursement for youth ages 18 or older who remain in foster care at state option and are placed in a "supervised setting in which the individual is living independently. the act directs hhs to establish in regulation what qualifies as such a setting . other provisions of the law address the connection of youth to caring adults , through adoption or placement with relatives . with limited exceptions , monthly federal ( title iv - e adoption and kinship guardianship ) assistance has not generally been available for a child who has reached his or her 18 th birthday and who left foster care for a permanent family via adoption or kinship guardianship . however , as of fy2011 , states and tribes that choose to provide adoption or kinship guardianship subsidies on behalf of eligible children who leave foster care after their 16 th birthday , so long as those youth have not yet reached their 21 st birthday and are enrolled in school , employed at least 80 hours a month , or participating in an activity designed to promote or remove barriers to employment . states and tribes may also cover an older youth with a medical condition that makes him or her incapable of participating in the activity and this incapacity is supported by regularly updated information in the child's case plan . in addition , a state or tribe is allowed to continue this assistance up to the 21 st birthday on behalf of any child , regardless of the age at which the child left foster care , if the state determines that "the child has a mental or physical handicap that warrants the continuation of assistance. ( this was and remains true with regard to adoption assistance ; p.l . 110-351 extended this , as of fy2011 , to kinship guardianship assistance. ) with regard to kinship guardianship , the child must have been "residing for at least six consecutive months in the home of the prospective relative guardian," among other requirements . hhs's july 2010 program instructions direct states that opt to extend foster care beyond age 18 to provide adoption and kinship guardianship subsidies to youth age 18 and older , up to the age the state has elected . the instructions advise that the term "relative" for purposes of kinship guardianship assistance can include biological and legal familial ties or refer more broadly to tribal kin , extended family and friends , or other "fictive" kin . 110-351 and other ongoing issues . the report is a companion to another report that provides context about older foster youth and related federal policy . see crs report rl34499 , youth transitioning from foster care: background and federal programs . under title iv - e of the social security act , states and indian tribes may seek federal funds for partial reimbursement of the room and board costs needed to support eligible children who are in out - of - home foster care . funding for the title iv - e foster care program is appropriated out of the general treasury and is available on an open - ended entitlement basis .