canadian timber faces an additional limitation . it is unclear whether lumber production capacity is a constraint on using beetle - killed trees in canada . however , lumber markets could be a problem . the largest market for canadian lumber is the u.s. housing market . even presuming that the current economic difficulties will be resolved quickly , and the u.s. housing market recovers from the doldrums , canadian shipments to the u.s. market could continue to be constrained . another is in the lodgepole pine stands of central british columbia . undoubtedly , but subtle or even large shifts in its location and plant associations are not out of the question . others are more sanguine , suggesting that lodgepole pine trees killed by mountain pine beetles are important contributors to the stand - replacement fires that favor lodgepole regeneration . concerns about the effects of the mountain pine beetle outbreak on high - elevation pine ecosystems are the same as for lodgepole pine ecosystems — wildfire threats and forest regeneration — but the effects are different . as in lodgepole pine ecosystems , the wildfire threat is largely unchanged by tree mortality due to mountain pine beetles . wildfires are still likely to be of mixed intensity , with some crown fires , especially in areas with spruce and fir ( which are not affected by the mountain pine beetle ) mixed with the high - elevation pines . the mountain pine beetle epidemic combined with other problems might prevent successful regeneration of these pine stands . the interspersed pattern of openings created by crown fires , together with the destruction of spruce and fir by wildfire , creates opportunities for whitebark pine and other high - elevation pines ( such as bristlecone and foxtail pines ) to regenerate . however , mountain pine beetles typically kill the largest - diameter trees — those that produce most of the seeds needed for regeneration . in addition , the high - elevation pines are susceptible to destruction by white pine blister rust . this introduced fungus slowly kills infected five - needle pines ( including the high - elevation pines ) , especially seedlings and saplings . with the mountain pine beetle killing seed source trees and white pine blister rust killing regeneration , the future of high - elevation pine ecosystems is uncertain . thus , climate change that is allowing univoltine outbreaks of mountain pine beetle in the high - elevation pines might eliminate the pines from high - elevation areas . one additional ecological concern relates exclusively to the mountain pine beetle outbreak in british columbia . as noted above , the current epidemic has reached farther north and east than any previous epidemic . figure 1 shows the historic distribution of the beetles reaching the eastern border of bc , about 150 miles from the forested area in central alberta where lodgepole pine mixes with the jack pine forest that stretches east to the atlantic ocean . an outbreak has been reported in alberta within 30 miles of the overlap .