appendix a . presidential records act amendments introduced in the 111 th , 112 th , and 113 th congresses this appendix provides background information on bills from the three previous congresses that sought to amend the presidential records act . similar provisions can be found in the legislation throughout each congress . 113 th congress in addition to h.r . 1233 , which was passed and enacted as p.l . 113-187 , another measure related to recordkeeping stuff was also considered ion the 113 th congress . representative elijah cummings introduced the electronic message preservation act ( h.r . or will the ephemeral nature of these platforms lead to a future situation in which millions of records created on multiple technologies can no longer be accessed ? additionally , h.r . 1234 would have authorized the archivist to promulgate regulations that established "standards necessary for the economical and efficient management of electronic presidential records during the president's term in office. the regulations would have focused on "the capture , management , and preservation of electronic records," the electronic retrieval of electronic messages , and the creation of a process to certify the president's records management system . pursuant to section 2208 of h.r . 1234 , the archivist would have been required to certify annually that the incumbent president was meeting the archivist's records management requirements . 1234 contained several provisions that would amend the sections of the pra that apply to the creation of , retention of , collection of , and access to federal records , generally . the archivist would also have been required annually to report to congress on the president's records management certification status . in the report to accompany h.r . 1234 , the committee stated that the bill sought to address provisions in current law that have been "rendered antiquated" by the "rapid migration ... toward electronic communication and recordkeeping. 1234 contained language similar to the presidential and federal records act amendments of 2014 ( p.l . 113-187 ) , which prohibits "an officer or employee" from creating a presidential record on "a non - official electronic messaging account , unless" copies of the message are forwarded to an "official electronic messaging account" within five working days . on june 25 , 2013 , h.r . 1234 was reported favorably , as amended , by the house committee on oversight and government reform . after being reported favorably by the committee , h.r . 1234 was placed on the house's union calendar . no further action has been taken on h.r . 112 th congress in the 112 th congress , two bills were introduced that would clarify the terms under which presidential records should be released to the public: the transparency and openness in government act ( h.r . 1144 ) and the presidential records act amendments of 2011 ( h.r . both bills contain identical pra - amending language . similar to the language in h.r . 1233 ( 113 th congress ) , both h.r . 3071 would have amended the pra to provide a 60-day presidential record review period any time the archivist intended to release previously unreleased presidential records . pursuant to h.r .