under the version of h.r . 1254 reported by hsgac , reporting thresholds would have varied depending on whether nara had already taken control of ( or agreed to take control of ) the library . for those facilities that were not yet under nara control , the reporting threshold would have been $200 , compared with $1,250 for those already under nara control . unlike the version of the bill passed by the house , the hsgac - reported version of h.r . 1254 also would have required reporting to continue throughout the president's lifetime . the debate over library fundraising suggests tension between the relatively narrow policy goal of making presidential papers publicly accessible on one hand , and in constructing what can be elaborate research centers and museums to house those papers on the other . appropriated funds typically address the former goal , while private funds cover the latter . as presidential libraries grow in number , scope , and size , interest in funding sources and alternatives is likely to continue . in the past , debate over those issues has centered around disclosure and financial viability . currently , disclosure appears to be the major policy concern . if congress determines that fundraising for presidential libraries should remain essentially a private matter , it might choose not to enact legislation requiring additional disclosure and , in so doing , maintain the status quo . under this option , private fundraising for presidential libraries would presumably continue unchanged . additional information about funding sources and amounts would continue to be publicly unavailable , unless fundraising organizations chose to voluntarily disclose the information . this outcome could be objectionable to those who believe that public disclosure could enhance transparency or discourage conflicts of interest . on the other hand , those who believe that additional disclosure could be burdensome , could discourage private contributions , or who otherwise object to additional reporting may prefer to maintain the status quo . if congress favors additional disclosure , it could choose to enact measures requiring additional detail about contributions or fundraising practices . the measure passed under suspension of the rules by a 388-31 vote . 775 could ensure that additional information about contributions to library foundations is publicly available . accordingly , although additional information about private funding sources would be required , the bill would not place new restrictions on how funds are raised , from whom , and in what amounts . the bill also would not require contributions from foreign sources to be specifically identified — a source of some controversy in recent debates surrounding library fundraising . nonetheless , additional disclosure about contributions ( regardless of source ) could provide more public access to basic information about funding than is currently available . if flagging particular sources of contributions were important to congress , additional reporting requirements could be placed on filers . certain contribution sources could also be restricted or banned outright . if congress wishes to pursue broader regulation of library fundraising , aspects of federal campaign finance policy may be a useful model , although certainly not the only model .