these funds are not included in the appendix . from fy2001 to fy2011 , congress provided cdc roughly $3.5 billion for global health activities . over that decade , cdc increased the size and scope of its global health programs . in fy2001 , for example , cdc spent $224.1 million on three key global health programs ( hiv / aids , immunizations , and malaria ) , with nearly half of those funds aimed at hiv / aids programs ( figure 2 ) . by fy2011 , cdc's global health budget had grown by nearly 50% , having reached $330.1 million , and had come to support two additional health areas: global disease detection and health system strengthening through "other health programs. in the early 2000s , concerns about hiv / aids dominated discussions about u.s. global health engagement and prompted the development of several initiatives , including the life initiative ( clinton administration ) , international mother and child hiv prevention initiative ( bush administration ) , and the president's emergency plan for aids relief ( bush administration ) . through these efforts , congress provided substantial increases for tackling hiv / aids through ongoing u.s. bilateral efforts , coordinated government - wide programs ( like pepfar ) , and multilateral initiatives like the global fund to fight aids , tuberculosis and malaria . the bulk of the increases , however , were provided through the state department - coordinated pepfar . by 2004 , global infectious disease outbreaks prompted greater congressional support for programs that would bolster countries' capacity to respond to infectious disease outbreaks . in that year , congress began funding gdd and "other health programs. the growth in spending on such programs meant that hiv / aids ultimately became a smaller portion of cdc's global health budget ( figure 2 ) . according to the fy2011 operating plan of cdc , congress made available $340.2 million for cdc's global health programs . the administration requests that congress provide about $381.2 million for cdc's global health programs in fy2012 , some 10% more than fy2010 ( table 1 ) . the fy2012 budget request included several programmatic changes . first , cdc began requesting support for programs aimed at addressing parasitic diseases ( like neglected tropical diseases ) along with requests for global malaria programs . in the fy2011 operating plan , cdc followed this new budgetary structure to report on fy2010 and fy2011 funding levels for activities related to malaria and parasitic diseases . for comparability , malaria is a subset of the parasitic diseases and malaria budget category in table 1 . the fy2012 budget request also renamed the "other global health" program as the "global public health capacity development" program . the administration requests that this new program combine support for ongoing efforts related to feltp and smdp with activities related to water and sanitation , and maternal and child health . the agency also requests that two activities currently funded through the hhs office of global health affairs — the afghan health initiative and health diplomacy — be funded through this new budgetary category . cdc's global health mandate has grown considerably since then .