the borrower must not have owned another home . the borrower must not have intentionally defaulted on his or her mortgage or any other substantial debt within the last five years , and he or she must not have been convicted of fraud during the last 10 years under either federal or state law . this appendix briefly describes some of these initiatives . the programs discussed in this appendix include the emergency homeowners loan program , hope for homeowners , fhasecure , fannie mae's and freddie mac's streamlined modification program , and the fdic's program for modifying loans that had been held by indymac bank . all of these initiatives expired between 2008 and 2011 , although some borrowers may have continued to receive assistance through these programs if they began participating in the program prior to the program's end date . emergency homeowners loan program the dodd - frank wall street reform and consumer protection act ( p.l . 111-203 ) , which was signed into law by president obama in july 2010 , included up to $1 billion for hud to use to administer a program to provide short - term loans to certain troubled borrowers who had experienced a decrease in income due to unemployment , underemployment , or a medical emergency , in order to help them make their mortgage payments . hud chose to provide this funding to the 32 states ( and puerto rico ) that did not receive funding through the administration's hardest hit fund ( described in the " hardest hit fund " section of this report ) . by statute , hud was not able to enter into new agreements under this program , called the emergency homeowners loan program ( ehlp ) , after september 30 , 2011 . ehlp funds were used to provide five - year , zero - interest , nonrecourse loans secured by junior liens on the property to help pay arrearages on the mortgage and to assist the borrower in making mortgage payments for up to 24 months going forward . an individual borrower was eligible to receive up to a maximum loan of $50,000 . to qualify for the ehlp , borrowers had to meet certain conditions , including the following: borrowers must have had a household income of 120% or less of area median income prior to the unemployment , underemployment , or medical event that made the household unable to make its mortgage payments ; borrowers must have had a current gross income that was at least 15% less than the household's income prior to the unemployment , underemployment , or medical event ; borrowers must have been at least three months delinquent and have received notification of the lender's intent to foreclose ; borrowers must have had a reasonable likelihood of being able to resume making full monthly mortgage payments within two years , and had a total debt - to - income ratio of less than 55% ; and borrowers must have resided in the property as a principal residence , and the property must have been a single - family ( one - to four - unit ) property .