appendix a . programs not currently funded race to the top - early learning challenge ( rtt - elc ) race to the top ( rtt ) was first authorized in fy2009 under the state fiscal stabilization fund in the american recovery and reinvestment act ( arra ; p.l . initially , the rtt program was designed to provide competitive grants to states implementing certain specified k - 12 education reforms . the fy2009 law did not explicitly authorize or designate rtt funding for early childhood activities . however , the fy2011 appropriations law ( p.l . 112-10 ) subsequently amended the initial rtt program , authorizing ed to reserve a portion of rtt funds for competitive grants to states for the improvement of early childhood care and education . the appropriations law specified that ed should jointly administer this new program with hhs . under this new authority , ed established the race to the top - early learning challenge ( rtt - elc ) grant program to support states in ( 1 ) establishing statewide data systems ; ( 2 ) aligning high - quality standards across programs ; ( 3 ) implementing statewide early learning standards ; ( 4 ) improving the early childhood workforce ; and ( 5 ) measuring children's outcomes and progress across developmental domains . in each of fy2011-fy2013 , ed reserved a portion of its total rtt funds for rtt - elc grants , including $500 million in fy2011 , $133 million in fy2012 , and $370 million in fy2013 . over the course of this three - year period , 20 states received one or more rtt - elc grant . no new funding has been provided for the rtt - elc since fy2013 . for more information , see crs report r44008 , preschool development grants and race to the top - early learning challenge grants: a primer , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] . the william f. goodling even start family literacy programs ( even start ) the 2015 esea reauthorization law ( essa ; p.l . 114-95 ) eliminated the authorization for even start programs , which had previously been authorized under esea title i , part b , subpart 3 . the even start programs were intended to integrate early childhood education , adult basic education , and parenting skills education into a unified family literacy program . when funded , these programs provided grants to states , which then distributed the funds to eligible entities ( consisting of a local education agency ( lea ) in collaboration with a community based organization ) . even start generally served children ages 0-7 and their parents . even start services were required to include adult literacy instruction , early childhood education , instruction to help parents support their child's education , participant recruitment , screening of parents , staff training , and home - based instruction . even start was first authorized in 1989 and grew rapidly in its early years . however , evaluations suggested the program had not been effective in improving child and adult learning outcomes .