other analysts might categorize the programs differently . more than eight years after the terrorist attacks on september 11 , 2001 , and seven years since the establishment of dhs , debate continues on policy questions related to homeland security assistance for states and localities . some of these questions arguably have been addressed in legislation , such as the statute that modified the distribution of funding to states and localities ( p.l . additionally , congressional committees have conducted hearings related to state and local homeland security assistance and preparedness . some may contend there is a need for the 111 th congress to conduct further oversight hearings ( which the house homeland security stated it intends to do ) and legislate on policy issues related to dhs assistance to states and localities . a brief discussion on this evolution and expansion follows . in 1996 , congress enacted the defense against weapons of mass destruction act ( also known as the nunn - lugar - domenici act ) . as the 111 th congress begins its second session , members may wish to consider the policy issues identified in this report or other related issues . this law , among other things , established the nunn - lugar - domenici program ( nld ) that provided financial assistance to over 150 major u.s. cities . this assistance , with the oklahoma city bombing being the primary catalyst , was focused on helping first responders prepare for , prevent , and respond to terrorist attacks involving weapons of mass destruction . two years later , the department of justice ( doj ) established the office for domestic preparedness ( odp ) to administer assistance programs that enhanced state and local emergency response capabilities , including terrorist attack response . at first , nld provided assistance to 120 cities ; it was later expanded to include 157 cities and counties . at the end of 1998 , 40 of the original 120 cities had received funding and training . in addition to training , approximately $300,000 was provided by dod to each city for personal protection , decontamination , and detection equipment . following the transfer of nld to doj , all cities completed the training initiated by dod , and doj based the training and exercises on state assessments . the program ended in 2001 upon completion of the training . odp was transferred to dhs with enactment of the homeland security act of 2002 . initially , odp and its terrorism preparedness programs were administered by the border and transportation security directorate , and all - hazard preparedness programs were in the federal emergency management agency ( fema ) . odp and all assistance programs were transferred to the office of the secretary in 2004 due to state and local criticism of dhs not having a "one - stop - shop" for grant programs assistance . after investigations into the problematic response to hurricane katrina , the programs were transferred to the national preparedness directorate . currently all programs and activities are administered by the grants program directorate ( gpd ) , within fema . gpd is now the primary dhs and fema entity responsible for managing the majority of dhs assistance to states and localities .