the doctrine has withstood constitutional challenge . there is no precise definition of what constitutes "special circumstances" ; the category is reserved for those extraordinary characteristics of a case which the court feels merit the designation . in addition , the individual must establish that if released , he will not flee or pose a danger and may be made subject to whatever relevant conditions the court deems to impose . sentencing guidelines do not recommend a sentence of imprisonment . second , when the defendant has been convicted of a capital offense , a 10-year federal crime of terrorism , a 10-year controlled substance offense , a crime of violence , or a violation of 18 u.s.c . ยง1591 ( commercial sex trafficking ) , the defendant must be detained unless the court finds that the defendant is not likely to flee or pose a safety concern , and either that a motion for acquittal or a new trial is likely to be granted , or that the prosecution has recommended no sentence of imprisonment be imposed , or that exceptional reasons exist for granting bail . third , in any other case , the defendant must be detained , unless the court concludes that the defendant is unlikely to flee or pose a safety concern if released conditionally or on his own recognizance . when a defendant appeals following conviction , the judge or magistrate may release him on condition or recognizance , if the judicial official is convinced that the defendant poses neither a flight risk nor a safety concern and that his appeal raises substantial questions that offer the prospect of success . "a question is substantial if the defendant can demonstrate that it is 'fairly debatable' or is 'debatable among jurists of reason.' an additional requirement applies when the defendant has been sentenced to prison upon conviction for a capital offense , a 10-year federal crime of terrorism , a 10-year controlled substance offense , or a crime of violence . in such cases , bail is available only under exceptional circumstances . the circumstances considered exceptional have been variously described as uncommon , unusual , unique , and rare . when the government alone appeals , the pretrial bail provisions of section 3142 apply , unless the government is simply appealing the sentence imposed . when the government appeals the sentence imposed , the defendant must be detained if he has been sentenced to a term of imprisonment ; otherwise , section 3142 applies . a number of consequences flow from an individual's failure to appear or to honor the conditions imposed upon his release . he may be prosecuted for contempt of court ; he may be prosecuted separately for failure to appear ; his release order may be revoked or amended ; security pledged for his compliance may be forfeited ; he may be subject to arrest by his surety ; and he may be prosecuted for any crimes that constituted a violation of his bail conditions . probation and pretrial service office conducts preliminary investigations and otherwise assists the courts in their administration of federal bail law .