it is the eventual consequence of life . as the nation prepares for an aging population and likely increase in demand for high quality end - of - life care services among the elderly , congress may face a decision whether to modify or expand the role of the federal government in providing support to individuals and families to assist with end - of - life care . some policy makers may favor enhancing federal support for research on end - of - life care practices or programs that provide end - of - life care services . in doing so , the federal government would devote additional funding to new or existing programs , implying increasingly difficult tradeoffs between end - of - life care services and supports and federal programs that benefit other populations . alternatively , some policy makers may feel that additional federal support to states regarding end - of - life care issues is warranted , and that the federal government can best serve individuals and families by providing technical assistance in care planning and service delivery or federal funding for end - of - life care services . still others may believe the federal government has a limited responsibility in assisting individuals and families regarding such a private and personal matter as the provision of medical and health care at the end of life . thus , congress may decide that no additional federal assistance can be made available . in this case , federal policy makers may want to evaluate how best to spend existing funds . this section briefly describes policies that would expand the federal government's role in addressing the issue of end - of - life care and have been the subject of discussion among federal policy makers and other interested stakeholders . they are organized into the following topics: training for health professionals , end - of - life care planning , support to family caregivers , and other policy issues . the provision of high quality end - of - life care is a complex issue for policymakers . individuals diagnosed with a terminal illness have different preferences for treatment , including differing cultural and spiritual attitudes related to death and dying and availability of family or social supports to assist them . where death is predictable , end - of - life care may be delivered and managed by a team of health professionals , resulting in the necessity for care coordination and enhanced communication between health providers and among providers , individuals , and families . the provision of end - of - life care services also involves multiple entities , including the services and support needs not only of patients , but of family members and friends . as a result of this complexity , public policy that aims to improve the quality of end - of - life care may need to take a multifaceted approach by addressing a range of issues such as those mentioned above – training for health professionals , end - of - life care planning , and support to family caregivers .