appendix a . congressional flood direction and oversight congress shapes how federal agencies implement their missions through authorization , appropriations , and oversight . to illustrate how congress shapes federal agencies flood - related actions through legislative direction , table a - 1 provides a list of the direction that congress has given to the corps on how the agency should implement its flood damage reduction mission and conduct its flood studies and projects . how to use this direction in guiding implementation can be challenging when one provision of law may conflict with another . table a - 2 is a listing of flood - focused congressional hearings between the 1993 midwest flood and 2008 ; the table illustrates the role and focus of congressional oversight . table a - 3 is a list of flood - focused reports by the gao from 1993 through 2008 ; gao reports investigate how the federal government spends taxpayer dollars in order to assist congress in meeting its constitutional responsibilities and to help improve the performance and ensure the accountability of the federal government . appendix b . analysis of the upper mississippi river comprehensive plan wrda 1999 authorized the upper mississippi river comprehensive plan ( umrcp ) . the umrcp final report , which is dated june 2008 , was transmitted to congress on january 15 , 2009 . the umrcp was conducted as a preliminary study , similar to the level of detail in a corps reconnaissance study . the umrcp final report and supporting documents are not at the level of detail of a feasibility study , which typically informs decision - making on construction authorization . the umrcp preferred ( but not recommended ) plan the umrcp final report states "additional authority to implement the comprehensive plan is not being recommended nor requested at this time based upon the [national economic development] evaluation of alternative plans. nonetheless , the umrcp final report did identify a preferred alternative from among the fourteen analyzed ; the alternatives were evaluated on multiple criteria , including environmental , social , and regional benefits . the report presented one "no action" alternative and thirteen other alternatives that would provide 500-year urban protection . these thirteen varied primarily on the level of protection and type of flood damage reduction actions taken in agricultural areas ; the alternatives ranged from increase in existing protection to 500-year protection for agricultural areas . the preferred alternative , known as plan h , would provide a 500-year level of flood protection along the length of the mainstem of the mississippi and illinois rivers ( but not other tributaries ) and ecosystem restoration benefits . the preferred plan would protect urban areas and towns with 500-year levees ; for agricultural areas it would provide 500-year levees except where buyouts would be more cost effective . the umrcp final report indicates that up to 39 levee districts would be bought out while 144 would have levees raised to 500-year protection . if buyouts of districts are implemented , there would be opportunities to pursue ecosystem restoration actions .