lobbying for those provisions continued throughout that period . pursuant to the lobbying disclosure act , as amended by the honest leadership and open government act of 2007 ( chapter 26 , title 2 , united states code ) , the following definitions are applicable to the registration and disclosure process . data from the clerk are utilized because they provide distinctions between paper and electronically filed reports . the distinction between report submission methods shows compliance with the lda requirements for electronic submissions and the rate of online filing prior to the passage of the hloga amendments . tracking these numbers is important because it enables a comparison of lobbying registration and disclosure before and after the hloga amendments . analyzing the registration , termination , and disclosure data before and after the hloga amendments allows a systematic examination of the amendments impact on the lobbying community . if the goal of the hloga was to more closely regulate lobbyists by requiring additional disclosure , the data constitute an opportunity to examine the law's impact . the year - end report data from 2001 to 2007 , which included both third and fourth quarter activity , may have been motivated by third quarter activity that was previously included in year end reports . it is possible , however , that the 2008 and 2010 upticks in reporting reflect the transition to a new presidential administration coupled with the beginning of a new congress . for 2009 , the volume of disclosure reports does not easily fit with the volume of reports for 2008 and 2009 . fourth quarter lobbying activity , as shown by the number of disclosure reports continues at a high level . this may reflect the continuation of congress's legislative agenda from the first to the second session . in the 111 th congress , many issues that were initiated during the first session continued through an after - thanksgiving session and into the second session . for termination , overall trends also continue , with an increase in terminations in the fourth quarter of 2008 and the first quarter of 2009 . since the first quarter of 2009 , the number of terminations has stabilized and roughly mirrors the 2008 numbers . overall , while terminations in 2008 and 2009 are greater than anytime between 2001 and 2007 , the pattern of increased terminations in congressional election years , followed by a slight decline the following year , continues . the most significant change in reporting occurred for the filing of disclosure statements . instead of filing two reports per year on lobbying activity , lobbyists , and lobbying firms are required to report four times per year . collecting the data in quarters instead of semi - annual periods appears to have uncovered a reporting trend that was otherwise obscured under the semi - annual system . for 2008 and 2010 , the data shows an overall decline in disclosure reports for the fourth quarter . the data suggest that lobbyists and lobbying firms make more contacts and engage in a greater percentage of their lobbying activity in the first three quarters of the year than at the end of a congressional session .