following the enactment of p.l . 114-26 — the law that provides the president with trade promotion authority ( tpa ) — the obama administration concluded negotiations on the trans - pacific partnership ( tpp ) regional free - trade agreement , which includes the united states and 11 other pacific - facing nations , but to date the agreement has not been ratified by congress or by other tpp countries . meanwhile , negotiations between the united states and the european union to conclude a transatlantic trade and investment partnership ( t - tip ) agreement are ongoing . considering the breadth of these two potential regional trade agreements , the economic diversity of the nations involved , and the broad range of u.s. agricultural and fishery products that might potentially be affected if tpp were to be implemented or if t - tip were to be successfully concluded and implemented — or both — it is conceivable that some u.s. agricultural producers and fishermen might qualify for trade adjustment assistance under taaf in the years ahead . whether taaf will be provided with funding to allow it to resume operations , and at what level , is for congress to determine . in the event that congress decides to appropriate funds to reactivate taaf , congress could provide oversight of the program in light of recommendations advanced by gao and the usda's office of inspector general . the break between periods reflects the lack of program authority in the january to september 2008 period . as amended by the enacted 2009 economic stimulus package ( p.l . 111-5 , division b , subtitle i ) , the program assists agricultural producers who have been adversely affected by competition from imports of a commodity that they produce . an "agricultural commodity producer" is defined as a "person that shares in the risk of producing an agricultural commodity and that is entitled to a share of the commodity for marketing , including an operator , a sharecropper , or a person that owns or rents the land on which the commodity is produced," or a person who reports a gain or loss on a federal income tax return from "the trade or business of fishing. support is available in the form of enhanced technical assistance and seed money to enable a producer to formulate and implement a business adjustment plan . because congress in 2009 significantly revised taaf's statutory provisions from those initially enacted , the text that follows describes how this program operated in the period before , and then in the period after , these changes . producers of raw and natural agricultural commodities ( crops , livestock , farm - raised aquatic products , and wild - caught seafood that competes with aquaculture products ) and of "any class of goods within an agricultural commodity" must follow a two - part process to receive benefits . first , a producer group must be certified by usda as eligible to apply for program benefits ( see " requirements for a commodity group to be certified " ) .