, imports ) . 3963 from the 110 th congress . the remainder of this report summarizes changes to prior law as enacted by chipra . under current law , states may provide chip coverage under their medicaid programs , create a new separate chip program , or both . 976 would have increased outlays by $34.9 billion over 5 years and by $71.5 billion over 10 years , and h.r . under separate chip programs , states may elect any of three benefit options: ( 1 ) a benchmark plan , ( 2 ) a benchmark - equivalent plan , or ( 3 ) any other plan that the secretary of hhs deems would provide appropriate coverage for the target population ( secretary - approved coverage ) . benchmark plans include ( 1 ) the standard blue cross / blue shield preferred provider option under the federal employees health benefits program ( fehbp ) , ( 2 ) the coverage generally available to state employees , and ( 3 ) the coverage offered by the largest commercial hmo in the state . benchmark - equivalent plans must cover basic benefits ( i.e. , inpatient and outpatient hospital services , physician services , lab / x - ray , and well - child care including immunizations ) , and must include at least 75% of the actuarial value of coverage under the selected benchmark plan for specific additional benefits ( i.e. , prescription drugs , mental health services , vision care , and hearing services ) . the floor stocks tax will also apply to products in a foreign trade zone ( i.e. the purpose of the floor stock tax will be to prevent the stockpiling of tobacco products before april 1 , 2009 , the effective date for future sales . chipra imposes regulatory and reporting requirements on manufacturers and importers of processed tobacco other than the tobacco products subject to excise taxes , and expands the definition of roll – your - own tobacco to include tobacco that could be used to make cigars . chipra expands the scope of penalties for not paying the tobacco - related tax , clarifies the statute of limitations , and mandates a study of tobacco smuggling . under prior law , quarterly estimated corporate tax payments due in july , august , and september of 2013 are 120% of the normal required payment , with the next such payment reduced accordingly . chipra increases the ratio to 120.5% and shifts $300 million of corporate taxes from fy2014 to fy2013 . the prior - law 120% withholding provision does not apply to firms with assets of less than $1 billion , and the withholding increase under chipra will not alter that exemption . during the 110 th congress , a number of chip bills saw legislative action . a majority of the chip changes enacted in public laws included provisions to add additional appropriations to chip , but did not make any major substantive changes to the program . the 110 th congress enacted provisions to address certain states' shortfalls in fy2007 federal chip funding ( u.s. troop readiness , veterans' care , katrina recovery , and iraq accountability appropriations act , 2007 , p.l .