the letter is reproduced here . u.s. house of representatives , washington , d.c. , april 20 , 1977 . dear colleague: as you know , it is my intention to create a new ad hoc committee to facilitate consideration of the president's energy message . to this end , i have asked jim wright [the majority leader] to call up a resolution tomorrow establishing the committee . the committee will be created around the president's speech . this will afford the committee an early opportunity to organize and perhaps hold general hearings . sometime next week the president will send his actual legislative recommendations to the congress . this legislation will first be parceled out among the appropriate standing committees just as if no ad hoc committee existed . i will place a reporting deadline on consideration of the bill by the standing committees . at the conclusion of this period , the legislation will be sequentially referred to the ad hoc committee . the committee will not have authority to change the recommendations reported by the standing committees . it will have authority to recommend amendments for consideration on the floor . when this measure goes to the rules committee , i will recommend that the legislation reported by the standing committees be considered as an original bill , with the ad hoc committee amendments in order thereto . i will further recommend that on the floor each standing committee manage those portions of the bill that fall within its jurisdiction . of course , when the house finally goes to conference with the senate on the energy legislation , primary responsibility will rest with representatives of each of the standing committees to settle differences relating to its portion of the bill . throughout the process , it is my intention to protect the prerogatives of the standing committees , drawing on their experience and expertise . what the ad hoc committee adds is an opportunity for comprehensive consideration of our national energy policy . it can function as a conference committee of the house to facilitate resolution of competing claims . this should help smooth matters on the floor . the membership of the ad hoc committee will be proportionate to the standing committees' jurisdiction over the legislation . in addition , i will do my best to see that every interest and region is fairly represented . i hope that you can join me in supporting this attempt to respond innovatively and responsibly to the president's recommendations . dealing with them will be among the most difficult and important challenges facing the congress in this generation . with every good wish , sincerely , thomas p. o'neill , jr . these policy preferences might be similar or dissimilar to a presidential proposal . they might be able to attract broad congressional and public support or they might not be able to do so . in a standing committee , there are also likely established relationships among committee members , committee staff , federal executive officials , interest groups , and others , such as public officials and the media . interactions based on these relationships could facilitate or impede the policy process , and are also likely to influence policymaking .