funds in p.l . 111-5 for state and private activities are not subject to matching or cost - share requirements ; this provision was included in response to the current economic conditions at the state and local levels , according to the joint explanatory statement . in addition , of the $500.0 million in total fs fire funding , $50.0 million may be used for "wood - to - energy grants" to encourage utilization of biomass from federal , state , and private lands to be used to produce energy . the $50.0 million is a sub - amount within the other activities ; thus it is not additive to the $250.0 million for federal activities and the $250.0 million for state and private activities . the levels of appropriations in p.l . 111-5 for wildland fire management were similar to those included in the earlier senate - passed version of h.r . the senate - passed bill also had included $15.0 million for blm , but did not identify the purposes of the funds . each of the agencies has substantial physical assets . for instance , an inventory of physical assets within the national park system identified more than 1,800 bridges and tunnels , 26,000 historic structures ( including historic buildings ) , 7,590 public use and administrative buildings , 770 campgrounds , 8,500 monuments and statues , 500 dams , 680 water systems and waste water collection systems , 200 solid waste systems , 5,300 family housing units , approximately 5,450 paved miles of public park roads , the equivalent of 948 paved miles of parking areas , 6,544 miles of unpaved roads , and 1,679 associated road structures . many of the older assets present particular challenges , and nps construction funds often are targeted for correction of critical health and safety problems . included in the economic stimulus law were appropriations to the blm and fs for wildland fire management . specifically , the law contained $500.0 million for the fs and $15.0 million for the blm . the blm funds were provided for "hazardous fuels reduction," for clearing excess forest biomass that can contribute to severe wildfires . the joint explanatory statement directed that these funds be used for high - priority projects on federal lands . the law and accompanying joint explanatory statement contained more detail for the allocation of the fs funds than for the blm funds . in general , the conferees on the bill again encouraged the fs to give priority to individual projects based on their capacity "to create the largest number of jobs in the shortest period of time and to create lasting value" for the public . of the fs funds , the law specified that $250.0 million is to be used on federal lands for several purposes — "hazardous fuels reduction," forest health protection , rehabilitation , and fire hazard mitigation activities . these activities traditionally have been funded under the annual appropriations laws . the other $250.0 million is to be used for cooperative activities on state and private lands , under all existing fs authorities . such cooperative activities also traditionally have been funded in the annual appropriations laws .