the most recent reauthorization was in 2004 ( p.l . 108-265 ) ; the next reauthorization is scheduled for 2009 . child nutrition and wic programs are operated by a wide variety of local public and private providers , and the degree of direct state involvement varies by program and state . for example , in the wic program , state health agencies exercise substantial control ; in the school meal programs , local educational agencies ( leas ) and local "school food authorities" most often have the major role ; in a very few instances , the federal government ( fns ) takes the place of state agencies ( eg , where a state has chosen not to operate a specific program or where there is a state prohibition on aiding private schools ) . in addition , day care centers for chronically impaired adults and elderly persons are eligible for assistance under the same general terms as centers caring for children . federal support for day care , summer , and outside - of - school meal / snack programs totaled some $2.5 billion in entitlement funding ( including a small amount of commodities ) for fy2007 . more than 5 million children ( and 100,000 adults ) participated . child nutrition laws also support a range of smaller programs , initiatives , and activities . states are entitled to federal grants to help cover administrative and oversight / monitoring costs associated with child nutrition programs . the national amount each year is equal to about 1.5% of child nutrition cash support . the majority of this money is allocated to states based on their share of spending on the covered programs ; about 15% is allocated under a discretionary formula granting each state additional amounts for the cacfp , commodity distribution , and "coordinated review" efforts . in addition , states receive payments for their role in overseeing summer programs ( about 2.5% of their summer program aid ) . states are free to apportion their federal administrative expense payments among child nutrition initiatives ( including commodity distribution activities ) as they see fit . state administrative expense funding in fy2007 totaled to more than $160 million . states receive grants for a fresh fruit and vegetable program , under which selected schools in each state get money to purchase and distribute fresh fruits and vegetables to all children in attendance ( regardless of family income ) . money is distributed by a formula under which about half the funding is distributed equally to each state and the remainder is allocated by state population ; states select participating schools ( with an emphasis on those with a higher proportion of low - income children ) and set annual per student grant amounts ( between $50 and $75 ) . congress periodically reviews and reauthorizes expiring authorities under these laws . at the state level , education , health , social services , and agriculture departments all have roles ; at a minimum , they are responsible for approving and overseeing local providers such as schools , summer program sponsors , and child care centers and day care homes , as well as making sure they receive the federal support they are due .