these bills were h.r . 1260 ( introduced by congressman conyers on march 3 , 2009 ) , s. 515 ( introduced by senator leahy on march 3 , 2009 , and reported by senator leahy with amendments on april 2 , 2009 ) , and s. 610 ( introduced by senator kyl on march 17 , 2009 ) . each of these bills was styled as the "patent reform act of 2009. . with respect to existing patent revocation proceedings , s. 610 would entirely eliminate inter partes  reeexamination . in contrast , h.r . 1260 and s. 515 would retain these proceedings . each of the three bills would retain ex parte reexamination proceedings . each of the bills would also introduce a new administrative procedure termed a "post - grant review proceeding" or "post - grant review procedures. the post - grant proceeding proposed by the three bills shares certain common features . first , the maximum length of the proceeding was set to one year , with an extension by six months possible for good cause shown . second , each post - grant proceeding would be administered by a newly established "patent trial and appeal board. third , any participant dissatisfied with the outcome would be able to bring an appeal to the federal circuit . finally , with the exception of confidential material that has been sealed by the uspto , the file of this procedure would be made available to the public . the following table identifies selected features with respect to each of these bills . as this table demonstrates , patent revocation proceedings involve a number of parameters . the particular choices made in selecting these parameters may reflect the following policy goals . patents derive their value from the rights they confer to exploit proprietary technologies . the increased focus on intellectual property in our information - based , knowledge - driven economy has arguably caused industry to raise its expectations with respect to the quality , timeliness , and efficiency of the granting of patents . as the uspto currently employs approximately 6,000 patent examiners with varying degrees of experience , legal training , and technical education , maintaining consistency in patent grant determinations presents a challenging task for uspto management . by recruiting members of the public to act as "private patent examiners," post - grant proceedings allow the uspto to confirm its earlier determinations regarding that subset of patents that prove to be of marketplace significance . in this respect , it should be appreciated that the validity of only a small subset of issued patents is ever called into question . for example , one commentator estimated that only about five percent of issued patents are litigated or licensed . post - grant proceedings may therefore direct the attention of the uspto to those patents that industry believes to be of particular significance and arguable validity . in addition , an administrative process for reassessing patentability determinations in a reliable , cost - effective , and timely manner could potentially allow members of the public to make commercial decisions with more certainty over the impact of patent rights .