according to u.s . permanent representative to the united nations ambassador susan rice , the u.n. committee charged with monitoring implementation of the sanctions is investigating the matter . otaiba's letter further stated that "the uae fully supports and has vigorously enforced united nations resolutions barring the shipment of sensitive materials and technologies to iran. the uae also has "closed dozens of international and local companies involved in the transshipment of dual - use and controlled materials," according to the letter , which also highlighted the government's participation in several u.s. security initiatives , including the container security initiative , the proliferation security initiative , and the department of energy megaports initiative . that already exists . it's being enforced by the existing customs and law enforcement services , intelligence services and so on and so forth . but the people who would oversee the implementation of the law , that office is still being staffed up . u.s. cooperation with national and emirate level officials on proliferation issues appears to be strong . a bilateral nonproliferation working group meets annually to review and discuss nonproliferation issues of shared concern . in a september 2008 letter to then - u.s. secretary of commerce carlos gutierrez , ambassador otaiba detailed six joint and unilateral interdictions on iran - bound ships completed since june 2008 . in 2009 , the uae seized "arms and related materials" from a ship en route to iran , according to australian officials . the uae conducted the seizure , which reportedly took place in late july or early august 2009 , pursuant to u.n. security council resolution 1874 . uae officials report they remain committed to fully implementing the 2007 law at the national level , including clarifying roles and responsibilities for export control enforcement . acting assistant secretary van diepen confirmed the administration's shared view of the uae's commitment to export control enforcement in july 2010 , stating: it's very clear to us that the uae government at the highest levels and also broadly throughout their interagency , you know , has internalized and understands the importance of nonproliferation and of dealing with the proliferation problems through effective action . and the uae has taken a lot of very important steps , not just passing legislation but in terms of stopping specific shipments , shutting down companies , dealing with specific individuals . so a lot of concrete real world activities have been engaged in by the uae to really do things in the real world that matter . the most proliferation - sensitive part of a nuclear power program is the capability to produce fuel for nuclear reactors , either by enriching uranium or reprocessing spent nuclear fuel to obtain plutonium . low - enriched uranium is used as fuel for nuclear reactors . both highly enriched uranium and plutonium can be used as fuel in some types of nuclear reactors but are also used as fissile material in nuclear weapons . the dual - use nature of nuclear fuel facilities frequently generates concern that ostensibly peaceful facilities may aid nuclear weapons programs .