no interest on advances accrues during the period . arra does not affect the underlying loan balance . states will still owe the full principal of any outstanding loan . if a state does not pay back funds within the prescribed amount of time or make good progress as determined by the u.s. labor secretary , the 5.4% federal tax credit to employers in the state would be reduced , effectively increasing in the federal unemployment tax on employers in that state . extension of emergency unemployment compensation benefits . the euc08 program has been 100% federally financed since its creation in july 2008 . arra changes the source of federal financing , however . prior to february 17 , 2009 , euc08 benefits were financed from the extended unemployment account ( euca ) in the utf . states will still finance regular uc through the state unemployment tax acts ( suta ) revenues . the federal government will continue to pay for federal and state administration of uc programs . uc benefits are an entitlement , and states are legally required to pay benefits even if the state account is insolvent . some states may borrow funds from the fua within the utf to meet unemployment benefit obligations . the following arra provisions will be 100% financed by the federal government through the utf: $7 b illion in "incentive" payments for modernization of state unemployment programs . the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 ( arra ; p.l . 111-5 ) , the 2009 stimulus package , contained several provisions affecting unemployment benefits . arra provides for federal financing of several elements of the stimulus package . for the euc08 program , arra continues 100% federal financing but changes the source of the federal financing . for the eb program , arra temporarily replaces 50% state , 50% federal financing with 100% federal financing . the following arra provisions will be 100% financed with general funds from the u.s. treasury: $ 25 week ly supplemental unemployment benefit payable from the week after state signature of an agreement with the u.s. labor secretary . this report addresses some of the more common questions about unemployment insurance in the 2009 stimulus package . this report does not provide operational details of unemployment insurance programs such as regular unemployment compensation ( uc ) , extended benefits ( eb ) , emergency unemployment compensation ( euc08 ) , trade adjustment assistance ( taa ) programs , and disaster unemployment assistance ( dua ) . as a result of arra , euc08 benefits through expiration of the euc08 program will be financed from general revenues of the treasury . states will be responsible , however , for the immediate and long - term costs of any changes to state unemployment compensation programs . the maximum incentive payment allowable for a state will be calculated using the methods used for reed act distributions , and does not need to be repaid . the interest payments that come due beginning february 17 , 2009 , the date of enactment for the stimulus package , until december 31 , 2010 , are deemed to have been made by the state ( and are not capitalized in to the principal of the loan ) .