also , p.l . 109-58 required that a relatively small amount ( 250 million gallons , or roughly 0.2% of gasoline consumption ) of cellulosic ethanol be blended in gasoline annually starting in 2013 . this difference highlights the ongoing debate over lifecycle analysis methods . the 111 th congress will likely address issues surrounding biofuels lifecycle in two ways: ( 1 ) oversight of epa's implementation of the rfs ; and ( 2 ) integration of fuel lifecycle emissions into other relevant legislation . definitions for various biofuels under the rfs could directly affect the supply of eligible fuels in the program . if supply is curtailed through the exclusion of certain fuels , then consumer fuel prices could increase . thus , congress may look to determine whether any regulations promulgated by epa adversely affect fuel supply and availability . likewise , congress may look to determine whether the goal of reducing greenhouse gas emissions is achieved through the lifecycle requirements of the rfs . the 111 th congress has debated legislation to address climate change and energy issues . transportation plays a key role in both u.s. energy consumption and u.s. greenhouse gas emissions . therefore , any policy to address these issues will almost certainly affect the implementation of the renewable fuel standard , and vice versa . specific proposals include a carbon tax or a cap - and - trade system that would put a price on carbon emissions , promoting a switch to lower - carbon fuels ; and a federal low - carbon fuel standard , which would require lower carbon emissions from all transportation fuels ( as opposed to just biofuels ) . also , the 30 year time frame focuses on ghg emissions impacts that are more near term and , hence , more certain . epa chose a 0% discount rate for many reasons , but a key reason is that the agency believes that there is a lack of consensus on the best way to apply an economic valuation ( discounting ) to a physical quantity , in this case ( ghg ) emissions , or whether such a calculation is even valid . while using some of the best data and models available , epa recognized that uncertainty exists regarding the proposed methodology to assess international ghg emissions from land use change . epa acknowledged that a transparent and scientific analysis of the ghg emission impact of renewable fuels going forward will be further refined as additional data sources and models become available . in the nprm , epa sought peer review and public comment regarding: use of satellite data to project future type of land use changes ; land conversion ghg emissions factors estimates epa used for different types of land use ; estimates of ghg emissions from foreign crop production ; methods to account for the variable timing of ghg emissions ; and how the several models epa relied upon are used together to provide overall lifecycle ghg estimates . from the peer review process and public comments , epa concluded that various changes should be made in its lifecycle methodology between the nprm and the final rule . these changes generally led to lower lifecycle emissions ( i.e.