program complexity remains an issue . some farmers have found it difficult to explain the program to landlords , which reportedly has limited participation . corn , wheat , and soybeans were the leading crops . other researchers have pointed out that in some cases , particularly with low coverage levels for crop insurance , payments under acre and indemnities under crop insurance may not be for the same part of the revenue risk distribution ( i.e. , acre could be paying for part of the "deductible portion" of the loss that a crop insurance policy does not cover ) . thus , the overlap between acre and crop insurance might be fairly small , perhaps less than 5% . both measures increased less than one percentage point in 2010 . expected acre payments and risk reduction , however , are especially strong in areas where yield variability , and therefore revenue variability , is relatively low . for example , high - yielding areas such as the corn belt , which tend to have low yield and revenue variability , can receive high payments because payment rates are driven in part by yield levels . in the next farm bill debate , congress will likely be interested in the effectiveness and cost of the acre program , particularly how it reduces revenue risk for producers of program crops and how variations of the program might be incorporated as part of the farm safety net . program effectiveness will likely be measured in part by whether payments in fact reach farmers who experience revenue losses , the level of participation , and to what extent acre complements crop insurance and other farm commodity programs . if , for a large number of farmers , the state trigger is met but the farm trigger is not , or vice versa , program effectiveness may be called into question . critics of acre also have said that the program might duplicate payments and coverage provided by crop insurance . some farmers and university researchers have expressed a preference for pursuing a county - wide ( or district - wide ) trigger rather than a state trigger to more effectively cover local revenue losses . changing the level of aggregation from the state level to one closer to the farm ( such as a county or crop reporting district ) would generally boost potential program costs . however , the additional costs might be partially offset by savings in crop insurance subsidies if producers purchase less coverage . the crop insurance industry is concerned that a county - based acre program could reduce the need for crop insurance , particularly in the corn belt . another question is the timing of payments and whether they arrive when needed . the national average market farm price is required in order to calculate payment levels . as a result , farmers have to wait until the data are available to receive payment , which could be more than a year after selling their crop . for example , the national average market price for 2009-crop corn ( required for determining 2009-crop acre payment rates ) was published on september 29 , 2010 . payments started flowing in november 2010 .