it also means safer communities . a broad array of research indicates that the two most important factors in successful re - entry are employment and a healthy connection to one's family . the child support enforcement ( cse ) program is a federal - state program whose mission is to enhance the well - being of children by helping custodial parents and children obtain financial support from the noncustodial parents , including those in prison or who were formerly in prison . child support payments enable parents who do not live with their children to fulfill their financial responsibility to their children by contributing to the payment of childrearing costs . there is a growing consensus that the cse program is one of the financial keys to helping families remain self - sufficient . according to the most recently available data , on average , child support constitutes about 17% of family income for households who receive it . among poor households who receive it , child support constitutes about 30% of family income . parents who make regular child support payments are more likely than those who do not to have better family relationships . research indicates that positive family relationships increase family stability and can help reduce recidivism . the intersection of the mission of state and federal correction facilities ( i.e. , successful re - entry of former prisoners into local communities ) and the mission of the cse program ( i.e. , consistent payment of child support obligations ) provides both systems with an opportunity to marshal their efforts in a way that results in positive outcomes for children . both congress and the obama administration are examining federal programs in an effort to reduce waste in the federal budget . although programs are often evaluated in isolation , the likelihood of reduced federal and state funding may promote more innovative thinking and collaboration among agencies involved in administering the criminal justice system and cse program . this report examines the cse program within the context of large numbers of former inmates re - entering communities . it provides a brief review of the cse program and data related to parents who are in state or federal prisons . next , it analyzes several issues that relate to the payment of child support by incarcerated or formerly incarcerated parents . then it presents policy options that address the problem of nonpayment of child support . for example , it discusses ways in which the cse program can help ex - offenders who are parents reconnect with their children and communities . it also suggests strategies that may lead to both lower recidivism and more parents making child support payments . this report focuses on the cse program to explore ways to deal with nonpayment of child support by noncustodial parents who are or were in prison . as higher numbers of inmates are released , the cse program will face more pressure to perform better in the area of increasing child support collections and reducing child support debt . if it is successful , a positive consequence may be fewer parents returning to prison . without intervention , they may face wage attachments of up to 65% of their disposable earnings to cover their child support obligations .