it delineates the parental involvement activities that are promoted through the esea . it examines progress made toward implementing these activities , and examines research on the importance of various parental involvement activities . it also discusses possible approaches for enhancing parental involvement in education . it is worth noting that the research reviewed for this report does not generally provide in - depth information about how thoroughly parental activities are implemented in locales or about what makes them more or less successful at achieving goals . information on implementation of parental involvement activities covered in this report generally comes from survey data reporting on the frequency of activities and on school personnel views on the importance of these activities . additionally , this report does not examine whether parental involvement activities are uniformly beneficial . the fy2008 appropriation for the grant program was $4,912,650 . the coalition for community schools' vision for community schools includes the following: a community school is both a place and a set of partnerships between the school and other community resources . its integrated focus on academics , services , supports and opportunities leads to improved student learning , stronger families and healthier communities . schools become centers of the community and are open to everyone — all day , every day , evenings and weekends . using public schools as hubs , community schools knit together inventive , enduring relationships among educators , families , volunteers and community partners . health and social service agencies , family support groups , youth development organizations , institutions of higher education , community organizations , businesses , and civic and faith - based groups all play a part . by sharing expertise and resources , schools and communities act in concert to transform traditional schools into permanent partnerships for excellence . because community schools provide services to parents and family members , these schools have another opportunity to reach out to parents and try to increase parents' involvement in their child's education . a three - year evaluation of two children's aid society community schools in new york city found that parents were more involved and felt more welcome at the community schools than at demographically similar comparison schools . in addition to increasing parental involvement , some research has found that community schools have increased academic achievement . these two options are title i - a public school choice , which allows a parent to transfer a child from a school that has had not met ayp for two consecutive years or more to a school that has met ayp , and supplemental educational services , which allows a parent to enroll a child in free tutoring if the child's school has not met ayp for three or more years . most of the parental involvement requirements in nclb are contained in title i - a , section 1118 , though section 1116 includes parental notification requirements and sections 1111 and 1112 also have parental involvement provisions .