it is administered by dhs's u.s . citizenship and immigration services ( uscis ) . the basic pilot program was briefly renamed the employment eligibility verification ( eev ) program by the administration of george w. bush , and was again renamed e - verify by that administration in august 2007 . iirira , as originally enacted , directed the attorney general to terminate the basic pilot program four years after going into effect , unless congress provided otherwise . congress has extended the life of the basic pilot program / e - verify multiple times . most recently , it extended e - verify until september 30 , 2018 , as part of the consolidated appropriations act , 2018 . although the unauthorized alien resident population has declined in size since its 2007 high point of an estimated 12 million , it remains substantial . according to a preliminary estimate by the pew research center , unauthorized alien residents in the united states numbered about 11.3 million in 2016 . the pew research center has also estimated that there were some 8.0 million unauthorized workers in the civilian labor force in 2014 . policymakers have considered an expansion of electronic employment verification — whether though e - verify or a new system — as a key option for addressing unauthorized employment . in weighing proposals that may emerge on electronic employment eligibility verification , policymakers may want to consider potential impacts on the key issues of unauthorized employment ; verification system accuracy , efficiency , and capacity ; discrimination ; employer compliance ; privacy ; and verification system usability and employer burden . the policy issues discussed here may be especially important to consider in the context of proposals to require all employers to conduct electronic employment eligibility verification . a mandatory system could arguably make it possible to identify many more unauthorized workers . at the same time , under such a system , any inaccuracies , inefficiencies , or privacy breaches that occurred could affect much larger numbers of employees and employers . employer compliance under a mandatory system would seem to be a salient issue , especially since it has direct implications for other issues , notably discrimination . employer burden may be another important consideration . it may be that a mandatory system would require new strategies to address these issues . the irca provisions did not have the effect of curtailing future illegal immigration . after falling to an estimated 1.9 million in 1988 as eligible unauthorized aliens legalized their status , the unauthorized population began to grow . by the early 1990s , it had surpassed pre - irca levels . the i - 9 process was effectively undermined by the ready availability of genuine - looking fraudulent documents . ten years after the enactment of irca , congress attempted to strengthen the employment verification process as part of the illegal immigration reform and immigrant responsibility act of 1996 ( iirira ) . iirira directed the attorney general to conduct three largely voluntary pilot programs for electronic employment eligibility confirmation .