the issue here is threefold . first is how much sovereignty to yield to the international monetary fund , financial supervisory board , bank for international settlements or other such organizations in devising macroprudential regulations for the world financial system that would identify signs of problems that could engulf entire economies . for example , how much authority should the imf have to compel countries to implement policies to reduce the risk of a systemic financial failure ? how severe is the global financial crisis ? on march 19 , 2009 , t he international monetary fund projected global economic activity to contract by ½ to 1% in 2009 — the first such fall in 60 years . figure 2 shows projected growth rates by quarter ( annualized ) by global insight , an econometric forecasting firm . as can be seen , countries of the world are experiencing a simultaneous downturn with the advanced industrialized countries of north america , europe , and japan dropping into recession and a significant slowdown in economic growth rates in both developing countries and in emerging markets in eastern europe . particularly noteworthy are the growth rates for china which still is positive but down considerably , and those for japan ( the second largest economy in the world ) and ukraine ( an example of a particularly hard - hit economy ) , both facing severe recessions . these declines in economic activity have combined with trillions of dollars lost in equity markets and a credit squeeze that not only is affecting households and businesses world wide but is putting a damper on the financing of activities such as world trade and oil exploration . on march 31 , 2009 , just prior to the g - 20 london leaders' summit , the obama administration issued an interim rule implementing the "buy american" provisions in the economic stimulus package that was consistent with existing u.s. practice . the interim rule imposed no new restrictions in terms of the origin of products that are eligible to be purchased by the federal government for procurement projects . it upheld that the manufacturing of all iron or steel used in federal projects funded by the stimulus bill must take place in the united states , except for metallurgical processes involving refinement of steel additives . the new rule also established no requirements on the origin of components or subcomponents used in construction materials , so long as the manufacture of the construction material occurs in the united states . it also exempted from the "buy american" provision all 38 countries that have signed the world trade organization's government procurement agreement and 47 least - developed countries . many analysts note that the relationship between government procurement and the world trading system has always been tenuous . the national treatment provisions of the 1947 general agreement on tariffs and trade ( gatt ) ( article iii ( 8 ) ) excluded government procurement from its obligations entirely . however , as the government share of gdp grew in the postwar period , especially in countries where industry sectors such as airlines and steel were nationalized , some gatt members came to believe that the trading system needed to place government procurement practices under certain disciplines .