these terms are defined below . an advance appropriation means appropriation of new budget authority that becomes available one or more fiscal years beyond the fiscal year for which the appropriations act was passed ( that is beyond the budget year ) . for example , if the following language appeared in an appropriations act for fy2010 , it would provide an advance appropriation for fy2011: "for medical services , $30,854,000,000 to become available on october 1 , 2010 ( the start of the fy2011 ) . under the current scoring guidelines , new budget authority for an advance appropriation is scored in the fiscal year in which the funds become available for obligation . in this example , you would record the budget authority in fy2011 . advance funding is budget authority provided in an appropriation act to obligate and disburse ( outlay ) in the current fy funds from a succeeding year's appropriation . advance funding is a means to avoid making supplemental requests late in the fiscal year for certain entitlement programs in cases where the appropriations for the current year prove to be insufficient . forward funding is budget authority that is made available for obligation beginning in the last quarter of the fy for the financing of ongoing activities ( usually grant programs ) during the next fy . this funding is used mostly for education programs , so that obligations for grants can be made prior to the beginning of the next school yea . there are two broad issues related to advance funding for some accounts of vha . the first issue is a budget enforcement issue related to current budget enforcement procedures in congress , and the second relates to issues that may arise if such a proposal were to be implemented . there are some options that might help congress in deciding on the long - term financing of va health care . one option would be for congress to provide oversight and direction to vha to modify its ehcpm so that it could provide better predictability for vha funding in future years . vha would have to develop analytic tools for measuring demand for health care , treatment capacity , and the fixed and variable costs associated with delivering care . furthermore , forecasting the effects of va policy and external influences on demand requires routine collection of data on veterans' employment , health insurance , health status , and overall health care utilization . these modifications could provide vha and congress with better estimates of funding needs , and thereby allow congress to make informed policy decisions . another option might be to create an independent entity modeled along the lines of the medicare payment advisory commission ( medpac ) . creation of such an entity could bring transparency to vha's funding process and would create credibility , particularly among key constituent groups . medpac was established by the balanced budget act of 1997 ( p.l . 105-33 ) to advise congress on issues affecting the medicare program . the commission's statutory mandate includes advising congress on payments to private health plans participating in medicare and providers in medicare's traditional fee - for - service program .