the intermediation transaction carries a variety of risks . banks face the risk of borrower default on the long - term loans . banks face liquidity and interest rate risks on the short - term funding side of the transaction . until the long - term loan is fully repaid , banks must continue to attract short - term savers . a bank must continuously be able to roll over or renew its short - term funding ( loans ) because the funds used to originate the long - term loan have been disbursed to the borrower . it is possible that banks could find themselves low on deposits , perhaps due to a sudden demand for cash or changes in economic conditions . financial market conditions could also change such that short - term rates rise higher than long - term rates , and continued funding of long - term loans becomes costly . given the default and funding liquidity risks associated with the intermediation transaction , banks and other financial institutions are always looking for innovative ways to reduce risk , which ultimately facilitates the expansion of intermediation and credit availability . although the intermediation transaction remains the same conceptually over time , its means of execution has evolved and diversified , which is considered financial innovation . financial innovations include securitization , growth of the commercial paper market , automated underwriting , derivative markets , and nontraditional mortgage products , which allow the long - term borrower and lender to share the risk of fluctuating long rates . these developments arguably facilitated intermediation in terms of reducing or managing the risks associated with supplying credit , which increased lending capacity . in fact , financial innovation in the mortgage market during the 1990s arguably enhanced homeownership by reducing loan origination costs and increasing the array and variety of mortgage products that could be offered to borrowers . such financial innovation also allowed aspects of the intermediation transactions to occur outside of what is considered traditional banking institutions . for example , some businesses , rather than obtaining traditional short - term loans from depository institutions , may issue their own debt in the form of commercial paper . commercial paper issuances are typically unsecured , short - term promissory notes or bonds that investors ( savers ) can hold in their portfolios and , upon maturity , roll the proceeds into newer commercial paper issuances . hedge funds , pension funds , and other financial entities may decide to purchase long - term , less liquid assets with funds obtained from their issuances of commercial paper . the commercial paper is the liability of the issuing firms , and the long - term assets ( loans ) acquired were not funded by liabilities ( deposits ) of a traditional depository institution . securitization is another example of a financial innovation that allowed aspects of the intermediation transaction to occur off bank balance sheets . securitizers are entities that purchase long - term loans , then use the payment streams to create short - term securities ( similar in nature to commercial paper with a variety of risk - return options ) to investors , which fund the loan purchases .