( see figure 3 . ) it is unclear whether it can tolerate higher ethanol concentrations . underwriters laboratories ( ul ) , an independent testing and certification company , announced guidance supporting the use of ethanol blends up to a maximum of 15% in existing fuel pumps currently certified to dispense e10 . however , according to the same announcement , ul stated that "under normal business conditions , e10 at the dispenser can vary from about seven to 13 percent ethanol. the blend wall is largely driven by four factors . first , under the caa it is unlawful to sell gasoline that contains additives at levels higher than those approved by epa . for ethanol , the limit was 10% by volume for all vehicles through 2010 . to allow a higher percentage , a fuel manufacturer would need to petition epa for a waiver . ( see " approval of new fuels and fuel additives ." second , automakers currently warranty their vehicles to operate on ethanol / gasoline blends up to 10% . while there are data to suggest that newer vehicles could be operated reliably on higher levels of ethanol without modification , no automaker has yet approved those higher blends for use . further , small engine manufacturers generally advise against using gasoline with more than 10% ethanol in machines such as lawnmowers , trimmers , and snowmobiles . even with epa's approval of higher ethanol blends for use in some vehicles , it is unclear whether vehicle and machine owners will be willing to use the new fuel without explicit approval from the engine / vehicle manufacturer . third , most existing infrastructure ( eg , underground gasoline storage tanks , fuel pumps ) is designed and certified to deliver blends up to e10 . however , a similar variance is likely to exist for e15: according to a ul representative , "it cannot ever be said that [e15] is exactly 15 percent. therefore , a higher maximum level , perhaps 18% , would be necessary to allow those pumps to be certified to deliver e15 . in november 2010 , the national renewable energy laboratory ( nrel ) released a study ( conducted by ul ) on the compatibility of new and legacy equipment ( listed to dispense up to e10 ) with e15 . ul determined that some of the testing was inconclusive , and some parts did corrode . while modifications to address some of these corrosion issues might be relatively inexpensive , some may represent a significant cost to fuel retailers . in march 2010 , ul certified two new pumps to dispense blends up to e25 . further , one pump manufacturer , gilbarco , retroactively expanded its warranty coverage to e15 for pumps manufactured after april 1 , 2008 . fourth , many state laws and regulations , including fire codes and other standards , limit ethanol in gasoline to 10% . these state rules would also need to be updated to allow widespread use of e15 . further , gasoline retailers are concerned that they could lose insurance coverage if they distribute gasoline with higher than 10% ethanol concentration .