the cfda is available on the internet . many federal grants do not provide funding directly to individuals , but rather to states , local governments , universities , and tribal entities . check the "applicant eligibility" section in the cfda program description to see who may apply . individuals may be eligible to apply for funds after they have been distributed at the state and local level , through their state energy offices or other contact listed in the cfda program description . the site is updated weekly . also , the homepage includes a map - link to a list of federal incentives . environmental protection agency ( epa ) energy star http: / / www.energystar.gov / index.cfm ? c=products.pr_tax_credits this website has a page on "federal tax credits for energy efficiency. the information on that page is organized into categories for consumers ( home improvements , cars , solar energy , fuel cells ) , home builders , appliance manufacturers , and commercial buildings . the site includes a frequently asked questions ( faq ) section providing answers about energy efficiency tax credits . department of energy ( doe ) financial opportunities http: / / www1.eere.energy.gov / financing / this website is focused mainly on information about matching funds , grants , and financing . information is organized into categories for consumers , business / industry / universities , inventors ( small business ) , federal energy managers , states , and native american tribes . the site includes a section on energy efficiency and consumer home financing . u.s. department of energy alternative fuels and advanced vehicles data center ( afdc ) http: / / www.eere.energy.gov / afdc / this website presents information about incentives for alternative fuels ( renewable fuels and others ) and vehicles . a key link provides access to "state and federal incentives and laws. incentives covered include grants , tax credits , loans , rebates , regulatory exemptions , fuel discounts , and technical assistance . information on state incentives is made available through a national map and through summary tables organized by type of incentive , regulation , technology / fuel , and user . the information about state incentives is updated after each state legislature's session ends . information about federal incentives is updated after pertinent legislation is enacted into law . another link provides access to "laws and incentives enactment history. u.s. department of energy ( doe ) clean cities financial opportunities http: / / www1.eere.energy.gov / cleancities / financial_opps.html this website presents information about incentives for alternative fuels and advanced technologies . a link to "government sources" provides information about funding opportunities through federal grant - making agencies ( grants.gov ) , metropolitan planning organization ( mpo ) , the congestion mitigation and air quality ( cmaq ) program , and various epa programs . a link to "solicitations" provides information about business funding opportunities that cover a variety of changing topics that have included plug - in hybrid vehicles , hydrogen vehicles , and transportation planning . clean cities coordinators are available to help with funding applications . the tax provisions are located in title xiii . emergency economic stabilization act of 2008 ( eesa ) p.l .