id . § 1396r - 8 ( k ) ( 3 ) . a medically accepted indication , in turn , includes a use "which is approved under the [ffdca]" or which is included in a specified drug compendia . id . § 1396r - 8 ( k ) ( 6 ) . see also id . § 1396r - 8 ( g ) ( 1 ) ( b ) ( i ) ( identifying compendia to be consulted ) . thus , unless a particular off - label use for a drug is included in one of the identified drug compendia , a prescription for the off - label use of that drug is not eligible for reimbursement under medicaid . neither neurontin , or accupril , another drug for which warner - lambert's marketing practices were at issue , had off - label uses that were present in the indicated compendia . neurontin had only been approved by the fda for use in conjunction with other drugs "to control seizures in people with epilepsy. however , dr. franklin alleged that warner - lambert sales representatives called "medical liaisons" were trained to discuss reports of neurontin's effectiveness as a mono - therapy to treat epilepsy , meaning the use of neurontin without the other drugs with which its safety and effectiveness had been presented to fda . the medical liaisons also allegedly reported that the use of the drug for bipolar disease , pain syndromes , and attention deficit disorders was effective according to clinical trials and other reports , though no such data existed . the case settled and did not go to trial . pfizer , which merged with warner - lambert , paid criminal monetary penalties for its violations of the ffdca and civil monetary penalties for its violations of the fca totaling $430 million . pfizer pled guilty to two felony violations of the ffdca — one for misbranding due to a failure to give adequate directions for use and one for introducing an unapproved new drug in interstate commerce — for which it agreed to pay a $240 million criminal fine . additionally , the company paid the united states government $83.6 million , plus interest , for its civil liability under the fca for medicaid reimbursement claims ; $68.4 million , plus interest , to the states and the district of columbia for state medicaid losses ; and $38 million , plus interest , "for harm caused to consumers and to fund a remediation program to address the effects of warner - lambert's improper marketing scheme. finally , pfizer agreed to a corporate integrity agreement that addresses the "training and supervising [of] its marketing and sales staff , and ensures that any future off - label marketing conduct is detected and corrected on a timely basis. the warner - lambert court's reasoning is similar to that presented in other fca suits related to marketing of off - label drug uses for which medicaid , medicare , or a governmental entity reimbursed the claims that were false because of the off - label use .