it is not a law . it is not signed by the president nor can it be vetoed . instead , its purpose is to establish a framework within which congress considers legislation dealing with spending and revenue . the budget resolution is not intended to establish details of spending or revenue policy . instead , details of such policy are to be included in legislation reported from the committees with legislative jurisdiction subsequent to the adoption of the budget resolution . all spending or revenue legislation reported from legislative committees , however , is expected to be consistent with the levels and priorities agreed to in the budget resolution . the spending policies in the budget resolution encompass two types of spending legislation: discretionary spending and direct ( or mandatory ) spending . discretionary spending is controlled through the appropriations process . appropriations legislation is considered annually for the fiscal year beginning october 1 . appropriations legislation provides funding for numerous activities such as national defense , education , and homeland security , as well as general government operations . direct spending , alternately , is provided for in legislation outside of appropriations acts . direct spending programs are typically established in permanent law that continue in effect until such time as they are revised or terminated by another law . the actual annual cost of direct spending is not determined by congress . it is instead dictated by formulas within the legislation providing for the program . the overall cost of a program depends on the eligibility requirements and benefits set forth in the legislation . these criteria determine who will be eligible to receive benefits and how much benefit they will receive . only by altering these formulas can congress adjust how much money will be spent . the 302 ( a ) allocations made to the house and senate appropriations committees reflect their jurisdiction over all discretionary spending . these allocations hold the appropriations committees accountable for staying within the spending limits established by the budget resolution . in recent years , budget resolutions have also sometimes included explicit spending limits on discretionary spending . both the house and senate appropriations committees have 12 subcommittees . each of these subcommittees is responsible for reporting one regular appropriations bill . sometimes these bills are packaged together in what is referred to as an omnibus appropriations act . once an appropriations committee has received its 302 ( a ) allocation , it then subdivides the committee allocation among its subcommittees as soon as practicable after the budget resolution has been adopted . these suballocations are known as 302 ( b ) subdivisions . the appropriations committees may make allocations among subcommittees , even if they do not correspond with the levels set forth in the functional categories of the budget resolution . section 302 ( c ) of the budget act provides a point of order against the consideration of any appropriations measures before the appropriations committee reports its subdivisions . the appropriations committees are then required to report these subdivisions to their respective chambers . the appropriations committees may revise the 302 ( b ) subdivisions anytime during the appropriations process to reflect actions taken on spending legislation .