the recommendations were accepted by the president and forwarded to congress . congress did not disapprove of the report and , therefore , the recommendations became law on november 9 , 2005 . the current brac law is similar to the original statute and retains many of the transfer authorities that were available in previous rounds . significant amendments in 1999 and 2001 altered portions of the law's disposal authorities , including requirements related to economic development conveyances . consequently , dod promulgated new regulations to implement the property disposal authorities available for the 2005 round . however , in 2009 , congress amended the law as it relates to economic development conveyances requiring dod to issue revised regulations . this report provides an overview of the transfer and disposal authorities available under the law for military installations closed during the 2005 round , and indicate how amendments to the base closure act have altered the property transfer and disposal process . it also describes dod's regulations implementing the amended base closure act . the transfer or disposal of federal property is primarily performed by the general services administration ( gsa ) pursuant to the federal property and administrative services act of 1949 ( fpasa ) . the base closure act directs the administrator of the gsa to delegate specified transfer and disposal authorities to dod for use at brac installations , and dod has , in turn , delegated this authority to the various military departments . thus , brac property transfer and disposal is performed , generally , in accordance with the fpasa and the gsa regulations implementing it . in addition , the base closure act authorizes dod , with gsa approval , to supersede gsa regulations with brac - specific regulations . apart from the transfer and disposal authorities typically available for federal property , the base closure act and other provisions of law authorize a variety of other conveyance mechanisms . the available authorities include: public benefit transfers , economic development conveyances ( at cost and no cost ) , negotiated sales to state or local governments , conservation conveyances , and public sales . in some cases , the analysis and use of particular authorities must precede analysis and use of others . on the other hand , there are many transfer and disposal mechanisms that are given roughly equivalent priority ; thus analysis and use of them may occur simultaneously . in addition to dod's role in making disposal and transfer determinations , the base closure act also provides a substantial role for states and communities in the property redevelopment planning process . thus , local communities can significantly affect the brac property transfer and disposal decisions made at the federal level . the specific roles for states and communities as well as the various transfer and disposal authorities are discussed below . the base closure act and the fpasa primarily governed the transfer and disposal process for 2005 round brac properties . the process first requires screening to determine if other dod components or federal agencies have a need for the property . in the event that property is not transferred in this manner , it is deemed surplus and may be disposed of pursuant to brac and fpasa authorities .