fast supersedes p.l . 112-141 , the moving ahead for progress in the 21 st century act ( map - 21 ) , which was signed into law by president obama on july 6 , 2012 . it reauthorized federal highway and mass transit programs through the end of fy2014 ( 27 months ) and authorized to be appropriated $105.2 billion for these programs in fy2013 and fy2014 ( about $118 billion including already appropriated funding for fy2012 ) . map - 21 followed 10 short - term reauthorizations of the safe , accountable , flexible , and efficient transportation equity act of 2005: a legacy for users ( safetea ; p.l . 109-59 ) , and lengthy consideration of federalism issues in surface transportation policy . map - 21's authorization was extended five times , most recently by p.l . 114-87 , the surface transportation extension act of 2015 , part ii , through december 4 , 2015 . although the federal presence , and influence , on surface transportation policy remains significant , fast is a continuation of previous reauthorizations' emphasis on increasing state decisionmaking authority . for example , fast provided states greater flexibility in the use of federal highway assistance by converting the surface transportation program ( stp ) into a block grant ; rolling the transportation alternatives program into the stp and allowing 50% of local government transportation alternatives funding to be used on any stp - eligible project ; and consolidating truck and bus safety grant programs . fast also includes changes to the project delivery approval process in an effort to reduce the average project delivery time for highway and mass transit construction projects . the changes made by fast and its predecessor , map - 21 , demonstrate that the nature of federalism relationships in american surface transportation policy is continuously evolving over time in reaction to changes in american culture , society , and politics . as will be shown , the federal government's role in determining the nature of american surface transportation policy has become increasingly influential , especially since the federal - aid to highway act of 1956 that authorized the interstate highway system . for many years , state and local government officials , through their public interest groups ( especially the national governors association , national conference of state legislatures , national association of counties , national league of cities , u.s. conference of mayors , and american association of state highway and transportation officials ) , have lobbied for increased federal assistance for surface transportation grants and increased flexibility in the use of those funds . for example , during fast's consideration , the national governors association advocated a multi - year reauthorization of federal highway and mass transit programs that "provide maximum flexibility to the state for implementation and innovation because of our diversity of geography , population , and priorities. state and local government officials contend that providing them added flexibility in surface transportation policy is justified because they are better able to identify surface transportation needs in their states than federal officials and are capable of administering federal grant funds with relatively minimal federal oversight . they also argue that states have a long history of learning from one another .