khan research laboratories . the spd also oversees "the systematic progress of weapon systems. ( written by paul kerr , analyst in nonproliferation. ) in august 2007 , then prime minister ehud olmert named dr. shaul horev ( alternate transliteration: chorev ) , formerly deputy chief of the israeli navy and then head of a secret "special means" division within the defense ministry , to be the iaec director general . according to a 2010 book by a u.s. - based israeli academic specializing in israel's nuclear history , the defense ministry reportedly plays a substantial but publicly undisclosed role in steering the program , largely due to its control over "key aspects of the iaec's operations , such as budget and security. the 2010 book characterizes the iaec as , in some respects , israel's most secretive security organization . the iaec directs research at the center for nuclear research at nahal sorek ( alternative transliteration: soreq ) , approximately 10 miles south of tel aviv , and at the larger center for nuclear research in the negev south of dimona . the sorek center has a small civilian research reactor under international atomic energy agency ( iaea ) safeguards . according to some reports , sorek also conducts nuclear weapons research and design activities . dimona is the site of a reactor and fissile material processing plant that is off - limits to international inspectors , and reportedly both highly enriched uranium ( heu ) and plutonium are produced there . in march 2012 , israeli officials announced plans to phase out the civilian reactor at sorek by 2018 , largely because the reactor's stock of heu fuel — provided by the united states in 1960 — is running out and the reactor is aging . nuclear suppliers group guidelines prohibit suppliers from exporting additional reactor fuel to israel because the country is not a signatory to the nuclear non - proliferation treaty ( npt ) . israel will reportedly replace the reactor with a particle accelerator that will fulfill many of the same research and medical functions . ( written by [author name scrubbed] , specialist in middle eastern affairs. ) policy - making toward north korea's nuclear program has been vested in the national defense council since 1991 . north korean leader kim jong - un heads this body . the other members represent the north korean workers ( communist ) party and the north korean military . kim jong - un was appointed "supreme commander" of the korean people's army after his father ( kim jong - il ) 's death in december 2011 . kim jong - un has had the supreme decision - making authority on nuclear policy , as did his father and grandfather before him . at the top of the operational organization is north korea's ministry of atomic energy industry , a full - fledged cabinet ministry . under this ministry , there are a number of nuclear - related organizations and research centers . there are two committees: an isotope application committee and a nuclear energy committee . the ministry also directs a nuclear research center at yongbyon , the site of north korea's known plutonium facilities . there also is a nuclear energy institute in pyongyang , the capital .