a similar bill , h.r . the telescope has evolved and developed over its lifetime . in 1974 , the first upgrade was completed , replacing the original wire mesh surface with aluminum panels . the upgrade totaled approximately $8.0 million — approximately $5.0 million from nsf and $3.0 million from national aeronautics and space administration ( nasa ) . the upgrade enabled arecibo to operate at 3 gigahertz . also , planetary radar studies were expanded with the installation of a 420 kilowatt transmitter , operating at 2.4 gigahertz . in 1997 , the second upgrade of the facility was completed , with the installation of a gregorian reflector system , suspended approximately 450 feet above the telescope's 1,000-foot dish and a 1-megawatt radar transmitter . this upgrade allowed the telescope to operate at up to 10 ghz , increasing the telescope's "sensitivity , frequency coverage , and agility , and enabl[ing] dual - beam incoherent scatter radar capability , providing new research opportunities. the upgrade was undertaken by nsf and nasa , with support from cornell university , at a cost of $25.0 million — $14.0 million from nsf and $11.0 million from nasa . arecibo is recognized for its research in radio astronomy , solar system radar astronomy / planetary radar , and ionospheric observations / terrestrial aeronomy . it has been used for research in such diverse areas as interstellar gas , pulsars and fundamental physics , variations in earth's ionosphere , galactic structure formation and evolution , complex and pre - biotic molecules in the interstellar medium , planetary surfaces and moons , and the post - discovery characterization and orbital refinement of near - earth asteroids . one of the first accomplishments of arecibo was determining the correct rotation rate of mercury , which was found to be 59 days instead of the previously estimated 88 days . other arecibo firsts include the first discovery of a binary pulsar , the first discovery of planets outside the solar system , and the first detailed three - dimensional mapping of how galaxies are distributed in the universe . in 1982 , research conducted at arecibo discovered a type of radio emission — hydroxyl megamaser — that has since been found to indicate a collision between two galaxies . in 1997 , the board on physics and astronomy of the national research council ( nrc ) established the astronomy and astrophysics survey committee to assess the field of ground - and space - based astronomy and astrophysics for the decade 2000 to 2010 . the committee was charged with recommending priorities for initiatives during that decade and to explore areas of development of new technologies . the report of the 2000 decadal survey , astronomy and astrophysics in the new millennium , made an effort to find the balance between long - term support for facility operations and research grants and priority for new technological opportunities and facilities . the committee made recommendations relating to coordination of the astronomy and astrophysics programs of the nsf , nasa , and the department of energy office of science ( doe ) . the committee also explored possibilities for international collaboration and private , state , and federal partnerships .