these can occur simultaneously or as a result of each other . economic growth can stimulate employment and individual income , generally reducing certain types of spending and increasing revenue levels . during a recession reductions in consumption and increased reliance on government programs have the opposite effect . for example , in a strong economy , new jobs are often created . if the unemployed become employed and earn higher incomes , additional tax revenue would be generated . in contrast , in a weak economy , people may lose their jobs , which could lower tax revenue and increase government expenditures on programs such as unemployment insurance and food stamps . economists refer to these changes as automatic stabilizers . policy changes by the federal government to change spending or revenue levels ( i.e. , through the creation of new programs or through tax cuts ) would also affect the size of the deficit . the dollar value of the budget deficit ( or surplus ) , however , may give a partial and potentially misleading picture of the government's true fiscal condition . deficits and debt levels are often measured as a percentage of gdp , rather than in dollar amounts . measurement of deficits and debt as a percentage of gdp provides adjustments for inflation and relates the size of the deficit or debt to the size of the economy . the deficit in fy2008 was $455 billion , or 3.2% of gdp , sharply higher than the fy2007 deficit of $162 billion ( 1.2% of gdp ) . in january 2009 , cbo projected that the deficit would reach nearly $1.2 trillion ( 8.3% of gdp ) in fy2009 , which did not include the effects of the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 ( arra ) . at the request of speaker of the house nancy pelosi and house budget committee chairman spratt , cbo released three alternative budget scenarios in february 2009 . under all of the scenarios , cbo projected a deficit of $1.4 trillion in fy2009 , with the majority of the deficit increase from the january to february projections occurring as a result of arra . cbo also projected the continuation of deficits well into the future . this budgetary outlook is largely attributed to the effects of the economy as well as the significant federal financial interventions and stimulus legislation already passed by congress . additional actions may increase the deficit further . cbo also projects that the recession , probably the longest and deepest since world war ii ( wwii ) , will likely last well into 2009 . the current condition of the economy will likely result in increases in outlays for mandatory programs , such as food stamps and unemployment benefits , also known as "automatic stabilizers," and increases in the deficit . revenue collection is also projected to be lower largely due to declines in personal incomes and corporate profits . the deficit impact of these increases in outlays and decreases in revenues is accounted for in the cbo baseline . the projected deficit for fy2009 is high relative to historic standards . the deficit reached its peak in 1943 at 30.3% of gdp .