the apec chair for 2009 is singapore . japan is to be the chair in 2010 , and the united states is to be chair in 2011 . decisions within apec's various organizational bodies are based on the consensus approach of apec . the most direct issue would be the level of u.s. financial support for apec . in addition to the issue of u.s. financial support for apec , congress may choose to express its sense on different policy issues . for example , congress could consider setting funding levels , directly or indirectly , for apec's trade facilitation programs independently from the amounts previously appropriated . in addition , congress may consider expressing its preferences regarding the agenda and content of the 2011 apec meetings to be held in the united states , possibly via appropriation legislation that provides funding for those meetings . the 110 th congress has already appropriated $2.3 million for the 2011 meetings , but additional funding is likely to be needed . past congresses have recognized the potential of apec as a vehicle for promoting free trade . in addition , to the issue of a possible free trade area of the asia - pacific , negotiations over regional trade integration under apec would likely raise issues related to labor rights and environment protection , and whether the united states would be able to respond to foreign country violations of labor or environmental standards with economic sanctions or monetary fines ( as stipulated in the u.s. - singapore / chile ftas ) . in addition , the announcement made late in the bush administration that the united states was entering into negotiations with the trans - pacific strategic and economic partnership ( tpp ) has brought into question u.s. commitment to apec and its role in fostering a ftaap . according to ambassador haslach , u.s. interest in joining the tpp is consistent with apec's objective of forming a ftaap , as tpp membership may be an achievable a short - term objective and the apec - based ftaap constitutes a long - term goal . some observers , however , are concerned that the possible negotiations with the existing tpp members – brunei , chile , new zealand and singapore – will divert the attention of the state department and the ustr away from apec , delaying progress on the ftaap . successful completion of the doha round was a major trade priority for the bush administration . it is yet to be determined if the issue will be a high priority for the obama administration . in addition to the various economic and trade issues , congress may also consider issues pertaining to human security as a result of the u.s. involvement with apec . for example , u.s. recognition of the apec business travel card could raise domestic security concerns to the expedited visa and entry privileges extended to card bearers . also , there are oversight issues raised by u.s. participation in various apec activities and , in particular , with respect to the 2011 apec meetings to be held in the united states . no legislation has been introduced in the 111 th congress that explicitly refers to apec , but one senate resolution — s.res .