it had an ethnically mixed population . the rise of hardline nationalism in serbia under slobodan milosevic and a similar movement in croatia led by franjo tudjman in the late 1980s and early 1990s posed a grave threat to bosnia - herzegovina's unity . bosnia's own republic government was split among bosniak ( slavic muslim ) , croat , and serb nationalists . the secession of slovenia and croatia in june 1991 upset the delicate balance of power within yugoslavia . milosevic conceded slovenia's independence after a few days , but croatia's secession touched off a conflict between croat forces and serb irregulars supported by the serb - dominated yugoslav army . bosnian serb nationalists demanded that bosnia remain part of a serbian - dominated yugoslavia . bosnian croat nationalists threatened to secede if bosnia remained in yugoslavia . bosnian president alija izetbegovic , a bosniak , worried about the possible spread of the conflict to bosnia and tried to find a compromise solution . however , these efforts were made very difficult by the milosevic and tudjman regimes , both of which had designs on bosnian territory . in addition , izetbegovic's hand was forced by the european community ( ec ) decision in december 1991 to grant diplomatic recognition to any of the former yugoslav republics that requested it , provided that the republics held a referendum on independence and agreed to respect minority rights , the borders of neighboring republics , and other conditions . izetbegovic and other bosniaks felt they could not remain in a milosevic - dominated rump yugoslavia and had to seek independence and ec recognition , even given the grave threat such a move posed to peace in the republic . bosnian serb leaders warned that international recognition of bosnia - herzegovina would lead to civil war . in march 1992 , most bosniaks and croats voted for independence in a referendum , while most serbs boycotted the vote . in april 1992 , shortly before recognition of bosnia by the european community and the united states , serbian paramilitary forces and the yugoslav army launched attacks throughout the republic . they quickly seized more than two - thirds of the republic's territory and besieged the capital of sarajevo . more than 96,000 people were killed in the war . approximately 2.3 million people were driven from their homes , creating the greatest flow of refugees in europe since world war ii . this would make any effort to unite the rs with serbia ( a longstanding dream of serbian nationalists ) more difficult . renewed conflict ( if perhaps on a smaller and more localized scale than in the 1990s ) would be most likely to occur if the rs attempted to secede from bosnia and herzegovina , and bosniaks tried to prevent such an action by force of arms . observers are divided on whether the current impasse , caused in part by rs obstructionism , could eventually destabilize the country even without a provocative act such as secession .