appendix a . selected visits by u.s. and prc officials november 15 - 18 , 2009 — president barack obama made his first state visit to china . while there , he and prc president hu jintao issued a u.s. - china joint statement discussing the importance of the relationship , highlighting its key accomplishments , and seeking further cooperation on increased educational exchanges ; global economic recovery ; and climate change , energy , and the environment . october 24- 31 , 2009 — general xu caihou , vice chairman of the prc's central military commission , visited the united states . in addition to meeting with secretary of defense robert gates , general xu visited u.s. military facilities , including the u.s . naval academy in annapolis , maryland ; the u.s. strategic command in nebraska ; nellis air force base in nevada ; fort benning , georgia ; the north island naval station in san diego , california ; and the u.s. pacific command in hawaii . september 4-5 , 2009 — stephen bosworth , the u.s. special envoy to north korea , visited china for two days , meeting with foreign minister yang jiechi and vice foreign minister wu dawei . september 6 , 2009 — prc national people's congress chairman wu bangguo arrived for a week - long u.s. visit . while in washington , he met with president barack obama , vice president joseph biden , and speaker nancy pelosi , among others . july 27-28 , 2009 — the first meeting of the new strategic and economic dialogue ( s&ed ) in washington dc , comprised of senior u.s. and prc officials , including secretary hillary clinton , secretary timothy geithner . councilor dai bingguo , and vice premier wang qishan . july 14-17 , 2009 — secretary of energy steven chu and secretary of commerce gary locke visited china to discuss , among other things , clean energy issues . july 3 , 2009 — deputy u.s. trade representative demetrios marantis began a five - day visit to china to discuss u.s. poultry exports . may 3 1 , 2009 — u.s. treasury secretary timothy geithner made a three - day official visit to china to discuss plans for the new strategic and economic dialogue scheduled for july 2009 . april 16 , 2009 — u.s . chief of naval operations admiral gary roughead began a six - day visit to china to discuss u.s. - china navy and military relations . during his visit , roughead acknowledged china's efforts to help combat piracy off the coast of somalia . april 2 , 2009 — u.s . treasury secretary timothy geithner and prc vice premier wang qishan met in london after the g - 20 financial summit closed . april 1 , 2009 — president barack obama and prc president hu jintao met for an hour on the eve of the g - 20 financial summit meeting in london . they agreed to build a more cooperative and comprehensive relationship , to increase exchanges at all levels , and to establish the u.s. - china strategic and economic dialogue .