should laboratories be consolidated or dispersed ? what is the optimal size and type of high - containment laboratory ? with multiple agencies expanding high - containment laboratory capacity , is a plan coordinating these efforts necessary ? does increasing laboratory capacity and the number of trained scientists increase the risk of accidents and / or opportunities for purposeful misuse ? what is an acceptable balance between the benefits these laboratories provide and the risks they pose ? what is the necessary federal investment ? policymakers have become increasingly interested in the expansion of these facilities following reports of accidents , regulatory noncompliance , and recent examples of community resistance to the laboratories . the commission on the prevention of weapons of mass destruction proliferation and terrorism recommended tightening government oversight of high - containment laboratories . these laboratories may also be regulated by state and local laws , regulations , and ordinances . this report focuses on the federal government's regulation of high containment laboratories . it explains the concepts of biosecurity and biosafety , including the mechanisms by which the federal government oversees their implementation ; describes the proliferation of high - containment laboratories ; discusses issues facing federal policymakers ; and identifies policy options for congressional consideration . biosecurity and biosafety are closely related . their definitions vary from source to source and sometimes overlap . in this report , biosecurity refers to steps taken to secure pathogens or biological materials from theft , unauthorized access , or illegal use , while biosafety refers to mechanisms or practices employed to lower the risk of unintentional infection in the laboratory or environmental release from the laboratory . while biosecurity and biosafety are clearly related closely , their practices and oversight mechanisms have mainly developed independently . the number of bsl - 3 and bsl - 4 laboratories is generally believed to have increased in recent years . while the number of bsl - 3 laboratories is not known , the total amount of planned or existent bsl - 4 space in the united states has increased by an estimated twelve - fold since 2004 . this expansion of high - containment laboratory space resulted from federal construction , increased federal funding of research and development activities requiring high - containment laboratories , and a greater focus on public health and diagnostic laboratory capacity . the expansion of high - containment laboratories has raised several issues for policymakers . these include how to determine the appropriate capacity to meet national needs , whether oversight of facilities or personnel need to be increased , balancing the desire for additional laboratory capacity with its accompanying increase in risk , possible international ramifications , and local concerns . in addressing these issues policymakers have several options . interested congressional policymakers could deem current efforts sufficient and no further action is warranted . several expert panels are examining these issues currently and congress could defer additional action until their reports are complete and their recommendations heard . alternatively , congress could decide to step up current oversight of facilities , pathogens , or personnel , or to take other actions . the 111 th congress has begun to consider some of these issues .