the future of sure is also affected by funding . under the 2008 farm bill , the sure program provides payments to producers for crop revenue losses due to natural disaster or adverse weather incurred on or before september 30 , 2011 . it would presumably provide more timely payments . however , the program design as defined in the farm bill has affected the timeliness of payments ( see section on " time lag for payment delivery " ) . a major distinction of sure is that payments are based on whole - farm crop revenue , not crop - specific losses . in previous disaster programs , producer payments were based on individual crop losses . if a farmer experienced a yield loss , the farmer would be eligible for a payment specific to that crop loss , assuming other criteria were met . revenue losses are , in general , determined by the calendar year of harvest . under the new program , a farmer's revenue from all crops in all counties is compared with a guaranteed level of revenue that is computed mostly from expected or average yields and prices . as a result , the program considers the disaster's impact on a farmer's entire enterprise and not on just the crop ( s ) that were adversely affected . if the actual farm revenue ( including farm program payments and insurance indemnities ) is less than the farm's guaranteed level , the producer receives a payment . in contrast , if actual whole farm revenue does not fall below the guaranteed level , whereby losses for one crop are offset by revenue gains for another , no disaster payment is made . payments are limited so that the guaranteed level cannot exceed 90% of expected farm income in the absence of a natural disaster . the sure program is designed to help fill gaps in other government commodity and risk management programs . the cost to the farmer is relatively low , and becoming eligible for sure does not affect decisions for other programs . as a result , interest in sure may have increased demand for crop insurance and nap coverage , resulting in a greater share of u.s. crops covered under crop insurance and nap . also , farmers who selected higher insurance coverage increased their sure guarantee . each has permanent authorization and receives regular annual funding . crop insurance indemnifies participating producers for yield or revenue losses for their farms . usda's noninsured crop disaster assistance program ( nap ) provides crop - loss coverage for crops not covered by insurance policies . emergency disaster loans are available to producers when a county has been declared a disaster area either by the president or the secretary of agriculture . in recent decades , when these programs did not provide sufficient financial assistance to producers , congress has provided "ad - hoc" emergency crop disaster assistance . in virtually every crop year between 1988 and 2007 , congress provided disaster assistance to farmers and ranchers with significant weather - related production losses . during this period , federal ad - hoc crop disaster programs provided approximately $1 billion per fiscal year to farmers who experienced a major crop loss caused by a natural disaster .