111-5 are unprecedented in scale and scope . the impetus behind broadband provisions in the arra was two - fold: in the short term , to create jobs through the construction and deployment of broadband infrastructure , and in the long term , to address concerns over economic and societal impacts of inadequate broadband availability , access , and adoption , particularly in rural and lower - income areas of the nation . the unprecedented scale and scope of the arra broadband programs , coupled with the short time frame for awarding grants , presents daunting challenges with respect to program implementation as well as congressional oversight . in december 2008 , leadership in the house and senate , as well as the obama transition team , announced their intention to include a broadband component in the infrastructure portion of the economic stimulus package . at the same time , numerous interested parties , including broadband equipment manufacturers ; large , mid - sized , and small wireline and wireless service providers ; satellite operators ; telecommunications unions ; consumer groups ; education groups ; public safety organizations ; think tanks ; and others unveiled a multitude of specific proposals for government support of broadband infrastructure . the arra broadband provisions are only one component in the nation's overall broadband strategy . the total consists of $4.7 billion to ntia / doc for a newly established broadband technology opportunities program ( btop ) and $2.5 billion to rus / usda broadband grant , loan , and loan / grant combination programs . arra broadband programs encompass three distinct programs or activities: ( 1 ) grants , loans , and loan / grant combinations to expand broadband services and infrastructure ( ntia and rus ) ; ( 2 ) the state broadband data and development grant program ( ntia ) ; and ( 3 ) development of a national broadband plan ( fcc ) . "broadband usa," the official web portal to apply for arra broadband funding , is located at http: / / broadbandusa.sc.egov.usda.gov / . agency websites tracking the latest arra broadband program developments are located at ntia , rus , and the fcc . the broadband technology opportunities program ( btop ) is newly authorized and established at ntia , while the broadband initiatives program ( bip ) significantly expands the scope and size of rus broadband loan and grant programs . the arra gives ntia and rus considerable flexibility to implement the btop and bip . the house and senate approved the conference report on h.r . 111-16 ) on february 13 , 2009 . implementation decisions made by ntia and rus have a significant impact on how the program is shaped and targeted , and the extent to which the program meets the goals and purposes set forth by the arra . on march 12 , 2009 , ntia and rus released a joint request for information ( rfi ) and notice of public meetings designed to gather public input into many of the implementation decisions which the agencies make as they develop rules and regulations for the program . a series of public meetings were held in march 2009 .