medicaid . certain low - income medicare beneficiaries also may be eligible for full or partial benefits under their state's medicaid program . individuals eligible for both medicare and medicaid are referred to as dual eligibles . the lowest - income dual eligibles qualify for full medicaid benefits , so that the majority of their health care expenses are paid by either medicare or medicaid ; medicare pays first , with medicaid picking up most of the remaining costs . in addition to full - benefit dual eligibles , state medicaid programs pay medicare premiums and some cost sharing for other partial dual eligibles , who have higher income than full - benefit dual eligibles but are still considered to have low income . other public sources . individuals may have additional coverage through the department of veterans affairs , or tricare for military retirees eligible for medicare ( and enrolled in part b ) . in 2015 , about 87% of medicare beneficiaries had some form of additional coverage . all ma plans have a catastrophic cap . employer coverage . coverage may be provided through a current or former employer . in recent years , a number of employers have cut back on the scope of retiree coverage . the trust funds are accounting mechanisms . income to the trust funds is credited to the fund in the form of interest - bearing government securities . expenditures for services and administrative costs are recorded against the fund . these securities represent obligations that the government has issued to itself . as long as a trust fund has a balance , the department of the treasury is authorized to make payments for it from the u.s. treasury . medicare expenditures are primarily paid for through mandatory spending — generally medicare pays for all covered health care services provided to beneficiaries . aside from certain constraints in hi described below , the program is not subject to spending limits . additionally , most medicare expenditures ( aside from premiums paid by beneficiaries ) are paid for by current workers through income taxes and dedicated medicare payroll taxes , that is , current income is used to pay current expenditures . medicare taxes paid by current workers are not set aside to cover their future medicare expenses . while medicare provides broad protection against the costs of many , primarily acute care , services , the program does not cover all services that may be used by its aged and disabled beneficiaries . in general , medicare does not cover eyeglasses , hearing aids , dentures , or most long - term care services . further , unlike most private insurance policies , it does not include an annual "catastrophic" cap on out - of - pocket spending on cost - sharing charges for services covered under parts a and b ( except for persons enrolled in medicare advantage plans ) . most medicare beneficiaries have some coverage in addition to medicare . the following are the main sources of additional coverage for medicare enrollees: medicare advantage . many ma plans offer services in addition to those covered under original medicare , reduced cost sharing , or reduced part b or d premiums .