appendix a . legislative history surface transportation assistance act of 1982 ( staa ) staa ( p.l . 94-424 ) authorized a significant increase in funding for the federal - aid highway system for fy1983-fy1986 and included a provision designed to mitigate the dissatisfaction of donor states by providing that each state would receive a minimum allocation ( also known as the minimum guarantee ) from the core fhwa programs . specifically , the bill ordered the fhwa to allocate among the states sufficient funds to assure that each state's total apportionments from the core highway and safety programs ( interstate highway substitution , primary , secondary , interstate , urban , bridge replacement and rehabilitation , hazard elimination , and rail - highway crossings , and section 203 of the highway safety act of 1973 ) would not be less than 85% of the percentage of estimated tax payments each state paid into the highway account of the htf . these "equity adjustment" allocations could be obligated to the core highway programs . surface transportation and uniform relocation assistance act of 1987 ( sturaa ) sturaa ( p.l . 100-17 ) authorized the federal - aid highway program for fy1987-1991 , retaining the 85% minimum allocation , but altering the basis of its calculation . the act revised the calculation to include the allocated ( sometimes referred to as discretionary ) programs , with the exception of federal lands programs and safety programs . should general fund money be treated as if it were highway taxes and credited on that basis across all states or should general fund money be treated differently , perhaps being credited according to state shares of general fund revenues ? at what point does the federal role in decision making become so limited that it might make sense to convert the fahp to a revenue - sharing or a block grant program ? 111-5 ) provided for $27.5 billion in funding from the treasury general fund to be apportioned and distributed through existing federal - aid highway programs . the version that originally passed the house would have apportioned funds to the states based on their shares of the fy2008 obligation limitation . this method would have reflected the equity bonus distribution in its totals . the version that originally passed in the senate would have simply apportioned the stimulus highway funds according to the stp formulas . as such , the senate bill would not have reflected an equity bonus distribution . as was mentioned earlier , some have questioned the appropriateness of applying shares based on highway tax payments to the spending of general fund - based stimulus spending . in the end , p.l . 111-5 split the difference . after funding a number of set asides , 50% of the remaining funds were to be apportioned according to the house method and 50% according to the senate method . the surge of general fund money as stimulus funding could also increase the likelihood of a reexamination of the donor - donee calculation methodology . some would argue that point has already been reached , especially as federal administrative , labor , and environmental requirements do add to most states' project costs .