presidents have relied on this authority very rarely . assuming that the president's war or foreign affairs powers extend to national security efforts such as the cnci , the next question is whether , and in what circumstances , the executive branch exercise of such powers might be constrained by congressional action . as discussed , congress and the president share powers to address matters of national security , and no precise line divides the powers of the two political branches . expand cyber education ; 9 . define enduring leap - ahead technologies ; 10 . define enduring deterrent technologies and programs ; 11 . develop multi - pronged approaches to supply chain risk management ; and 12 . define the role of cyber security in private sector domains . increase the security of classified networks ; 8 . one question often raised is whether the cnci objectives are being pursued concurrently . the supreme court rejected this claim , but justices reached the conclusion by different analytical routes . writing for the majority , justice black took the hard - line view that the commander - in - chief clause gives the president no substantive authority . he emphasized that controlling private property to affect labor disputes "is a job for the nation's lawmakers. in contrast , justice jackson argued that the president's inherent constitutional powers "fluctuate," from relatively high when authorized by congress , to their "lowest ebb" when a president "takes measures incompatible with the express or implied will of congress. specifically , justice jackson articulated three categories of executive action: ( 1 ) action supported by an express or implied grant of authority from congress ; ( 2 ) a "zone of twilight" between the other categories , in which "congressional inertia" can occasionally "enable , if not invite , measures on independent presidential responsibility" ; and ( 3 ) action that conflicts with statutes or congressional intent . actions in the first category enjoy congressional support and thus might not need to rely solely on an inherent constitutional powers argument ; assuming that congress acted pursuant to an enumerated article i power in delegating the authority , these actions are clearly authorized unless they violate another constitutional provision . actions in the second , "zone of twilight" category prompt a complicated , totality - of - the circumstances inquiry , in which courts determine congressional intent vis - a - vis executive action . actions that fall within the third category – that is , actions that conflict with statutory law – generally lack constitutional authority , unless the action is one of the few types of actions over which the president has exclusive authority . in youngstown , justice jackson found that president truman's actions fit within the third category , because congress had not left the issue of property seizure during labor disputes to an "open field" ; rather , congress had passed statutes designed to stabilize markets when government required supplies . on this basis , justice jackson joined the majority to strike down president truman's seizure of the steel industry . given the existing statutory framework , at least some potential responses to cyber threats would likely fall outside of the first of justice jackson's categories .