eligibility . ( 1 ) a federal standard for counting income for the new group or state - based standards ? ( 2 ) if state - based standards , how much flexibility to use income disregards ? ( 3 ) allow states to deduct medical expenses from income for eligibility determinations ( i.e. , "spend down" ) or not ? ( 4 ) assets test or not ? ( 5 ) if additional individuals are made eligible , are provider payments and provider supply adequate to ensure beneficiaries' access to needed care ? benefits . provide standard medicaid benefits already offered in each state or permit additional state flexibility ? cost - sharing . generally only "nominal" amounts currently required or permit additional state flexibility ? section 1115 waivers . ( 1 ) is the new group's impact on budget neutrality specified in legislation or left to regulation ? ( 2 ) for states already covering the group through a waiver , would their current flexibility ( a ) terminate , ( b ) last until the waiver's expiration but without ability to renew the waiver , or ( c ) last in perpetuity ? in some cases , individuals are ineligible for medicaid regardless of their income . will the federal government cover ( 1 ) all of the costs of the new group ( 100% fmap ) , ( 2 ) some amount above the regular fmap but less than 100% , or ( 3 ) just the regular fmap ? some health reform proposals include provisions to expand traditional medicaid — to 100% of poverty , for example — regardless of whether one is a member of a covered group , such as children , pregnant women , the aged , and the disabled . this report briefly describes two key aspects of current medicaid eligibility — ( 1 ) categorical eligibility ( i.e. , not eligible under prior rules ) , ( 2 ) for those below poverty who were eligible before but are newly enrolled , and / or ( 3 ) for those below poverty who were already enrolled ? if the federal government will pay a larger percentage than the regular fmap , will the federal funding be ( 1 ) capped or ( 2 ) open - ended ? is the new group ( 1 ) wholly in place as of a certain date or ( 2 ) phased in ? will the state face a maintenance of effort ( moe ) requirement ( 1 ) for the dollars ( eg , must not spend less than what they spent on medicaid before a particular date ) and / or ( 2 ) for the people ( eg , if individuals would have been eligible under an already existing eligibility pathway , states could be required to enroll them through that pathway , especially if the benefits to individuals or the financial impact on states differ for the new eligibility group ) . , membership in a covered group ) and ( 2 ) income eligibility . to qualify for medicaid , potential beneficiaries generally must be a member of a covered group and meet certain financial criteria . although all poor ( i.e.