economic and financial committee . the committee includes representatives of ministries of finance , the european commission , the ecb , and central banks to promote high - level assessments of developments in financial markets . the best possible result is not limited to execution price but also includes cost , speed , likelihood of execution and likelihood of settlement and any other factors deemed relevant . systematic internalizer . a systematic internalizer is a firm that executes orders from its clients against its own book or against orders from other clients and are treated as mini - exchanges , which makes them subject to pre - trade and post - trade transparency requirements capital requirements directive the capital requirements directive , which became effective in january 2007 , introduced a supervisory framework within the eu for investment management firms and banks . the purpose of the directive is to move the eu towards complying with the basel ii rules on capital measurement , adequacy , and related market disclosure disciplines . this directive promotes a risk based capital management methodology through a "three pillar" structure that includes ( 1 ) new standards that set out the minimum capital requirements that firms will be required to meet for credit , market , and operational risk ; ( 2 ) firms and supervisors will be required to decide whether they are holding enough capital to address the risks realized under pillar i and act accordingly ; and ( 3 ) improve market discipline by requiring firms to publish certain details about their risks , capital , and risk management . the directive also requires firms to make provision for a charge against their capital for operational risks in order to identify , monitor , manage , and report on certain types of external events that may have a negative effect on their capital . the directive applies not only to internationally active banks , which is the main focus of the basel ii approach , but it also applies to all credit institutions and investment firms irrespective of the size , scope of activities , or levels of sophistication . under the directive , firms are required to meet rules governing the minimum amounts of their own financial resources they must have in order to cover the risks to which they may be exposed . lamfalussy process as the european commission crafted a coordinated eu approach to the financial crisis , it has done so in accordance with a set of procedures known as the lamfalussy process . the lamfalussy structure provides a framework for updating eu financial regulations and developing similar supervisory practices . while this process can be time consuming , it provides a process for eu members to follow so that policies that are considered through the process ultimately will be acceptable to all eu members and , therefore , will be more likely to be implemented . mifid is the most significant piece of legislation that has been introduced under this process . originally developed in march 2001 , it is named after the chair of the eu advisory committee that created it , alexandre lamfalussy . the process is composed of four "levels," each focusing on a specific stage of the implementation of legislation .