monitoring is conducted by u.s. embassy beirut . all information is compiled into inl's annual end - use monitoring report which includes information on location , use , condition , and program impact of the equipment provided . the fy2011 request also reflects this commitment . u.s. assistance to the laf and isf has improved the capability of those forces to provide for lebanon's internal security needs ( see " recent laf accomplishments " and " recent isf accomplishments " below ) , but broader political questions are unanswered about the purpose and potential limits of u.s. assistance . some lebanese leaders continue to question the appropriateness of u.s. and other international security assistance and characterize laf / isf cooperation with external parties as an infringement on lebanese sovereignty . statements from lebanese leaders across the political spectrum suggest that most perceive israel to be the primary external threat to lebanon's security , even as some who hold this view simultaneously argue that hezbollah's weapons and syrian and iranian support for hezbollah are significant if not comparable transnational threats . to the extent that u.s. security assistance is limited to training and items designed to improve lebanese government capability to contain and potentially disarm hezbollah and other internal threats , they may become incompatible with the evolving threat perceptions and political intentions of lebanon's political leadership . events continue to suggest that lebanese leaders are prepared to seek security assistance and weapons from non - u.s. sources to meet their perceived needs . on august 3 , 2010 , the laf opened fire on an israeli defense force ( idf ) unit engaged in routine brush - clearing maintenance along the blue line , alleging that it had crossed over into lebanese territory . two lebanese soldiers , a journalist , and an israeli officer were killed in the confrontation . soon after the incident , unifil issued a report confirming that the idf had not been in lebanese territory . although incidents along the blue line are not uncommon , unifil called this incident the "most serious" along the israeli - lebanese border since 2006 . in response , representative nita lowey , chair of the state foreign operations subcommittee of the house committee on appropriations placed a hold on the fy2010 $100 million fmf appropriation for lebanon citing the need to "determine whether equipment that the united states provided to the lebanese armed forces was used against our ally , israel. prior to the incident on august 3 , representative howard berman , chair of the house foreign affairs committee , also placed a hold on the fy2010 assistance , pending a better understanding from the state department about the strategy for u.s. assistance to lebanon and assurances that the laf is a responsible actor . other members also publicly expressed concerns . the hold was lifted in november 2010 after congressional consultations with the state department . it is unclear how current concerns will impact congressional consideration of the administration's fy2011 request for lebanon .