appendix a . selected statistics appendix b . acronym . net imports decreased in 2008 . the dry gas production increased 7.8% to 20,571 billion cubic feet in 2008 , reflecting in part the increase in drilling activity in response to price increases , as indicated in the natural gas rig count . the u.s. natural gas rig count has trended upward since 2002 . in 2002 , the average monthly rig count was about 600 . this contrasted with the relative stability of 2007 . in early 2008 , the market tightened and prices moved up . in the summer , supply area spot prices went much higher than in the past , then decreased through the rest of the year to end lower than at the start of the year . this report examines current conditions and trends in the u.s. natural gas markets . unlike the global oil market , natural gas markets remain generally regional , with global trade in lng growing . for the most part , north america has a continent - wide market that is integrated through a pipeline network that connects the lower - 48 states , the most populous provinces of canada , and parts of mexico . prices throughout this integrated market are influenced by demand ( which may be influenced by weather , economic conditions , alternative fuel prices , and other factors ) , supply , and the capacity available to link supply sources and demand loads ( transmission and distribution systems ) . the u.s. natural gas market is the major component of the north american natural gas market . it accounts for about 81% of north american consumption and about 70% of north american supply . the key price point in north america is henry hub . henry hub is a major pipeline hub near erath , louisiana , that is used as the designated pricing and delivery point for the new york mercantile exchange ( nymex ) gas futures contracts and other transactions . the price difference between other locations and henry hub is called the "basis differential. eia expects lng imports to increase 20% in 2009 , rebounding somewhat from the 42% drop in 2008 . however , low summer demand in europe could mean the united states will receive more lng than forecast . eia forecasts average henry hub prices to decrease roughly 35% in 2009 , to $5.62 per mmbtu , due to weak economic conditions , increased u.s. production , and lower demand . eia's forecast of natural gas prices depends on certain assumptions embedded in the forecast . these factors have uncertainty associated with them , as discussed next . natural gas markets in north america continue to function well relative to other energy markets . consumers and producers managed the tumultuous prices of 2008 without suffering major apparent damage . this market appears to continue responding appropriately to price signals . new pipelines and storage facilities have been built where price differentials have indicated need and value for these facilities . current investment in lng import capacity may prove excessive for the 2008-2009 heating season .