these causes of action are described in this section . the commission has the statutory authority to bring an action for violation of the securities act , as well as any violation of the rules and regulations issued by the commission pursuant to the act . whenever the commission believes a person has violated or is about to violate the provisions of the securities act , the commission has the power to issue a cease and desist order . pursuant to any cease and desist order , the commission has the authority to order accounting and disgorgement . the laws governing the issuance of these two types of mbss are different . mbss offered by the gses and ginnie mae are exempt from the registration requirements and ongoing disclosure obligations contained in the federal securities laws . private label mbss do not enjoy a blanket exemption from the federal securities laws and are classified by the securities and exchange commission as a type of "asset - backed security" ( abs ) that must register under the securities act of 1933 ( '33 act or securities act ) or obtain an exemption and provide continuing disclosures required by the securities exchange act of 1934 ( '34 act or exchange act ) . this report will provide an overview of the registration requirements for private label mbss under the securities act . it also highlights the most frequently used exemptions for private label mbss . it outlines potential liability for fraud and / or material misstatements in the required disclosures and the consequences for failure to register when required by federal securities laws . this report will not discuss reporting requirements or liability for mbss under the exchange act of 1934 . the securities act requires issuers of all types of securities to register the offering with the securities and exchange commission ( sec ) or to qualify for an exemption from the registration requirements . a registration statement consists of two parts: a prospectus , which must be delivered with every offer to sell the securities and contain the information outlined in section 10 of the securities act , and other information which need not be provided to potential purchasers but must be on file with the sec and available for public inspection . failure to file a registration statement when one is required results in a violation of section 5 of the '33 act and strict liability under section 12 ( a ) ( 1 ) . sections 11 and 12 of the securities act provide private causes of actions for material misstatements or omissions contained in the registration of private label mbs securities . section 15 of the act creates liability for controlling persons . the commission may also bring civil or criminal actions for violations of the act . in conjunction with the enforcement described above , the commission may bring an action for violation of section 17 of the securities act . section 17 is a general antifraud provision . it prohibits any individual , in the offer or sale of securities , from employing various means or devices of fraud .