cabinet appointed . in late november , a 35-member , national union government cabinet was appointed , days after a roadmap deadline requiring this outcome had passed due to disputes over the proposed makeup of the cabinet . the cabinet includes 12 opposition members , but not all opposition parties were satisfied by the appointments . some had reportedly wanted portfolios other than what they were given , and spokespersons from the mouvance ravalomanana and mouvance zafy reportedly boycotted the cabinet's initial meeting , alleging that the cabinet selection process was not in accordance with the roadmap . legislature appointed . in early december , the congress of transition ( ct , the lower legislative chamber , akin to the house of representatives ) and the superior council of transition ( cst , the upper legislative chamber , akin to a senate ) were both enlarged , the former from 256 seats to 417 seats , and the latter from 90 seats to 189 seats . incumbents in the transitional legislature appointed in october 2010 retained their posts , but additional seats were allocated according to the recommendations of signatories to the roadmap . they were selected under criteria that took into consideration partisan , regional , and gender balance , and the nominations of various political parties . seats allocated to the mouvance zafy , which did not name any nominees , were not filled . electoral commission appointed . on march 12 , 2012 , an independent transitional electoral commission ( the ceni - t , after its french acronym ) was inaugurated . its members include 10 civil society , 9 political party , and 2 rajoelina administration designees plus a president , béatrice atallah ; an appeals court judge ; and a member of a former national elections council . provisional electoral timetable adopted . on may 27 , the ceni - t adopted a partial electoral administrative process timetable , with a projected completion date of november 11 , 2012 , as required by the electoral code . it requires that the election be held during the dry season , between april 30 and november 30 , unless otherwise mandated due to a court - declared force majeure . the final scheduling of elections will be dependent on completion of various electoral procedures associated with voter registration , voter education , vetting of the voter rolls , and the like . some of this work is likely to be challenging ; the current voter registry is reportedly highly inaccurate and is missing large numbers of listings from the southern portions of the island . the ceni - t , whose work is dependent on central government funding , has pledged to issue biweekly progress updates . it expects to publish a more specific electoral calendar in august , pending substantial completion of its pre - poll tasks . amnesty law passed . in mid - april 2012 the lower and upper houses of parliament passed an amnesty law — albeit belatedly vis - à - vis the roadmap implementation schedule — broadly covering responsibility for possible violations of the law associated with political events between 2002 and 2009 , that is , between the election and deposition of ravalomanana .