similarly , congressional action has been limited . enacted in 1990 , prior to widespread use of the internet , the ada does not specifically cover the internet . similarly , the doj has not expressly addressed the internet in its ada regulation . there has also been no supreme court decision on this issue , and there have been few lower court judicial decisions . the lower courts that have examined the issue , moreover , have split , creating additional uncertainty . the doj should amend its regulations to clarify the obligations of commercial establishments under title iii of the americans with disabilities act with respect to commercial websites . the fcc should open a proceeding on the accessibility of video programming distributed over the internet , the devices used to display such programming and related user interfaces , video programming guides and menus . congress should consider clarifying the fcc's authority to adopt video description rules . the ada contains various requirements depending on whether the discrimination prohibited is in the employment context ( title i ) , is related to the activities of state or local governments ( title ii ) , or concerns public accommodations ( title iii ) . in addition , while the doj issued an advanced notice of proposed rulemaking on july 23 , 2010 , to require that internet services be accessible to individuals with disabilities , it has yet to issue a final rule on this issue . although most of the judicial decisions and discussion of ada applicability to the internet have arisen regarding public accommodations , it is helpful to briefly examine employment and state and local government requirements . the law on whether and how the ada applies to the internet is unsettled . furthermore , the use of a "nexus" approach that a district court within the ninth circuit adopted in national federation of the blind v. target corporation , which requires a connection between the internet services and the physical place in order to present an actionable ada claim , would limit the ada's application to online retailers . the americans with disabilities act ( ada ) has often been described as the most sweeping nondiscrimination legislation since the civil rights act of 1964 . it provides broad nondiscrimination protection in employment , public services , public accommodations , and services operated by private entities , transportation , and telecommunications for individuals with disabilities . as stated in the act , its purpose is "to provide a clear and comprehensive national mandate for the elimination of discrimination against individuals with disabilities. however , the ada , enacted on july 26 , 1990 , prior to widespread use of the internet , does not specifically cover the internet , and the issue of coverage has not been definitively resolved . the supreme court has yet to address this issue , and lower court decisions have varied in how they have approached the ada and the internet . the ada was amended in 2008 to respond to a series of supreme court decisions that had interpreted the definition of disability narrowly but did not address the issue of internet coverage .