in sec . 613 , the act specifies the steps that "the president and the secretary" need to take to encourage dialogue and report on the status of any resulting sino - tibetan discussions . section 614 of the tpa also requires that tibet be included as a separate section in any relevant reports submitted in accordance with the foreign assistance act of 1961 ( the state department's annual human rights report ) or the international religious freedom act of 1998 . finally , sec . 615 of the tpa amends p.l . these sources included officers from ngos involved with tibet ; tibetan and american scholars ; sources close to the dalai lama ; and current and former u.s. government officials . many felt that the special coordinators for tibet have demonstrated a consistent commitment to their statutory responsibilities and fulfilled these with as much success as prc sensitivities have allowed . u.s. leverage with the prc is thought to have benefited from the more senior - level position held by the longest - serving special coordinator , paula dobriansky , who as under - secretary of state was the highest - ranking u.s. official to date to hold this position . according to observers , an official at the under - secretary level is in a position to have more avenues of input in u.s. policy issues , including regular access to the secretary of state , participation in senior - level u.s. government meetings , and the opportunity to travel to china with the president and sit in on his meetings with the dalai lama . moreover , some observers thought that having a special coordinator dual - hatted with a more senior rank assured access to meetings with senior prc officials that beijing would decline to a u.s. official holding either lower rank or maintaining a single , tibet - centric portfolio . on the negative side , some thought the position of special coordinator has been hampered by a number of constraints on its ability to coordinate u.s. tibet policy with other u.s. government departments and agencies . according to these observers , while the tpa theoretically imposes obligations on a number of u.s. government agencies concerning tibet , it establishes unclear lines of communication and no mechanism for the special coordinator either to facilitate interagency coordination or to task other u.s. government agencies . some observers interviewed for this report provided anecdotal evidence that cabinet secretaries at times had traveled to tibet without either informing or consulting with the special coordinator for tibet or even with the state department east asia bureau . among the suggestions that some observers made were: giving the special coordinator authority to convene a policy coordinating committee ( pcc ) on tibet to facilitate interagency coordination on u.s. tibet policy , and revisiting the issue of giving ambassadorial rank to the special coordinator in order to enhance the stature and clout of this position within the state department . in the case of the latter , however , it should be noted that the political and diplomatic problems of making such a move , noted elsewhere in this report , remain salient .