the global economic downturn is deep and broad . job cuts and declining levels of economic activity are affecting countries around the globe . even before the crisis hit , there had been an erosion of public support for trade and globalization in many countries , including the united states . as a result , increased pressures for protection should not be unexpected . protectionism is a very elastic concept with multiple meanings . for many economists , no form of protection is legitimate because such interventions distort prices and misallocate resources over time . for some trade lawyers , only measures that are not consistent with wto rules and obligations are protectionist and considered unacceptable . for many political realists and policymakers , protective measures that provide help to constituents in times of economic distress are a political responsibility and necessity , not protectionism . for some historians , efforts by countries to improve their own trade position and help domestic industries at the expense of others by imposing measures that artificially increase exports or limit imports describe protectionism . still other historians define protectionism as a return to the policies of the 1930s , which are characterized by substantial across the board increases in trade barriers often directed at particular countries and cycles of retaliation and counter - retaliation . to analyze the relationship between the economic downturn and protectionism , this report constructs three scenarios . each scenario reflects a different dimension of the relationship between the economic downturn and protectionism . the scenarios are a continuum based on an analysis of the situation today to the direction that trade protectionism could take under different assumptions and circumstances . the scenarios are not predictions , but descriptions of how and why protectionist pressures could be manifested and transmitted under very different situations and policy responses . under a low impact s cenario existing wto rules and obligations , bolstered by a high level of global interdependence , keep pressures for protection under control . proposals for protection , if implemented , have a modest impact on global trade flows . under a medium impact scenario wto rules prove inadequate or are disregarded due to the exigencies of the economic crisis . as a result , trade and investment flows over time could be diverted or fall outside wto surveillance , thereby weakening the world trading system . under a high impact scenario wto rules are violated or ignored , major trade conflicts occur , and the world trading system is damaged . this threat arises from longstanding trade imbalances driven by distorted global savings and consumption patterns . the depth and duration of the economic downturn likely will be a major determinant of which scenario or scenarios prevail . at the same time , the degree to which protectionist measures are adopted could affect the course of the economic downturn as well . a concluding section discusses several policy challenges that rising pressures for trade protection may pose for policymakers and the 111 th congress . this issue has been on the agenda of the g - 20 countries when the leaders met in london in april 2009 and on the agenda of the g - 8 countries when the finance ministers met in trieste in june 2009 .