in some states the legislatures meet but once a year . as the senate will have more power and consist of a smaller number than the other house , vacancies there will be of more consequence . the executives might be safely entrusted , he thought , with the appointment for so short a time . james wilson of pennsylvania countered by asserting that the state legislatures met frequently enough to deal with vacancies , that the measure removed appointment of the senators another step from popular election , and that it violated separation of powers by giving the executive power to appoint a legislator , no matter how brief the period . oliver ellsworth of connecticut noted that "may" as used in the provision was not necessarily prescriptive , and that "[w]hen the legislative meeting happens to be near , the power will not be exerted. a motion to strike out executive appointment was voted down eight states to one , with one divided . hugh williamson of north carolina then offered an amendment to change the language to read "vacancies shall be supplied by the executive unless other provision shall be made by the legislature," which was also rejected . the committee on style and arrangement made minor alterations , and inserted the provision in article i , section 3 , paragraph ( clause ) 2 in its september 12 report . the full convention made final changes and approved the provision on september 17 , and it was incorporated without debate into the constitution in the following form: ... and if vacancies happen by resignation , or otherwise , during the recess of the legislature of any state , the executive thereof may make temporary appointments until the next meeting of the legislature , which shall then fill such vacancies . each member shall have one vote . on august 9 , the delegates turned to article 5 ; edmund randolph of virginia , a member of the committee of detail , explained that the provision was thought ... necessary to prevent inconvenient chasms in the senate . the appointments provision does not appear to have aroused much interest during the debate on ratification . a review of available sources , including the federalist and proceedings of the state conventions that ratified the constitution , reveals almost no debate on the question . for the next 124 years , governors appointed temporary senators according to the constitutional requirement with only minor controversy . during this long period , 189 senators were appointed by state governors ; 20 of these appointments were contested , but only 8 were "excluded" by the senate . the primary grounds for these contested appointments appear to have centered on whether vacancies happened during the recess of the legislature . according to historian george haynes , throughout much of this time , "the senate refused to admit to its membership men who had been appointed by the governors of their several states when the legislature had had the opportunity to fill the vacancies , but had failed to do so by reason of deadlocks. aside from this recurring controversy , the appointment of temporary senators seems to have been otherwise unremarkable .