on february 28 , 2017 , the senate adopted by unanimous consent s.res . the funds authorized and allocated by resolution are appropriated in legislative branch appropriations acts . authorization of funding for senate committees ( except the committee on appropriations and select committee on ethics ) is governed by senate rule xxvi , paragraph 9 . in recent practice , during the first few months of a new congress , each senate committee ( except appropriations and ethics ) typically reports a two - year funding resolution providing for its expenses . these resolutions are then incorporated by the committee on rules and administration into a single , omnibus committee funding resolution . since the 106 th congress , committee funding resolutions have divided funds among three calendar periods — from march 1 to september 30 of the first year of a congress , from october 1 to september 30 of the following year , and from october 1 to end of the following february — to align with the fiscal calendar . this permits the senate to identify the amounts authorized for each fiscal year and the subsequent appropriations required . 62 , authorizing expenditures by senate committees for the period march 1 , 2017 , through september 30 , 2017 , the period october 1 , 2017 , through september 30 , 2018 , and for the period october 1 , 2018 , through february 28 , 2019 . table 1 provides the requested and the authorized levels of funding for committees for the 115 th congress . table 2 through table 10 provide committee funding requests and authorizations for senate committees in the 106 th through 114 th congresses . table 11 through table 19 provide the same information , calculated in constant ( january 2017 ) dollars . the senate committee on rules and administration has jurisdiction over committee funding resolutions and issues regulations governing committee funding and staff . committee funding and staff are also regulated by senate rules , especially rule xxvi , clause 9 , and rule xxvii , as well as by statute . the senate biennial committee funding process applies to all senate committees except appropriations and ethics , which have permanent authorizations for their staff and operating expenses .