the treaty provisions in h.r . 3970 were modeled off of provisions contained in h.r . 3160 with additional language to ensure compliance with existing tax treaties . the more sensitive is foreign investment , the lower the optimal tax rate . a thorough investigation of the elasticity of supply is beyond the scope of this report . importantly , however , in some cases foreign firms may be able to use treaty shopping to eliminate all u.s. tax on their u.s. earnings , and it is unlikely that foreign investors are so sensitive to u.s. taxes that the optimal tax rate on foreign investment is zero . if this is the case , economic theory suggests that it is likely that the proposal would increase u.s. economic welfare . there are , however , a couple of important qualifications . one is economic: the analysis does not take into account possible counter - actions by foreign governments , which might erode or offset any benefit to the united states . for example , a country that is home to firms that would be affected by the treaty - shopping proposals might impose anti - treaty - shopping restrictions of its own that would affect u.s. firms' investment within its own borders . the other is non - economic: as noted above , some have argued that the anti - treaty - shopping proposal in h.r . 2419 , from the 110 th congress , would abrogate existing u.s. tax treaties . an analysis of these questions is , however , beyond the scope of this report . the degree of common ownership applied by the bills would have been 50% . thus , the provision would have applied to payments to a foreign corporation where the u.s. corporation and the payee corporation are linked to a common foreign parent by chains of at least 50% ownership . a central concern of supporters of the anti - treaty - shopping proposal is tax revenue: foreign firms that reduce their u.s. withholding taxes with treaty shopping reduce the tax revenue the united states collects on u.s. - source income , and in international taxation , the country of source — in this instance , the united states — traditionally has the primary right to the tax revenue it generates . supporters cite fairness as underlying this concern , contrasting the low u.s. taxes treaty - shopping foreign firms pay with taxes paid by u.s. - resident individuals and businesses . opponents of the measure have argued that the provision would increase the cost to u.s. firms of doing business in the united states , and would thus harm u.s. employment and wages . the tax - treaty proposals in the 111 th and 110 th congresses were not the first instance where u.s. policymakers have attempted to restrict treaty shopping . conceptually , one alternative to legislation is to include such restrictions in tax treaties . as described above , the treaties that the united states has negotiated in recent decades have all contained limitation on benefits ( lob ) clauses that deny treaty benefits to third - country residents .