appendix a . state , foreign operations authorizing legislation and u.s. code reference . in the fy2019 consolidated appropriations act ( p.l . 116-6 ) , the department of state , foreign operations , and related programs appropriations act ( division f ) is divided into eight titles , each associated with the following activities: many of the component accounts within these titles correspond to one or several authorities in statute . title 22 of the u.s. code contains many of these authorities . major acts in title 22 include the state department basic authorities act of 1956 ( p.l . 84-885 ; hereinafter the basic authorities act ) , the foreign service act of 1980 ( p.l . under this title , funds are appropriated in support of u.s. government departments and independent agencies conducting humanitarian , development , and other programs meeting u.s. foreign policy objectives throughout the world . general provisions set out limitations and prohibitions on assistance ; administrative , notification , and reporting requirements ; and more detailed funding requirements for specific accounts in other titles of the legislation . this title specifies also allocations for various aid sectors , including education , democracy promotion , water and sanitation , and food security , as well as cross - cutting issues such as gender equality . in addition , title vii provides more detail about aid to certain countries and regions . since fy2012 , executive branch budget requests have distinguished between "core" or "enduring" international affairs funding and funding to support "overseas contingency operations" ( oco ) . the oco designation was described initially in budget documents as reflecting "the extraordinary costs of department [of state] and u.s. agency for international development ( usaid ) operations and programs in afghanistan , iraq , and pakistan," its use quickly expanded to include a broader range of activities and countries . oco funds are not counted toward spending caps established by the budget control act , 2011 , as amended ( p.l . 112-25 ) , and as a result have been used as a means of maintaining international affairs funding levels while complying with bca budget restraints . while the trump administration has proposed the elimination of oco funding under sfops for fy2019 and fy2020 , congress has continued to use the designation in sfops legislation . oco funding supports accounts that received core funding in titles i - v of the legislation , but is identified separately in title viii . it is one of 12 appropriations bills that congress considers annually to fund the discretionary activities of the government . congress structures sfops into several titles , which consist of broad spending categories . these titles are subdivided into paragraphs that each address one component account , a funding line item that includes one or several activities of the government . a single component account may cover one agency's entire annual budget , grant funds to an independent organization , or fund multiple activities associated with statutory authorities , among other things . 96-465 ) , and the foreign assistance act of 1961 ( p.l . 87-195 ; hereinafter the faa ) , among others . this report identifies the statutory authorities that enable each component account to function .