this report will not be updated . some additional provisions in p.l . 111-13 apply to both ncsa and dvsa programs , though the amendments are to ncsa , and are discussed below . section 121 ( f ) of p.l . 111-13 requires the corporation to develop a plan to establish the number of approved national service positions at 88,000 for fy2010 and to increase the number to specific levels each fiscal year . by fy2017 , 250,000 approved positions are to be established . an approved national service position is defined in statute as a position for which the corporation has approved the provision of a national service educational award . programs in which members can receive an educational award include the americorps state and national program , the educational award only program , the national civilian community corps , the vista program , and the new serve america fellowships . for fy2008 , there were an estimated 75,000 approved national service positions . 1388 by a vote of 275-149 . the bill was signed into law on april 21 , 2009 ( p.l . the focus of this report is on selected amendments p.l . 111-13 makes to ncsa and dvsa . section 179 of p.l . 111-13 requires that the corporation establish , in consultation with grantees receiving assistance under ncsa and dvsa , performance measures for each grantee . grantees are required to submit to the corporation corrective plans if they fail to meet the established levels of performance . the corporation will reduce ( by at least 25% ) or terminate the grant of a grantee that continues to fail to meet performance levels after a period for correction . section 179a of p.l . 111-13 establishes a partnership between the corporation and the national conference on citizenship to create a civic health assessment . the partnership facilitates the establishment of a civic health assessment by selecting a set of civic health indicators , obtaining civic health data relating to the assessment , conducting related analyses , and reporting the data and analyses . the partnership will , at least once a year , prepare a report that enables communities and states to assess their civic health , as measured on each of the indicators comprising the civic health assessment , and compare those measures with comparable measures of other communities and states . section 189d of p.l . 111-13 requires that entities selecting individuals to serve in a position in which the individuals would receive a corporation grant - funded allowance , stipend , educational award , or salary conduct a criminal history check for such individuals . an individual that is registered , or required to be registered , on a sex offender registry or has been convicted of murder is ineligible to serve . 111-13 creates a new subtitle j of title i , which consolidates the training and technical assistance provisions that were contained throughout the prior law . the corporation is required to provide technical assistance to the ncsa and dvsa programs . priority is given to programs where services are needed most , where national service programs do not currently exist , or where the programs are too limited to meet community needs .