appendix a . traditional and emerging desalination technologies there are a number of methods for removing salts from seawater or brackish groundwater to provide water for municipal and agricultural purposes . the two most common processes , thermal distillation and reverse osmosis , are described below ; their descriptions are followed by descriptions of some of the more innovative and alternative desalination technologies . the earliest commercial plants used thermal techniques . improvements in membrane technology have reduced costs , and membrane technology is less energy - intense than thermal desalination ( although it is more energy - intense than most other water supply options ) . reverse osmosis and other membrane systems account for nearly 96% of the total u.s. desalination capacity and 100% of the municipal desalination capacity . reverse osmosis reverse osmosis forces salty water through a semipermeable membrane that traps salt on one side and lets purified water through . reverse osmosis plants have fewer problems with corrosion and usually have lower energy requirements than thermal processes . examples of how research advances in the traditional desalination technologies of reverse osmosis have the potential for improving the competitiveness and use of desalination are: nanocomposite and nanotube membranes and chlorine resistant membranes . nanocomposite membranes appear to have the potential to reduce energy use within the reverse osmosis process by 20% , and nanotube membranes may yield a 30% - 50% energy savings . membranes are susceptible to fouling by biological growth ( i.e. , biofouling ) , which reduces the performance of the membranes and increases energy use . the most widely used biocide is chlorine because it is inexpensive and highly effective . the most common membranes used in reverse osmosis , however , do not hold up well to exposure to oxidizing agents like chlorine . advancements in chlorine resistant membranes would increase the resiliency of membranes and expand their applications and operational flexibility . distillation in distillation , saline water is heated , separating out dissolved minerals , and the purified vapor is condensed . there are three prominent ways to perform distillation: multi - stage flash , multiple - effect distillation , and solar distillation . in general , distillation plants require less maintenance and pretreatment before the desalination process than reverse osmosis facilities . while solar distillation is an ancient means for separating freshwater from salt using solar energy , research into improving the technology is increasing . in large part the interest stems from the potential application for the technology to supply freshwater to small remote settlements where saline supplies are the only source and power is scarce or expensive . innovative and alternative desalination processes capacitive deionization capacitive deionization desalinates saline waters by absorbing salts out of the water using electrically charged porous electrodes . the technology uses the fact that salts are ionic compounds with opposite charges to separate the salts from the water . the limiting factor for this technology is often the salt absorption capacity of the electrodes . flow - through capacitive deionization shows promise for energy - efficient desalination of brackish waters . electrodialysis electrodialysis and capacitive deionization technologies depend on the ability of electrically charged ions in saline water to migrate to positive or negative poles in an electrolytic cell .