why is it politically hard ? and i think the answer's pretty straightforward: it seldom has more friends than it has enemies . liberals prefer a categorical approach to intergovernmental grant giving . essentially for two reasons: first of all , it locks in - it institutionalizes constituencies ; that is , it sets up a pretty sturdy relationship between client groups ; program authorizing committees in congress ; and patron agencies in the executive branch . and this pretty much ensures that intended target populations get funded , consistently . but , secondly , unlike block grants , which are often administered by formula , the categorical system gives politicians more opportunities for credit claiming . i'm going to quote , here from yale political scientist david mayhew on this subject . he says , "the categorical grant is for modern democratic congressmen what the rivers and harbors act and the tariff were for pre - new deal republican congressmen. that's true , but when the chips were down , conservatives are often not that keen about block granting , either... . they may like the fact that it may be somewhat easier to trim program spending , once programs are taken out of their political silos or cease to be entitlements . but they don't necessarily like the total lack of accountability , the absence of any strings to the money , once it goes out to the states . the following discussion examines in more detail the arguments presented by block grant advocates and block grant critics . block grant advocates argue that federal administrators are often out of touch with grassroots needs and priorities whereas state and local government officials are "closer to the people" than federal administrators and , therefore , are better positioned to identify state and local government needs . they also argue that state and local government officials are more "visible" to the public than federal administrators and , as a result , are more likely to be held accountable for their actions . from their perspective , this heightened level of visibility and accountability encourages state and local government officials to seek the most efficient and cost - effective means to deliver program services . as a result , they view the added flexibility provided by block grants as a means to produce both better programmatic outcomes and at a lower cost . block grant advocates also argue that the flexibility afforded to states and localities under block grant programs allows them to innovate and experiment with new approaches to governmental challenges that would not be possible if the funding were provided through more restrictive categorical grants . they argue that states have a history of learning from one another through the sharing of best practices at forums sponsored by the national governors association , through state and local government officials' participation in their respective national organizations' annual meetings , and through word - of - mouth . block grant advocates also assert that block grants promote long - term planning . unlike project categorical grants that require state and local government officials to compete for funding , block grants use formulas to distribute funds .