, state or local agencies or officials . as is discussed below , absent statutory context indicating otherwise , like terms in discrete sections of a statute are generally given the same meaning by a court . the final ambiguity is the use of the term "state. although the governor is the chief executive officer of a state , he is generally not the only officer vested with legislative power to apply for and accept grants . that power may be distributed to various state and local officials , who are authorized to act on behalf of the state without approval of the governor . thus , once either a governor's certification or the legislature's acceptance is made , ยง 1607 would have little or no apparent effect on the remaining power of a governor , state or local official to choose whether or not to seek and administer these funds . the language of ยง 1607 ( b ) , while adding an additional requirement to the federal funding process , does not otherwise appear to supplant or replace existing federal requirements , nor does it appear to change the allocation of power within a state to make decisions regarding the application for , acceptance of and use of such federal funds . any interpretation of this language which did provide authority to a state legislature , by concurrent resolution , to direct the acceptance and spending of federal monies would likely raise tenth amendment issues . consequently , such an interpretation would be disfavored . section 1607 ( a ) of the recovery act provides that , in order for a state to be eligible for the federal funds in the recovery act , a governor must certify that ( 1 ) a state will request and use funds in the future , and ( 2 ) the funds will be used to create jobs and economic growth . this language does not appear to bind a governor to request or accept any particular level of governmental funding , nor does it appear that the certification must be based on the governor's future acceptance of funds , as such request or acceptance can sometimes be made by other state officials or by local officials . forty - five days after enactment of the recovery act , if a governor has not provided the necessary certification , then ยง 1607 ( b ) would appear to provide a state legislature the authority to step in to "accept" state funds by concurrent resolution , achieving the same result as would have been achieved by the certification . however , it seems clear that such acceptance , while "sufficient" to trigger the availability of federal funds under the recovery act , does not free a state from any other conditions for receiving funds , such as filling out applications , justifying needs , and providing assurance of compliance with program requirements . many of the interpretive problems with ยง1607 result from the ambiguity of the terms used .