no appropriations were authorized for fy2009 . rules for implementation of the repowering assistance program are currently being developed by usda . the rfs is discussed in detail below . this report examines the role of government intervention and economic , trade , and environmental issues related to ethanol that are likely to be discussed in the 111 th congress . ethanol will likely be central to discussions of renewable fuel issues during the 111 th congress . an output / input ratio of 1.0 implies that energy output equals energy input . the critical factors underlying ethanol's energy efficiency include ( 1 ) corn yields per acre ( higher yields for a given level of inputs improves ethanol's energy efficiency ) ; ( 2 ) the energy efficiency of corn production , including the energy embodied in inputs such as fuels , fertilizers , pesticides , seed corn , and cultivation practices ; ( 3 ) the energy efficiency of the corn - to - ethanol production process: clean burning natural gas is the primary processing fuel for most ethanol plants , but several plants ( including an increasing number of new plants ) use coal ; and ( 4 ) the energy value of corn by - products , which act as an offset by substituting for the energy needed to produce market counterparts . over the past decade , technical improvements in the production of agricultural inputs ( particularly nitrogen fertilizer ) and ethanol , coupled with higher corn yields per acre and stable or lower input needs , appear to have raised ethanol's neb . about 82% of the corn used for ethanol is processed by more efficient dry milling ( a grinding process ) and about 18% is processed by wet milling plants . all new plants under construction or coming online are expected to dry mill corn into ethanol: thus the dry milling share will continue to rise for the foreseeable future . a 2007 report by the national renewable energy laboratory ( nrel ) summarized recent reports on the neb for corn ethanol . results varied widely , but most reports using similar assumptions found the neb for corn ethanol to be positive . in 2004 , usda reported that , assuming best production practices and state of the art processing technology , the neb for corn ethanol ( based on 2001 data ) was a positive 1.67 — that is , 67% more energy was returned from a gallon of ethanol than was used in its production . other researchers have found much lower neb values under less optimistic assumptions , leading to some dispute over corn - to - ethanol's representative neb . a 2006 review of several major corn - to - ethanol neb analyses found that , when co - products are properly accounted for , the corn - to - ethanol process has a positive neb that is improving with changing technology . this result was confirmed by another comprehensive study that found an neb of 1.25 for corn ethanol .