1 ( the senate bill ) . the house bill , but not the senate bill , would have specifically created new programs to support school modernization , renovation , and repair at the elementary , secondary , and postsecondary education levels . both the house bill and the senate bill would have provided general funds for education to support state fiscal stabilization . this section will provide an overview of the relevant programs and corresponding prohibitions on the use of funds . because questions have been raised regarding the previous versions and actions taken by the house and senate , the proposed provisions of the house and senate bills follow the enacted provisions in arra . the establishment clause of the first amendment provides that "congress shall make no law respecting an establishment of religion.... " the u.s. supreme court has construed the establishment clause , in general , to mean that government is prohibited from sponsoring or financing religious instruction or indoctrination . the court has interpreted the establishment clause in numerous lines of decisions ( eg , government aid to religious organizations , access to public facilities for religious purposes , etc. ) the court has drawn a constitutional distinction between aid that flows directly to sectarian schools and aid that benefits such schools indirectly as a result of a voucher or tax benefit program . generally , restrictions on direct aid are greater than restrictions on indirect aid . in direct aid programs , such as the funding provided for modernization in arra , a government program provides aid directly to a religious organization or program . the court requires that direct aid serve a secular purpose and not lead to excessive entanglement with religion . it also requires that the aid be secular in nature , that its distribution be based on religiously neutral criteria , and that it not be used for religious indoctrination . in a series of cases in the 1970s , the court limited the use of public funds for the construction and maintenance of religious schools under the establishment clause . in 1971 , the court upheld as constitutional a federal program that provided grants to colleges , including religiously affiliated colleges , for the construction of needed facilities , so long as the facilities were not used for religious worship or sectarian instruction . in 1973 , the court upheld a program in which a state issued revenue bonds to finance the construction of facilities at institutions of higher education , including those with a religious affiliation . the program met constitutional requirements because it barred the use of the funds for any facility used for sectarian instruction or religious worship . also in 1973 , although the court had just upheld aid for construction and repairs to religious institutions of higher education , the court held that public funds could not subsidize maintenance and repair of sectarian elementary and secondary school facilities , including costs for heating , lighting , renovation , and cleaning . because establishment clause restrictions are heightened in elementary and secondary school settings due to the impressionable nature of those students , the court imposes greater restrictions on aid provided to elementary and secondary schools .