unlike h.r . 1256 , the senate version of the fda tobacco legislation contains a provision , discussed below , that is designed to address these first amendment concerns . this section also examines federal preemption of state law in the context of the fda tobacco legislation , the federal cigarette labeling and advertising act , and three supreme court cases . 1256 / s. 982 would give fda broad authority to regulate tobacco product marketing if it determined that such regulation was appropriate to protect the public health . the hhs secretary would be required to make that determination based on a consideration of the "risks and benefits to the population as a whole," including whether the agency's actions would discourage current users from quitting or encourage others to start using tobacco products . this section will review briefly the u.s. supreme court's decisions on government regulation of advertising and other forms of commercial speech , before analyzing the fda's 1996 rule in the context of such decisions . in central hudson gas & electric corp. v. public service commission ( 1980 ) , the court established a four - part test for deciding the constitutionality of commercial speech regulation . first , in order to be protected by the first amendment , the commercial speech must concern lawful activity and not be false or misleading . second , the government must demonstrate that by restricting such speech , it is seeking to further a substantial government interest . third , the restrictions must directly advance that interest . fourth , there has to be a reasonable fit between the type of restrictions imposed and the government's objectives — in other words the regulation cannot be "more extensive than is necessary to service that interest. the u.s. supreme court has issued a series of decisions striking down government restrictions on commercial speech , including tobacco product advertising . in the 2001 case , lorillard tobacco co. v. reilly ( 2001 ) , the court found a number of massachusetts state regulations restricting outdoor and point - of - sale advertising for cigars and smokeless tobacco products to be unconstitutional . the court determined that the regulations restricted speech more than was reasonable to advance the state's interest in reducing underage ( i.e. , illegal ) use of tobacco products and , thus , failed to meet the fourth part of the central hudson test . banning all outdoor tobacco advertisements within 1,000 feet of a school or playground , in conjunction with other zoning restrictions , argued the court , "would constitute a nearly complete ban on the communication of truthful information about smokeless tobacco and cigars to adult consumers. the court found that the restrictions on outdoor advertising of cigars and smokeless tobacco were overbroad in that they prohibited advertising "in a substantial portion of the major metropolitan areas of massachusetts," included oral communications , and imposed burdens on retailers with limited advertising budgets . the court also upheld challenges by smokeless tobacco and cigar companies to the outdoor advertising restrictions on the grounds that adults have a right to information and the tobacco industry has a right to communicate truthful speech on legal products .