the committee may then hold a hearing on the nomination . after the hearing , the committee has several options: ( 1 ) it may report the nomination to the senate favorably , unfavorably , or without recommendation ; ( 2 ) it may vote against reporting the nomination ; or ( 3 ) it may choose to take no action at all . typically , if the committee votes on a nomination , it votes to report favorably ; however , in a very small number of cases , the committee has voted against reporting a nomination , or has voted to report the nomination either unfavorably or without recommendation . if a majority of the committee agrees to any one of the motions to report , the nomination moves to the full senate . note that , in the event of a tie vote , the nomination fails to be reported by the committee . additionally , the nomination remains in committee if the committee votes against reporting , if there is no committee vote on the nomination , or if the committee votes to table the nomination . once a lower court nomination is reported to the full senate by the judiciary committee , the nomination is listed on the senate's executive calendar , with senate consideration of the nomination scheduled by the majority leader . if the senate , when voting on whether to confirm , rejects the nomination ( as has happened on rare occasions ) , it is returned to the president with a resolution of disapproval . if a judicial nomination does not receive a senate vote , the nomination ultimately will either be withdrawn by the president or returned to the president by the secretary of the senate upon a senate adjournment or recess of more than 30 days . this report identifies , from the 76 th congress ( 1939-1941 ) through the first session of the 113 th congress ( january 3 , 2014 ) , 19 u.s. circuit court or district court nominations that received other than a favorable vote from the senate , the senate judiciary committee , or both . the vast majority of unconfirmed nominees from 1945 through 2013 — approximately 90% — failed to receive a committee vote in the senate judiciary committee . the procedural route for a circuit or district court nomination is as follows: once the president has submitted such a nomination to the senate , it is almost invariably referred to the judiciary committee . the white nomination , as table 2 shows , was reported favorably by the judiciary committee , only to be rejected by the full senate . among these 19 nominations were 18 ( or all but one of the nominations ) on which the judiciary committee voted other than to report favorably . the only nomination that did not receive a vote other than to report favorably was that of ronnie l. white to the district court for the eastern district of missouri . table 1 , below , summarizes the final committee and floor dispositions of these 19 nominations .