law. some have also suggested including ruds that specifically address parental rights . one proposed understanding , for example , states that parents are primarily responsible for their children's upbringing and development and for making decisions related to the best interest of the child . there has been significant debate regarding what impact , if any , u.s. ratification of crc might have on domestic abortion policy . the ambiguous nature of some crc provisions relating to these issues has left the door open for broad interpretation by both opponents and supporters of the convention . critics of u.s. ratification have raised questions regarding the convention's possible impact on state parental notification laws for children undergoing abortion . in particular , they are concerned about article 16 ( 1 ) , which states , "no child shall be subjected to arbitrary or unlawful interference with his or her privacy , family , home , or correspondence. some fear that this "right to privacy" could ultimately allow children to choose to have abortions without notifying or receiving guidance from their parents . opponents of the convention express concern with crc committee decisions that appear to criticize countries that restrict abortion . additionally , some have argued that article ( 24 ) ( 2 ) ( d ) of crc , which states that states parties "shall ... take appropriate measures ... to ensure appropriate pre - natal and post - natal health care for mothers," could be interpreted to mean that children may undergo abortions without parental notification . supporters of the convention contend that the treaty does not take a position on abortion or when a child's life begins . they maintain that crc text allows individual countries to interpret the treaty in a way that aligns with their national abortion policies . they note that countries with strict anti - abortion laws , such as the holy see ( vatican ) , the philippines , and ireland , have ratified the convention . a similar statement was made by administration officials in early 2015 . this report provides a brief history of the convention and outlines its objectives and structure , including the role and responsibilities of the treaty's monitoring body , the committee on the rights of the child . it examines u.s. policy toward crc , including the positions of past and current administrations and congressional perspectives . the report also addresses selected policy issues that the 114 th congress might take into account if considering ratification of crc — including the treaty's possible impact on u.s. sovereignty , federal and state laws , and parental rights . other issues for possible consideration include the effectiveness of the convention in protecting children's rights , and its role as a u.s. foreign policy instrument . u.n. member states first collectively recognized the rights of children in the universal declaration of human rights , a non - binding resolution adopted by the u.n. general assembly in 1948 . the declaration states , "motherhood and childhood are entitled to special care and assistance . all children , whether born in or out of wedlock , shall enjoy the same social protection. u.n. member states further enunciated children's rights by unanimously adopting the declaration on the rights of the child in 1959 .