as noted , h.r . 1586 would impose special taxing rules on bonuses paid to employees of fannie mae , freddie mac , and certain entities that receive assistance over $5 billion under eesa after december 31 , 2007 . one of these excise taxes is imposed on private foundations that make expenditures for activities such as lobbying or conducting voter registration drives . the initial tax is equal to 20% of the expenditures , and an additional tax is imposed at the rate of 100% if the expenditures are not corrected ( eg , recovered ) in a timely manner . another example of this type of excise tax is where a private foundation that fails to distribute an adequate amount of income during the year is taxed at a rate of 30% on the undistributed income , with an additional 100% tax imposed if the income remains undistributed . for one of the private foundation excise taxes , the additional tax is imposed at a rate of 200% — a private foundation with excess holdings in a business entity is initially subject to a tax equal to 10% of the holdings' value , and an additional tax at a rate of 200% is assessed if the foundation fails to address the issue by the end of the taxable period . although there is no inherent constitutional concern with these taxes on private foundations , there is the strong implication that they are punitive in nature . one could argue that h.r . 1586 and s. 651 are atypical tax legislation and , therefore , the traditional deference to a legislature's choice of classification may not be appropriate . tax classifications are usually given deference because they are "a device for fitting tax programs to local needs and usages in order to achieve an equitable distribution of the tax burden" and it is inappropriate for a court , which is not in a position to be familiar with these things , to second guess the legislature . it could be argued that this rationale is not present here , as the legislative history of the bills ( particularly h.r . 1586 ) may evidence a punitive intent , aimed primarily at one company , that is not typically seen in tax legislation . under this argument , these expressed motivations targeting specific taxpayers may lead a court to question the legitimacy of the government's interest . this argument may be stronger for h.r . 1586 , where the legislative history containing statements targeting one company is more developed , the bill applies to fewer entities , and the 90% rate may be reaching confiscatory levels ( arguably making the proposal look less like a tax and more like punishment ) . on the other hand , courts may be reluctant to adopt this analysis in light of the fact that both proposals apply broadly to companies receiving a threshold amount of taxpayer money ( i.e. , the bills are not limited only to companies mentioned in the legislative history ) . a court searching for an adequate justification for the bills and their classifications that is independent from any desire to target a select group of bonus recipients and payors would likely consider the bills' legislative history .