2454 as passed by the house of representative . avgas ( aviation gasoline ) is a high octane fuel used in light aircraft powered by reciprocating spark - ignition engines . crude oil classification dfm ( diesel fuel marine ) has been used in all shipboard propulsion plants ( diesel , gas turbine , and steam - boiler ) since 1975 . its nato equivalent is f - 76 . 2 diesel fuel ) is the primary fuel for ground mobility vehicles . fsii stands for fuel systems icing inhibitor fob ( free on board ) is a trade term requiring the seller to deliver goods on board a vessel designated by the buyer . the seller fulfills its obligations to deliver when the goods have passed over the ship's rail . when used in trade terms , the word "free" means the seller has an obligation to deliver goods to a named place for transfer to a carrier . contracts involving international transportation often contain abbreviated trade terms that describe matters such as the time and place of delivery and payment , when the risk of loss shifts from the seller to the buyer , as well as who pays the costs of freight and insurance . jet a - 1 ( ja1 ) is a civilian - aviation kerosene - based turbine fuel adopted by international commercial aviation . its astm specification is d16555 ( jet a - 1 ) , and identified by nato as f - 35 . jet a , normally available in the united states has the same flash point ( 100 "f ) as jet a - 1 but a higher freeze point . jet a ( ja ) is civilian - aviation kerosene type of jet fuel ( similar to ja - 1 ) , produced to an astm specification and normally only available in the united states . it has the same flash point as jet a - 1 but a higher freeze point maximum ( - 40°c ) . it is supplied under astm d1655 ( jet a ) specification . jet b is a distillate covering the naphtha and kerosene fractions . it can be used as an alternative to jet a - 1 but because it is more difficult to handle ( higher flammability ) , there is only significant demand in very cold climates where its better cold weather performance is important . it is supplied in canada under canadian specification is can / cgsb 3.23 . jp - 4 ( jp for "jet propellant" ) is the military equivalent of jet b with the addition of corrosion inhibitor and anti - icing additives ; it meets the requirements of the u.s. military specification mil - dtl - 5624u grade jp - 4 . ( as of january 5 , 2004 , jp - 4 and 5 meet the same u.s. military specification ) . jp - 4 also meets the requirements of the british specification def stan 91-88 avtag / fsii ( formerly derd 2454 ) . its nato code is f - 40 .