section 2323. . the memorandum also stated that the army's goals for assistance to hbcus remain in effect as aspirational goals and that pre - existing agreements with hbcus could be continued until they lapse because the district court's decision was prospective and governed only contracting and other actions initiated after february 26 , 2009 . the 111 th congress responded to the district court's decision , in part , by establishing a new program to assist hbcus , hsis , annhis , mmis , and other msis in performing "defense - related research , development , testing , and evaluation activities. among the forms of assistance that defense agencies may provide under this program are grants , scholarships , fellowships , and the acquisition of research equipment and instrumentation . on september 9 , 2011 , the obama administration proposed amending the far in light of the decisions by the federal circuit and the district court in rothe . the administration proposes to delete those portions of the far which govern price evaluation adjustments to bids or offers submitted by small disadvantaged businesses for defense contracts , and which are rooted solely in section 1207 of the department of defense authorization act of 1987 ( i.e. , subpart 19.11 and the corresponding clause at far 52.219-23 ) . it also proposes to relocate and otherwise amend those provisions of the far which govern monetary incentives and evaluation factors for subcontracting with small disadvantaged businesses , and which are rooted in the small business act ( i.e. , subpart 19.12 and corresponding clauses far 52.219-24 , 52.219-25 and 52.219-26 ) . according to the administration , the latter provisions "were not at issue in the rothe decision , and therefore retain their legal status. as numerous commentators and the sba have recognized , the federal circuit's decision in rothe could have significant implications for the percentage of federal contract dollars awarded to minority - owned small businesses and for other federal contracting programs for small businesses . the demise of dod's price evaluation adjustment authority under section 1207 is not , in itself , necessarily all that significant , in part because other provisions of law have precluded dod from exercising this authority for over a decade , as is discussed below . potentially more serious is the effect that the rothe decision could have on other programs for small disadvantaged businesses , which minority - owned small businesses are presumed to be . the rothe decision arguably suggests grounds upon which potential plaintiffs might be able to successfully challenge these programs . the rothe decision could also potentially leave programs for women - owned small businesses vulnerable to constitutional challenges . while not subject to strict scrutiny like the program for minority contractors at issue in rothe , these programs are subject to heightened scrutiny rather than rational basis review , which is the most deferential form of judicial scrutiny . other programs for small businesses should be unaffected by the rothe decision . ยง 2323 should cease .