aliens in the united states without authorization ( i.e. , illegally present ) are ineligible for federal public benefits , except for specified emergency services . nonetheless , controversies and confusion abound , particularly regarding the eligibility of families comprised of people with a mix of immigration and citizenship status , such as an lpr married to an unauthorized alien with u.s. citizen children . a corollary issue is foreign nationals who have temporary employment authorizations and social security numbers , but who are not lprs . although it does not address the legality of the alien's immigration status , the internal revenue code makes clear that "resident aliens" are generally taxed in the same manner as u.s. citizens . those who are temporary legal residents or "quasi - legal" migrants pose a particular dilemma to some because they are permitted to work and have likely paid into the system that finances a particular benefit , such as social security or a tax refund , for which they may not be eligible . unintended consequences , most notably when tightening up the identification requirements to stymie false claims of citizenship results in denying benefits to u.s. citizens , add complexity to the debate . these issues are arising in the context of specific legislation on due process rights , access to health care , tax liabilities and refunds , educational opportunities , and means - tested federal assistance . in the 110 th congress , senate action on comprehensive immigration reform legislation stalled at the end of june 2007 after several weeks of intensive floor debate . they further argue that it would serve as a magnet for future flows of unauthorized migrants . some express concern that potential terrorists could use refugee status or asylum as an avenue for entry into the united states , especially aliens from trouble spots in the mideast , northern africa and south asia . some assert that the non - governmental organizations and contractors for the united nations that assist displaced people are expanding the definition of "refugee" to cover people never before considered refugees . others argue that — given the religious , ethnic , and political violence in various countries around the world — it is becoming more difficult to differentiate the persecuted from the persecutors . others maintain that current law does not offer adequate protections for people fleeing human rights violations and gender - based abuses that occur around the world , or that it is time to re - think u.s. refugee policy . as a signatory to the united nations protocol relating to the status of refugees , the united states agrees that it will not return an alien to a country where his life or freedom would be threatened . a refugee is a person fleeing his or her country because of persecution or a well - founded fear of persecution on account of race , religion , nationality , membership in a particular social group , or political opinion . asylum - seekers are individuals who apply for refugee protections after they have arrived in the united states . those granted asylum as well as those who are determined to be refugees are eligible to become lprs after one year in the united states .