appendix a . questions for state officials appendix b . detailed tables of state program . in addition , h.r . 632 would authorize appropriations of $5 million annually for fy2009 through fy2013 for grants to states to develop and enhance silver alert plans . no time period is specified . the grants would be distributed by doj on an equitable basis throughout the united states . the federal share of the grant would not exceed 50% . the focus of this report is on those state alert systems for missing adults . crs sought to obtain detailed information from states about their alert systems to better inform congress about their activities as well as analyze the similarities and differences among various state alert systems . in general , these alert systems are intended to rapidly disperse information about a missing person to law enforcement entities , and often the public . this type of alert system is different from the federally funded safe return program in that safe return maintains a database of individuals who have been pre - identified as being at risk of wandering due to alzheimer's disease and related dementia and choose to enroll in the program . in the event that an individual enrolled in the safe return program does go missing , safe return can provide information and a physical description of the missing individual , which can assist family members in filing a missing persons report and help law enforcement agencies , regardless of whether the state has an alert system , in search and recovery efforts . provided that the missing individual is wearing identification , safe return can also facilitate reuniting missing persons with their caregivers . based on requests from some members of congress for information regarding the administration of alert systems for missing adults , crs sought to identify states that were believed to have missing adult alert systems and contact those states to obtain further information . using information from a variety of sources , including recent news articles , policy publications , and discussions with various stakeholders from organizations such as the alzheimer's association and project lifesaver international , inc. , crs identified 11 states with alert systems for missing adults — colorado , delaware , florida , georgia , kentucky , north carolina , ohio , oklahoma , rhode island , texas , and virginia . crs did not conduct a search of state statutes or survey all 50 states to determine whether each state had implemented an alert system for missing adults . thus , the 11 identified states may not be an exhaustive list of all states with alert systems for vulnerable missing adults . for the 11 selected states , crs reviewed authorizing legislation , executive orders , and regulations to obtain program data on these state alert systems . crs also contacted officials in each of the states to obtain additional information . based on key areas of interest in state alert systems for missing adults that have been expressed by some members of congress , crs prepared a detailed list of questions for state officials covering the following attributes ( see appendix a for a copy of the questions submitted to state officials ) : 1 .