both the eu and the united states heavily support their agricultural sectors . although many in congress have historically defended u.s. farm support programs as a means to ensure that the united states has continued access to the "most abundant , safest , and cheapest food supplies in the world," long - standing criticisms and continued debate have challenged the extent of and need for government support of farm programs . these sources also provide , although to a more limited extent , estimates of support for non - commodity programs , such as agricultural conservation programs , rural development , agro - forestry , bioenergy , and related farm programs . these information sources also highlight differences between the united states and the european union , not only in terms of their respective policy priorities , but also in terms of farm sector differences . to date , however , non - commodity support still constitutes a very small share of total farm - level support , compared to farm production support . some argue that the failure of the united states and eu to reform their respective farm support programs has contributed to delays in the doha round of multilateral trade negotiations within the world trade organization ( wto ) . the eu has less total land in farming , but as many as six to seven times the number of farm operators . such differences can affect how the available data and information may be interpreted , and caution is needed when comparing any available data translated into a per - unit basis , such as expenditures per acre or per farm , between these countries . putting aside limitations of the data , these information sources are useful in comparing farm program support across countries . the data indicate that , since the mid - 1980s , total farm support in the united states and eu has declined as a share of total gross farm receipts . in general , support for commodity programs has decreased , whereas the support for non - commodity programs , such a farmland conservation and certain types of rural development programs , has increased . however , support for non - commodity programs still accounts for a small share ( less than 1% ) of farm receipts . as a share of overall farm receipts , support for such programs is slightly greater in the united states , where support for non - commodity programs accounts for less than 0.7% of receipts , than in the eu , where it accounts for less than 0.3% of receipts annually . however , in terms of total spending , the data show that the eu provides more support , in aggregate , than the united states for both production - based programs and non - commodity programs , such a farmland conservation and agri - environmental programs . the eu is one of the united states' chief agricultural trading partners and also a major competitor in world food markets .