acronym referenc . next , benchmark assessments are discussed . benchmark assessments are also not required by federal law , but they are widely used by districts and states . the next section provides a discussion of international assessments . it will also highlight some of the issues to consider when making inferences from high - stakes assessments vs. low - stakes assessments . nclb greatly increased the emphasis on student assessment . under nclb , student scores on state assessments are used as key indicators in an accountability system that determines whether schools are making progress with respect to student achievement . some have viewed this shift towards test - based accountability as a positive move because it places more emphasis on developing rigorous content standards in reading , mathematics , and science and teaching to the standards . test - based accountability as implemented by nclb also leads to increased attention on traditionally underperforming subgroups of students , including disadvantaged students , students with disabilities , and lep students . on the other hand , test - based accountability has been criticized for narrowing the curriculum and focusing all instruction on the tested subjects of reading and mathematics at the expense of other subjects . the current practice of test - based accountability may also create incentives to set low expectations for proficiency and to focus on a subset of children who are near the proficiency level instead of focusing on children at all achievement levels . under nclb , schools are held accountable for the performance of each of these subgroups , and each subgroup shares a common goal of reaching 100% proficiency in reading and mathematics by 2014 . designing an accountability system in this way has increased the attention given to the achievement of certain subgroups that may have been previously masked by overall student performance . in general , disaggregating data by subgroups has been seen as a positive step in terms of equity in education because the performance of all subgroups "counts" towards ayp . supporters of disaggregation believe that it leads to increased access to rigorous academic curriculum for students who otherwise may not have had access to such curriculum due to low expectations of performance . along with the increased attention to subgroups of students , there has been increased attention to the achievement gaps between white students and minority students and between economically advantaged students and disadvantaged students . over the last several decades , a general goal of public education has been to "close the achievement gap," and thus , improve equity in education . by disaggregating assessment results , nclb has led to consistent measurement of the achievement gap and allows researchers to examine the size of the achievement gap over time . one of the unintended consequences of nclb accountability is the way instruction may be focused on students just below the "proficient" level , possibly at the expense of other students . under nclb's test - based accountability system , the goal is for 100% of students to reach proficiency by 2014 . in an effort to raise the percentage of proficient students , schools and teachers may target instructional time and resources towards those students who are near proficiency .