further guidance is expected . most of this spending is for the economic recovery payments . most of the general oversight provisions appear to cover activities and provisions associated with division a rather than the entire law . the general oversight provisions might be further categorized into two groups: appropriations to oversight entities including offices of inspector general ( ig ) , the government accountability office ( gao ) , and a newly established recovery accountability and transparency board ( ratb ) ; and a number of substantive provisions , including establishment of ratb and enumeration of numerous reporting requirements . appropriations to igs , gao , and ratb are included predominately in division a . the provisions are distributed among 12 titles in division a and one title in division b . in total , 23 igs receive $254.75 million in 25 separate appropriations . igs in all 15 executive departments receive appropriations , ranging from the department of veterans affairs on the low side ( $1 million in a single appropriation ) to the department of health and human services on the high side ( $48.25 million in two appropriations ) . arra provides funding to be available to igs with widely varying periods of availability . for the ig at the department of state , for example , funds are available until the end of fy2010 . other igs variously have funds available until the end of fy2011 , fy2012 , fy2013 , or "until expended" ( i.e. , "no - year" funds ) . gao receives $25 million , available through the end of fy2010 , and ratb receives $84 million , available through the end of fy2011 . some appropriations specify that funds are to be used specifically for oversight of arra - related activities , but others essentially are supplemental appropriations that do not restrict use of funds to arra - related purposes . it should be noted that ratb has authority to transfer up to 100% of its funds to any office of inspector general , the office of management and budget , the general services administration , and an advisory panel for ratb that arra establishes ( division a , title xv , section 1524 ( f ) ) . in total , the appropriations provided to these oversight - oriented entities sum to $363.75 million . the second group of general oversight provisions is included only in division a — chiefly in titles xv and xvi — albeit in considerable variety . there are 12 entries each corresponding to one title of division a . however , the entry for title viii , departments of labor , health and human services , and education , and related agencies , also discusses the state fiscal stabilization fund ( title xiv ) which received appropriations for education programs . table 4 indicates the total discretionary budget authority for fy2009-fy2019 provided by title in division a . table 5 and table 6 , at the end of this section , provide additional information on appropriations in division a , including funding by department and agency . of the $311.20 billion in total funding , $288.73 billion is identified as for fy2009 .