none of the legislation was enacted . eisa expanded the rfs and restricted the definition of biomass . as described above , the renewable biomass definition for the rfs under eisa excludes biomass removed from federal lands and crops from forested lands as biofuel feedstocks . advocates for this definition include groups who favor minimal land disturbance ( for ecological reasons as well as to sustain sequestered carbon ) and are concerned that incentives to use wood waste might increase land disturbance , especially timber harvesting on federal lands . opponents of this definition include groups who seek to use materials from federal lands and other forested lands ( i.e. , not tree plantations ) as a source of renewable energy while possibly contributing to long - term , sustainable management of those lands . advocates of the renewable biomass definition in the 2008 farm bill include groups who seek to use the potentially substantial volumes of waste woody biomass from federal lands and other ( non - plantation ) forest lands ( eg , waste from timber harvests , from pre - commercial thinnings , or from wildfire fuel reduction treatments ) as a source of renewable energy . opponents include groups who seek to preserve forested land and federal land , and who are concerned that incentives for using wood waste would encourage activities that could disturb forest lands , possibly damaging important wildlife habitats and water quality , as well as releasing carbon from forest soils . it is not clear whether the biomass definitions in the 2008 farm bill and in eisa constitute a barrier to biomass feedstock development for conversion to liquid fuels . concerns for some landowners and business entities that wish to enter the biomass feedstock market include economic stability , risk / reward ratio , revenue generation , land use designation , and lifecycle greenhouse gas emissions . additionally , the feedstock development potential of woody biomass varies by region . for example , biomass stock tends to be located on private forest land in the southeastern united states and on federal land in the western united states . 95-620 ) as a type of alternate fuel . however , the term was first defined in the energy security act of 1980 ( p.l . 96-294 ) , in title ii , biomass energy and alcohol fuels , as "any organic matter which is available on a renewable basis , including agricultural crops and agricultural wastes and residues , wood and wood wastes and residues , animal wastes , municipal wastes , and aquatic plants. for example , in the 113 th congress , the house passed h.r . 2 , which would have allowed indian tribes , from fy2014-fy2018 , to carry out demonstration projects to promote biomass energy production on indian forest land and in nearby communities by providing tribes with reliable supplies of woody biomass from federal lands . however , there also have been efforts in congress to stall or prevent the use of biomass for energy production , which in turn would impact biomass feedstock development . for instance , there were repeated attempts to eliminate certain portions of the renewable fuel standard ( h.r . 4849 ; 113 th congress ) .