a retiree cannot receive both crsc and crdp benefits . the retiree may choose whichever is more financially advantageous to him or her and may change the type of benefit to be received during an annual o pen s eason to maximize the payments received . there are currently two groups of retirees who are not eligible for crdp benefits ( see figure 4 ) . the first group is nondisability military retirees with service - connected disabilities that have been rated by the va at 40% or less . as previously discussed , the fy2008 ndaa extended crsc eligibility to chapter 61 retirees who retired due to combat - related physical disability prior to completing 20 years of service . this process is not automatic ; it is application - driven . crsc payments will generally be equal to the amount of va disability compensation that has been determined to be combat - related . the legislation does not end the requirement that the retiree's military retired pay be reduced by the amount of the total va disability compensation the retiree receives . instead , crsc beneficiaries are to receive the financial equivalent of concurrent receipt as "special compensation," but the statute states explicitly that it is not retired pay per se . crsc payments are paid from the department of defense military retirement fund . as of september 2017 , a total of 90,740 retirees were receiving crsc ( see figure 1 ) . with the extension of crsc to chapter 61 disability retirees , the special rule factors significantly into the concurrent receipt calculations . for those whose crsc payment is limited or eliminated by the special rule , there may be a perceived inequity between crsc recipients with 20 or more years of service ( longevity retirees ) and chapter 61 ( disability retirees who generally have less than 20 years of service ) retirees . to resolve this potential issue , congress could modify or eliminate the special rule or limit its application to specific military operations . the fy2004 ndaa authorized , for the first time , actual concurrent receipt for retirees with at least a 50% disability , regardless of the cause of disability . however , the amount of concurrent receipt was to be phased in over a 10-year period , from 2004 to 2013 , except for 100% disabled retirees , who became entitled to immediate concurrent receipt effective january 1 , 2005 . depending on the degree of disability , the initial amount of retired pay that the retiree could have restored would vary from $100 to $750 per month , or the actual amount of the offset , whichever was less . in 2014 , all offsets ended and military retirees with at least a 50% disability became eligible to receive their entire military retired pay and va disability compensation . if the member electing the lump sum payment is not eligible for crdp ( i.e. , the retired pay offset applies ) , the va will withhold disability payments until the sum of the amount withheld over time equals the gross amount of the lump sum payment .