however , the court pointed out that these issues can be reconciled . compounding drugs that were withdrawn or removed from the market for safety reasons 3 . compounding finished drugs from bulk active ingredients that are not components of fda - approved drugs , without an fda sanctioned investigational new drug application 4 . receiving , storing , or using drug substances without first obtaining written assurance from the supplier that each lot has been made in an fda - registered facility 5 . receiving , storing , or using drug components not guaranteed to meet official compendia requirements 6 . using commercial scale manufacturing or testing equipment for compounding drug products 7 . compounding drugs for third parties who resell to individual patients or offering compounded drug products at wholesale to other state licensed persons or other commercial entities for resale 8 . compounding drug products that are commercially available in the marketplace or that are essentially copies of commercially available fda - approved drug products 9 . failing to operate in conformance with applicable state law regulating the practice of pharmacy . the fda indicated that the list of acts was not exhaustive , and that other factors may be appropriate to consider in enforcement actions . in september 2004 , 10 licensed pharmacies specializing in drug compounding brought suit challenging fda's authority to regulate compounded drugs . in medical center pharmacy v. ashcroft ( later changed to medical center pharmacy v. gonzalez and then medical center pharmacy v. mukasey ) , plaintiffs sought , among other things , a declaration that drugs compounded by licensed pharmacists were not "new drugs" per se under the ffdca . compounding is considered a conventional component of the practice of pharmacy and has historically been regulated at the state level . the federal food , drug , and cosmetic act ( ffdca ) , as amended , establishes certain minimum standards for the manufacturing , marketing , and distribution of drugs , and authorizes the fda to ensure that drugs and other products marketed in the united states are safe and effective for their intended uses . the act prohibits any person from introducing a "new drug" into interstate commerce unless it is approved by the fda . a "new drug" is defined by the act as "[a]ny drug ( except a new animal drug or an animal feed bearing or containing a new animal drug ) the composition of which is such that such drug is not generally recognized … as safe and effective for use under the condition prescribed , recommended , or suggested in the labeling thereof. in order to be determined to be safe and effective , new drugs are subject to a lengthy approval process , which is supervised by the fda . the ffdca also contains requirements preventing drugs from being adulterated or misbranded . until 1997 with the enactment of the fda modernization act of 1997 ( fdama , discussed below ) , congress had not explicitly addressed whether compounded drugs had to meet these requirements of the ffdca . for approximately the first 50 years of the ffdca , pharmacists compounded drugs without getting fda approval for these drugs , and regulation of drug compounding was left to the states .