where is the care provided ? who pays for the care ? a crosswalk of the recommendations of the four federal reports mentioned above in the context of the issues facing the mental health care delivery system is included in the appendix . historically , mental illness has not been as well understood as other physical illness . this has led to disparities in the treatment and financing of mental illness . the mental health care system currently faces a number of structural and functional issues . experts have called for its transformation and provide numerous recommendations . transformation of the mental health care system , in this view , would require incorporating in a timely fashion evidence - based practices as part of routine practice , resolving workforce shortage issues , ensuring access to care by removing financial barriers , coordinating mental health care with general health care and social services , and developing a way to systematically measure and improve the quality of care delivered . while each of these recommendations may result in some benefits , evidence suggests a comprehensive transformation of the mental health system could be necessary to ensure the availability and accessibility of quality mental health care to all individuals who need it . while it is recognized that mental health care is also provided within the department of veterans affairs ( va ) and the department of defense's ( dod's ) military health system , a detailed analysis of these systems is beyond the scope of this report . measurements of the quality of mental health care are inadequate to improve quality and transform the system . in the 1990s , a number of federal reports on the state of the nation's mental health system have called for its reform: mental health: report of the surgeon general ( surgeon general's report ) ,1996 . president's new freedom commission report ( freedom commission report ) , 2003 . transforming mental health care in america report ( action agenda ) , 2005 . improving the quality of health care for mental and substance - use conditions report ( iom report ) , 2005 . these reports are consistent in their recommendations for reforming the mental health care system . they recommend improving the evidence - base for treatment practices , overcoming stigma , improving quality of mental health care and its measurement , addressing workforce shortage issues , coordinating care , and addressing financial barriers to mental health care . the reports differ in their area of primary focus and the extent to which they assign specific roles to the public and private entities in order to reform the mental health care system . for example , the surgeon general's report and the freedom commission report provide general guidelines for reform , whereas the action agenda and the iom report attempt to translate the guidelines into action steps . this section analyzes the issues facing the mental health care delivery system , including evidence - based practices , access to care , financing mental health care , coordination of care , and quality of care . options that congress may consider are described in each area .