the final cost is unpredictable . immediate , significant changes are required to rescue the program . however , the risks are so large considering the available time that we recommend immediate development of contingency plans to revert to paper operations . the oig report acknowledged that the bureau had taken important actions , such as management changes and better oversight , to address these problems , but stated that "significant risks remain for the 2010 decennial. similarly , the government accountability office pointed out vulnerabilities in the bureau's management of its information technology systems , including the handheld computers . in a november 6 , 2008 , press release to announce its presidential transition website , gao included the upcoming census among its 13 "urgent issues ... needing the attention of [then - ] president - elect obama and the 111 th congress during the transition and the first year of the new administration and congress. the 2010 census , in large part because of it problems and a substantial total estimated cost , remained one of the areas gao designated as "high risk" in a january 2009 update of its high - risk series . among the concerns gao noted in a march 2009 report were the following: the dress rehearsal was originally conceived to provide a comprehensive end - to - end test of key 2010 census operations ; however , ... because of the problems encountered with the handheld devices , among other things , testing was curtailed . as a result , although several critical operations underwent end - to - end testing in the dress rehearsal , others did not . according to the associate director for the 2010 census , the bureau tested approximately 23 of 44 key operations during the dress rehearsal . examples of key operations that underwent end - to - end testing ... are address canvassing and group quarters validation . an example of a key operation that was not tested is the largest field operation — nonresponse follow - up... . in december 2008 , after additional development and improvements to the handheld computers , the bureau conducted a limited field test for address canvassing , intended to assess software functionality in an operational environment . we observed this test and determined that users were generally satisfied with the performance of the handhelds... . however , the test ... included only a limited subset of functionality to be used during the 2009 address canvassing operations . gao further observed that although nonresponse follow - up was paper based in previous censuses , the paper - based nrfu in 2010 would rely on "newly developed systems" that had "not yet been fully tested in a census - like environment.... any significant change to an existing it system introduces the risk that the system may not work as intended ; therefore , testing all systems after changes have been made ... is critical to the success of the 2010 census. gao noted that testing had "only recently started" for the 2010 nrfu , including the it systems and infrastructure necessary to support this operation and certain other activities , such as group - quarters enumeration .