attorneys' offices . as mentioned , organized crime in the united states has taken on an increasingly transnational nature . this shift has been facilitated by factors such as economic globalization and improved communications technology . organized crime activities across the globe do not appear to be waning , and the national intelligence council has estimated that by 2025 , the "relative power" of criminal networks will continue to rise , and some countries could even be taken over and run by these networks . the section below provides a detailed discussion of the organized crime groups that operate in the united states , the activities of these groups , and the domestic industries that have been and may continue to be threatened by organized crime . one way of analyzing the organized crime threat is by examining the most prominent organized crime groups operating in the united states . the fbi , for instance , provides information on the various organized crime groups in order to present a picture of organized crime in the united states . a second method is by examining those areas of society threatened most by the activities of organized crime ( such as the economy or national security ) , regardless of which group is committing the crime . the organized crime and racketeering section ( ocrs ) at doj , for example , presents the organized crime threats to the united states in terms of the principal threat areas , rather than the individual groups committing crimes . do these evolving threats from organized crime require new tools to combat it ? another issue that congress may wish to consider is the adequacy of the resources the federal government allocates to organized crime . of note , the term "international organized crime" includes not only those organized crime groups operating outside the borders of the united states , but within the u.s. borders as well . as mentioned earlier , the council noted that international organized criminals have and may penetrate the energy and other strategic sectors of the economy ; provide logistical and other support to terrorists , foreign intelligence services , and governments ; smuggle / traffic people and contraband goods into the united states ; exploit the united states and international financial system to move illicit funds ; use cyberspace to target u.s. victims and infrastructure ; manipulate securities exchanges and perpetrate sophisticated frauds ; corrupt or seek to corrupt public officials in the united states and abroad ; and use violence or the threat of violence as a basis for power . former u.s. attorney general michael mukasey outlined strategic goals in combating these threats . these goals continue to include targeting the largest organized crime threats , dismantling criminal organizations and removing their leadership , marshalling information from all available resources , and relying on all possible domestic and international tools and law enforcement partnerships . one specific goal of the organized crime council that may be of particular interest to congress is to "provide law enforcement with updated legislation and operational procedures needed to combat international organized crime.