this report will analyze the legal issues associated with religious exemptions to photo identification laws . although no lawsuits appear to have challenged federal laws with photo requirements , state photo identification laws have been challenged for several decades . after discussing the legal requirements of the free exercise clause and rfra , the report will explain the elements of analysis necessary for legal challenges involving religious objections to photo requirements . the report will also analyze lawsuits that have challenged state photo requirements , including significant factors of consideration in such cases . however , because the u.s. constitution provides only a baseline of protection , it is possible that states may have imposed heightened review through their state constitutions or enacted separate statutory protections similar to rfra . crawford is not binding precedent on the issue of the constitutionality of voter id for religious objectors . furthermore , it considered only indiana's law , and it is notable that state laws requiring identification may vary significantly . finally , the report will analyze what factors may be relevant in future decisions that may arise related to federal photo identification requirements as well as u.s. supreme court opinions related to religious objections to voter identification requirements . members of some religious groups may object to having their photograph taken as many identification laws require . the teachings of several religious groups may prohibit their members from being photographed in general or from revealing some parts of their body . accordingly , "nothing about the state's interest in fighting voter fraud justifies this requirement of a postelection trip to the county seat instead of some verification process at the polling places. thus , the court may resolve the question differently in a different case involving religious objections to photo requirements . for instance , some christians , including some amish , believe photographs violate the ten commandments . members of other religious groups may believe that members must wear head coverings or veils for religious reasons . identification laws that require individuals to be photographed or require individuals to be photographed without religious head covering may infringe upon these individuals' first amendment right to exercise their religious beliefs freely , leading to potential legal challenges to determine whether the individuals' first amendment right must be accommodated . the most common type of identification law to be challenged are state driver's license laws , but the legal issues may also apply in other cases with photograph requirements . although photo identification requirements most often are enacted at the state level , federal identification requirements also exist . u.s. passports must include a photograph that displays "a good likeness" of the individual , and the u.s. department of state does not permit exemption from this requirement based on religious objections . additionally , congress enacted the real id act of 2005 , which contains a number of provisions relating to improved security for driver's licenses and personal identification cards , as well as instructions for states that do not comply with its provisions . the u.s. supreme court considered the constitutionality of indiana's voter id law , and although a majority of justices did not agree upon a rationale , the court did uphold the law as constitutional on its face .