this is done for several purposes . first , by providing periodic threat images to the screeners , the system promotes alertness and acts as a mitigation for boredom and complacency , two factors that can have a significant negative impact on human performance . second , the ability to collect data regarding screening performance and screener sensitivity in real - world settings serves as an invaluable tool for human factors researchers studying screener performance . for example , these researchers can look at performance as a function of time of day and time on shift , to optimize the scheduling of shifts and breaks for screeners . researchers can also use the tip data to identify particular threat items or methods of concealment that are often missed , and in response can tailor recurrent screener training and re - qualification to emphasize and correct specific weaknesses , either on a systemwide , an airport - by - airport , or even on an individual screener level . third , tip provides a quantifiable means to evaluate the performance of screeners at individual , work group , airport , or systemwide levels of analysis . as such , it can be used to track progress over time and can be used to document deficient levels of individual performance that establish grounds for dismissal . tip has been one of the most significant technology changes to carry - on screening since x - ray screening techniques were first implemented in the early 1970s , and directly addresses human performance aspects of checkpoint screening functions . however , tip is limited in its scope and provides data on only one aspect of screening operations: screener preliminary threat identification of x - ray images . tip does not provide data on whether proper procedures were carried out once a threat object was suspected and flagged by the x - ray screener , whether explosive trace detection ( etd ) systems were properly used to conduct secondary evaluations of suspected explosives , and so on . also , tip does not provide any data on the screening of passengers themselves or their checked baggage ; it only provides data on the screening of carry - on baggage . nonetheless , tip is widely regarded as an important screener evaluation tool , and it will likely remain an integral part of advanced technology ( at ) x - ray equipment deployment in the future . current generation x - ray systems provide significantly higher resolution than systems that were deployed at airports in the 1990s and prior . however , these systems only provide a single view angle , typically an overhead view , of screened items . nonetheless , in addition to increased image resolution , image coloration and other image enhancement features allow screeners to more easily differentiate organic and metallic materials and provide the capability to use color contrast to better differentiate certain elements of the x - ray image . for example , the coloration allows organic materials to stand out from inorganic materials making it easier to detect dense organic matter that may be indicative of an ied , and provides differential coloration of metals to allow for easier detection of metallic weapons .