it paralleled h.r . 4173 with respect to transferring consumer protection functions from the banking agencies to a single regulatory agency , also named the consumer financial protection agency . it contained a provision applying state consumer laws of general applicability to national banks unless such laws discriminate against national banks or unless the cfpa determines that they are inconsistent with federal law . the draft legislation also includes a provision precluding the interpretation of the visitorial powers clause as limiting the authority of a state's attorney general from bringing a judicial action "to require a national bank to produce records relevant to the investigation of violations of state consumer law , or federal consumer laws ; ... to enforce any applicable provision of federal or state law , as authorized by such law. 3310 , the consumer protection and regulatory enhancement act , introduced on july 23 , 2009 , by representative spencer bachus , would have continued the current practice of having the federal banking regulators monitor consumer protection compliance with respect to banking institutions , although it would consolidate bank regulation . it would have established a financial institutions regulator ( fir ) to assume the functions of the various current federal banking regulators . within the fir there would be an office of consumer protection to be responsible for administering and enforcing consumer protection laws . it contained no provision altering current law with respect to the visitorial authority over national banks or the preemption of state consumer protection laws for the benefit of national banks . as occ and the states begin to operate under the new rules covering preemption of state consumer protection laws and state enforcement authority over national banks , some of the matters which may draw attention from congress include ( 1 ) how well occ and the consumer financial protection bureau are coordinating efforts with those of the states ; and ( 2 ) the extent to which the regime established in dodd - frank improves consumer protection without unduly burdening the financial services industry . the implementing regulation is 12 c.f.r . it provides , in pertinent part , "state officials may not exercise visitorial powers with respect to national banks , such as conducting examinations , inspecting or requiring the production of books or records of national banks , or prosecuting enforcement actions , except in limited circumstances authorized by federal law. included among the list of "visitorial powers" specified in the regulation as exclusive to occ is "[e]nforcing compliance with any applicable federal or state laws" that concern "activities authorized or permitted pursuant to federal banking law. in the clearing house association , l.l.c . in office of the comptroller of the currency v . spitzer , the district court granted occ's request for an injunction against the state ag's enforcement of fair lending laws . occ's objection to the ag's investigation of national bank mortgage practices was grounded in the visitorial powers clause of the nba and the occ regulations interpreting that clause .