3962 is based on h.r . 3200 , america's affordable health choices act of 2009 , which was originally introduced on july 14 , 2009 , and was reported separately on october 14 , 2009 , by three house committees — education and labor , energy and commerce , and ways and means . the u.s. senate passed its version of health insurance reform on december 24 , 2009 , the patient protection and affordable care act , in h.r . 3590 , as amended by the senate ( hereafter referred to simply as h.r . 3590 consolidated and amended bills passed by the two committees with principal jurisdiction , the committee on health , education , labor , and pensions , which ordered reported s. 1679 , the affordable health choices act on july 15 , and the senate finance committee , which ordered reported s. 1796 , america's healthy future act of 2009 , on october 19 , 2009 . the house and senate must agree to the same measure with the same legislative language before a bill can be presented to the president . congress did not chose to appoint a formal conference committee to negotiate a compromise that would then reported to each chamber for consideration , opting for negotiations between the chambers . in an effort to move the process forward , the president released a health reform proposal on february 22 , 2010 , which combines and modifies provisions in the senate and house passed bills . on february 25 , 2010 , the president held a bipartisan meeting on health reform , attended by both democrats and republican members of congress . this report presents basic background information on health insurance that may be useful to legislators considering health insurance reforms . it describes health insurance reform approaches and provides brief descriptions of health insurance reform bills introduced in the 111 th congress . the discussions in this report will not summarize all currently introduced legislation , but may be helpful in understanding the range of options that are currently being considered by congress . the potential impact of various reform approaches and bills is not analyzed in this report . as a result , it does not provide evaluations of how well different bills , once enacted , would meet their objectives . however , all of these bills have a common focus: to address some or all of the current issues surrounding health insurance and health services . the costs of health insurance and health care services are consuming a growing portion of workers' compensation , and the percentage of individuals with job - based health insurance coverage is declining . some states are seeking reforms in their state systems , providing useful trials and errors to potentially inform the debate at the federal level . just as the federal debate in the 1990s was spurred by rising health care and health insurance costs , declining numbers of individuals with private coverage , and state experimentation and innovation , those same issues are at the center of the debate today . many of the issues addressed through health reform legislation are exacerbated by the existing recession .