for example , h.r . among these bills are h.r . 851 , which would require any institution provided with assistance under the emergency economic stabilization act of 2008 to meet standards for executive compensation and corporate governance , and h.r . 857 and s. 360 , which would prohibit any officer or employee of an entity receiving funds under tarp from being compensated more than the president of the united states . with the acknowledgment by aig of the payment of bonuses to a number of its employees , bills have been introduced to recover at least some of the bonuses paid . these bills would use different ways of recovering the bonuses . 1575 would authorize the attorney general to recover excessive compensation paid by entities which have received federal financial assistance on or after september 1 , 2008 . 1664 , passed by the house , would amend the emergency economic stabilization act of 2008 to prohibit unreasonable and excessive compensation and compensation not based on performance standards paid by companies receiving direct capital investments of taxpayer money . a bill that would limit the deductibility of employee compensation for all employers , corporate or noncorporate , was introduced in the 111 th congress . 1594 proposed limiting the deduction for compensation paid to an employee in excess of the greater of $500,000 or "an amount equal to 25 times the lowest compensation for services performed by any other full - time employee during such taxable year. since it applies to all employers and is not limited to a few top executives , the provision is broader than either the ยง 162 ( m ) provisions in eesa or the provisions that pre - date eesa . the former is used as a means of limiting salary deductions . both are used to limit "golden parachutes. provisions to limit executive compensation , including golden parachute payments , have existed within the internal revenue code ( irc ) for many years ; however , new provisions affecting entities receiving funds from the troubled assets relief program ( tarp ) were introduced in the 110 th congress by the emergency economic stabilization act of 2008 ( eesa ) . these provisions have some similarities to the earlier provisions in the code , but differ sufficiently that the eesa provisions will be described separately from the earlier provisions , which are still in effect for publicly held corporations that have not received tarp funds . eesa and the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 ( arra ) also introduced restrictions outside of the irc on golden parachute payments . these are discussed in the corporate governance section of this report . in 2005 , congress enacted the bankruptcy abuse prevention and consumer protection act of 2005 ( bapcpa ) . although many of its most publicized changes involved consumer bankruptcies , bapcpa also made changes to business bankruptcies . among the changes was a new subsection that limited the extent to which "key employee retention plans" ( kerps ) could be paid as administrative expenses of the debtor . this restriction generally is more applicable in chapter 11 reorganizations than in chapter 7 liquidations , but is not limited to chapter 11 .