figure 1 . map of haiti source: map resources . adapted by crs . haiti shares the island of hispaniola with the dominican republic ; haiti occupies the western third of the island . since the fall of the duvalier dictatorship in 1986 , haiti has struggled to overcome its centuries - long legacy of authoritarianism , extreme poverty , and underdevelopment . while significant progress has been made in improving governance , democratic institutions remain weak . poverty remains massive and deep , and economic disparity is wide . attempts at democratic rule have been intermittent and only partially successful . in 1991 , a military coup interrupted the first term of haiti's first democratically - elected president , jean - bertrand aristide ; the threat of a u.s. military intervention allowed him to return three years later and finish his term . in 1996 , the first transition between two democratically elected presidents in haitian history occurred when rené préval assumed the presidency . five years later , in 2001 , aristide was re - elected . political conflict led to the collapse of his government in 2004 , which was followed by an interim government . charges of corruption against aristide , dissolution of the parliament by préval in his first term , questions of the interim government's legitimacy , and flawed elections under all of them contributed to their inability to establish a fully accepted or functioning government . since 2004 , however , haiti has made what the international monetary fund ( imf ) and others call "remarkable progress" toward political stability and economic stabilization . the government has conducted democratic presidential and parliamentary elections , and enacted wide - ranging reforms , especially in economic governance . although crime and violence continue to undermine haitian development , security has improved significantly enough that the united nations stabilization mission in haiti ( minustah ) is shifting the focus of its biggest contingent from security to development . the fundamental inequality of haitian society has remained basically unchanged , though , and haiti remains the poorest country in the hemisphere . in proximity to the united states , and with such a chronically unstable political environment and fragile economy , haiti has been a constant policy issue for the united states . the u.s. congress views the stability of the nation with great concern and commitment to improving conditions there . in may 2006 , rené préval began his second five - year term as president of haiti . during his first three years in office , préval has established relative internal political stability . he outlined two main missions for his government: ( 1 ) to build institutions , and ( 2 ) to establish favorable conditions for private investment in order to create jobs . in november 2007 , his administration published its poverty reduction strategy , a key step in meeting imf requirements for debt relief . former president george w. bush praised préval for his efforts to improve economic conditions and establish the rule of law in haiti . préval pledged to cooperate with u.s. counternarcotics efforts . both president barack obama and secretary of state hillary clinton have met with president préval and indicated strong support for development in haiti .