453 to administer the ictf . establishes an international clean technology fund in the u.s. treasury . an interagency group is to consist of the secretaries of state , energy , and treasury ; the epa administrator ; and any other federal agency head or executive branch appointee the president designates . the secretary of state is to chair the group . directs the president to publish a list of countries eligible for assistance no later than january 1 , 2012 , and revise this list annually . criteria for eligibility shall include developing countries that have signed and ratified an agreement or treaty to undertake ghg mitigation activities ; a determination by the president that such activities will achieve substantial , measurable and verifiable ghg reductions ( relative to business as usual ) ; and such other criteria as the president determines . authorizes the secretary of state , in consultation with the interagency group , to provide assistance from the ictf for projects in eligible countries . assistance may be in the form of grants , loans or other assistance . distribution of assistance from the ictf may be direct , via the world bank or other international development bank or institution , through an international fund created by the unfccc , or through some combination of these mechanisms . the interagency group will establish criteria for project selection . the secretary of state shall monitor project performance and shall have authority to terminate assistance in whole or part for noncompliance with the approved proposal . requires the president to submit annual reports on assistance from the program , beginning no later than march 1 , 2012 . parts 1 and 2 support domestic and international assessments of vulnerabilities to climate change , development of adaptation strategies and plans , and authorization of funding to assist adaptation to climate change . part 1 establishes three overlapping domestic programs with distinct interagency coordination bodies , program offices , requirements for assessments , adaption plans and strategies , funding mechanisms , and reporting requirements . part 2 addresses an international adaptation assistance program . establishes the national climate change adaptation council for interagency coordination among 16 or more federal agencies . the council is chaired by the representative of the national oceanic and atmospheric administration ( noaa ) and supported by a new national climate change adaptation program within noaa . the council is to serve as a forum for interagency consultation and coordination on federal policies relating to the assessment of , and adaptation to , the effects of climate change on the united states and its territories . establishes a national climate change program within noaa to increase the effectiveness of federal climate change adaptation efforts . under this program , among other duties , the administrator of noaa must produce a quadrennial national assessment evaluating the nation's vulnerability to the effects of climate change . the assessment is to be comprised of regional assessments and a national synthesis . several factors for inclusion in regional assessments are listed . in each assessment cycle , the administrator of noaa must convene workshops in each identified region and one nationally .