none of the bills were enacted . the recent postage benefit bills prompt at least two observations and four questions . ( 1 ) it is unclear whether any concerns exist about the voucher - type free postage proposals . as indicated above , during the 109 th , 110 th , and 111 th congresses , measures advanced but were not enacted . in each instance , the house bill carried the free postage benefit , and the senate bill did not . should this relatively low - cost mailing be further subsidized by enacting a free - mail - to - troops postage benefit ? and are senders likely to use a voucher for letters that can be used to cover the more expensive parcel postage ? the conference committee reports did not elaborate on why the senate version was preferred , and the congressional research service has not located any published accounts that detail any objections to these postage benefit bills . for example , mailing 15 pounds of widgets in a 20" by 4" by 4" package ( 320 cubic inches ) from the silver lake , ohio zip code 44224 to the apo zip code 96278-2050 would require over $20 in postage . sending the same 15 pounds of widgets in a 12" by 12" by 5" priority mail flat - rate box ( 720 cubic inches ) would cost $14.95 . ( whether the dod experiences similar cost differences for package delivery is unclear. ) to reduce delivery costs , should any free postal benefit require recipients to use a box of a particular size and shape ? ( 2 ) it is unclear how much a free - mail - to - troops postage benefit would cost annually . only one of the aforementioned bills was scored — the cbo scored the final version of h.r . 923 ( 109 th congress ) , at $30 million for the 2006 calendar year , "including $17 million for postage , and $13 million for the dod's transportation and administrative costs. ( 1 ) none of the free postage for troops bills described the means through which the dod was to provide postage vouchers to military personnel overseas ; nor did the bills describe how these individuals would transfer these vouchers to family members or friends back in the united states . it was referred to the house committee on armed services . 1935 would establish a postage benefit for members of the armed services on active duty in iraq or afghanistan , and for individuals who are "hospitalized at a facility under the jurisdiction of the armed forces of the united states as a result of a disease or injury incurred as a result of service in iraq or afghanistan," provide a beneficiary with one coupon or voucher per month , which he or she could give to anyone who wished to send a letter of no more than 13 ounces or a parcel of no more than 15 pounds ; and authorize an appropriation to the dod to cover the cost of this program to the usps . funding is "not to exceed $75 million for the total period beginning with fiscal year 2012 and ending with fiscal year 2017. .