one of these areas was workforce policies . the nga center concluded: every sector examined in this report will be affected by the availability of workers during a pandemic . in general , states and the private sector should develop and test policies affecting the willingness and ability of personnel to perform their duties , whether in traditional or alternative settings . potential strategies and or guidance addressing telecommuting , alternative schedules , or modified operating hours for retail establishments and internet or distance - learning programs for school children would be particularly useful . during a pandemic , almost everyone will be susceptible to the illness . a central disease control strategy will be keeping sick people away from others to minimize the spread of infection . employers should examine their human resource policies and , if needed , create new policies that would allow sick workers to stay at home during a pandemic . when possible , states and private sector employers should collaboratively develop policies that effectively balance the need of some workers to care for sick ( or healthy ) family members for extended periods of time with the requirements government and private sector continuity of operations plans . the employment - at - will doctrine governs the employment relationship between an employer and employee for most workers in the private sector . an employee who does not work pursuant to an employment contract , including a collective bargaining agreement that may permit termination only for cause or identify a procedure for dismissals , may be terminated for any reason at any time . although the employment - at - will doctrine provides the default rule for most employees , it has been eroded to some degree by the recognition of certain wrongful discharge claims brought against employers . in general , these wrongful discharge claims assert tort theories against the employer . a cause of action for wrongful discharge in violation of public policy is one such claim . if isolation or a quarantine were used to attempt to limit the spread of a pandemic influenza virus and an employee was terminated because of absence from the workplace , a claim for wrongful discharge in violation of public policy might arise . a claim for wrongful discharge in violation of public policy is grounded in the belief that the law should not allow an employee to be dismissed for engaging in an activity that is beneficial to the public welfare . in general , the claims encompass four categories of conduct: refusing to commit unlawful acts ( eg , refusing to commit perjury when the government is investigating the employer for wrongdoing ) ; exercising a statutory right ( eg , filing a claim for workers' compensation , reporting unfair labor practices ) ; fulfilling a public obligation ( eg , serving on jury duty ) ; and whistleblowing . although most states appear to recognize a claim for wrongful discharge in violation of public policy , it is possible that a state may allow a claim only under certain circumstances . for example , texas recognizes such a claim only if an employee is terminated for refusing to perform an illegal act or inquiring into the legality of an instruction from the employer .