sec . 3506 of the national defense authorization act for fy2010 ( h.r . 111-84 , october 28 , 2009 ) required the administration to report on its efforts to facilitate the embarkation of armed private security teams on u.s. flagged commercial vessels operating in high - risk areas . items to be reported on include the elimination of restrictions under any regulation or provision of law on the use of armed security teams in high - risk areas , the negotiation of bilateral agreements with relevant coastal states , and the development of common training and qualification standards for armed security teams . the report was delivered to congress in february 2010 and describes numerous advisories the administration has issued that offer guidance to u.s. flagged commercial vessels . the report also provides detail on u.s. efforts to coordinate with and obtain information from relevant foreign port authorities on the issue of armed security teams . the international traffic in arms regulations ( itar ) may be an area of concern for ship owners desiring to arm their vessels in self - defense against acts of piracy . section 38 of the arms export control act ( acea ) authorizes the president to control the export and import of defense articles and defense services . the president , through executive order 11958 , as amended , delegated the statutory authority to promulgate regulations with respect to exports of defense articles and defense services to the secretary of state . the resulting regulations are known as the international traffic in arms regulations . itar requires u.s. persons to obtain a license in order to export or import items identified on the united states munitions list . as defined by regulation , the term "export" includes "sending or taking a defense article out of the united states in any manner. objects covered by the term "defense article" are found on the united states munitions list and are classified into 21 separate categories . categories i and iii appear to be most relevant in a discussion regarding protection from acts of piracy because they include firearms ( category i ) and ammunition ( category iii ) that could be used in the defense of a vessel . based on the definitions of export and defense articles , a ship owner would be required to obtain a license for the temporary export of firearms and ammunition , or other covered armaments , for use in the defense of a vessel . there is an exception to the licensing requirement under itar for the temporary export of not more than three non - automatic firearms and not more than 1,000 cartridges . to comply with this exception a u.s. person ( 1 ) must declare the temporary export of the firearms and submit to an inspection by a customs officer ; ( 2 ) must retain the firearms with the person ( i.e. , not mail the firearms to the destination ) ; and ( 3 ) maintain the firearms for that person's exclusive use and not for reexport or transfer of ownership . the regulation makes a distinction between u.s. persons and crew members of vessels , but how the distinction would affect the status of the vessel as an entity is unclear .