shortly after that announcement , the electronic voting stations are closed . the clerks wait several moments after closing the electronic voting stations to allow any members to cast votes in the well , to ensure that all well cards are accounted for , and to be certain all information has processed through the system . the final vote count is recorded on what is referred to as a "tally slip. the clerk gives the tally slip to the parliamentarian , who hands it to the presiding officer , who uses it to announce the outcome of the vote . the announcement did not change the long - standing practices for ending a vote . when the house is not in session , however , it is common for members and staff to escort visitors onto the house floor . prior to this modification , however , no policy was published concerning the manner of closing a vote taken by electronic device . in the 110 th congress , the presiding officer closed an electronic vote without following the appropriate protocol , which led to the creation of the select committee to examine voting procedures and the recommendation to modify the speaker's policy . as described above , the house rules set a minimum , but not a maximum , on the length of time an electronic vote will be held open . in practice , the presiding officer exercises some discretion on when to close a vote . the announced policy of the speaker states that electronic votes will be closed as soon as possible after the minimum time limit has expired . generally , however , the presiding officer works to ensure that any member intending to vote has an opportunity to do so , and indeed the policy of the speaker includes the assurance that "no occupant of the chair would prevent a member who is in the well before the announcement of the result from casting his or her vote. the 2009 modification of the speaker's announced policy establishes that the best practice is "for presiding officers is to await the clerk's certification that a vote tally is complete and accurate. the select committee to investigate the voting irregularities of august 2 , 2007 did not recommend that a detailed description of the practice for closing a vote be included in the announcement , or raised to the level of a standing rule , in part because the clerks need flexibility to change processes of this nature that might be affected by changes to the electronic voting system or the house chamber . for many years , the presiding officer and the clerks have followed established practices for closing a vote taken by electronic device . after the minimum time has elapsed , the presiding officer indicates that the available time is about to expire by asking if any other members wish to vote or to change their votes . after allowing members to respond , the reading clerk then reads the names of the members who changed their votes in the well from a list prepared by a tally clerk . a recorded vote is considered to be over when the presiding officer makes an unequivocal statement of the result .