given this , health reforms vary greatly from state to state . for instance , some states may pursue comprehensive reform , while others may design reform initiatives that are more narrow in scope . these more limited reform efforts may focus on a particular component of the health care system , such as the availability of private health insurance options , the delivery of health care , or public financing for health coverage . given that state laws and regulations vary , any new standard imposed nationwide would place unequal burden on insurance carriers , depending on which state they already operate in . this typically results in policies that invest public resources to assist consumers and firms with the cost of health insurance . below are general descriptions of select reform strategies that have been proposed or implemented at the state level . since an all - inclusive analysis of state reforms is beyond the scope of this report , these descriptions include examples of both common and innovative initiatives to illustrate the breadth of reforms . for example , while massachusetts has achieved near - universal coverage two years after enactment of comprehensive health reform , the costs associated with reform have exceeded initial estimates and long - term financing is an ongoing concern . moreover , the increase in newly insured residents has highlighted a common feature in health care delivery in massachusetts and other states: severe physician labor shortages , particularly in primary care . overall , the massachusetts experience exemplifies the eventuality that any national reform will involve consideration of trade - offs . and in the climate of limited resources , such consideration will necessitate priority setting . the selected strategies reflect the current diversity of reform approaches , in terms of scope of reforms , policy levers used , and populations affected . the reform strategies have been identified according to targeted stakeholder groups: consumers , employers , purchasers of health coverage , and health plans . in addition , the report explores key design and implementation challenges related to coverage and cost , and provides a succinct state example for each reform strategy . the above - mentioned state reforms ( and other strategies ) are policy levers that are available to federal legislators and policymakers . but while state experiences provide some insight , they are not directly generalizable to the nation as a whole . the differences between state - level reform and national reform relate not only , or even primarily , to scope , but also involve fiscal and legal constraints , the regulatory environment , economic conditions , labor market supply , and other factors . the complexity of national reform poses unique challenges and opportunities . for example , each state sets regulatory standards with which insurance carriers licensed in their state must abide , such as benefit mandates , rating rules , and solvency standards . some states establish very strict standards , others impose less restrictive requirements , and some not at all , depending on the regulatory area and segment of the health insurance market . on the other hand , only federal law applies to health coverage that is self - insured .