balanced . most players in the debate acknowledge the need for some discussion of the balance between risks and benefits of a drug . they often disagree over the breadth of comparisons ( for example , whether to consider other drugs or other treatments or cost ) or methods to use . is there common ground between both groups ? there is a spectrum of opinion about dtc ads . proponents of dtc advertising say the ads: educate consumers about medical conditions ; alert them to treatments that exist ; fairly present risks as well as benefits ; detail non - drug approaches to improve health ; remind and motivate consumers to comply better with drug therapy regimes ; and help to de - stigmatize conditions . critics of dtc advertising say the ads: minimize the risks of some medications while promoting their benefits ; lure patients into expensive drugs when cheaper ones work as well , thus increasing healthcare costs ; persuade patients to ignore other medications with fewer side effects and more established safety track records ; provide information that would be more credible coming from non - industry sources ; and are susceptible to marketing needs that interfere with objective presentations . not all of these views necessarily conflict . it is possible to educate about medical conditions and omit information about alternate therapies , for example . as congress considers arguments for and against dtc advertising of prescription drugs , context becomes important . all pharmaceuticals carry some risks . human drugs , by their definition , are substances intended to affect the structure or function of the body . consumers can take too much — or too little . they can take drugs that interact with each other in ways not yet understood . researchers do not know all risks at the time fda first approves a drug for marketing . in fact , one effect of the 2005 controversy over vioxx was that it heightened public awareness of how incomplete the data really are before tens of thousands of consumers use a drug in real - life conditions , which include use beyond the carefully controlled limits of clinical trials . scientists then attributed approximately 100,000 excess heart attacks and sudden cardiac deaths to an unanticipated cardiovascular side effect of that heavily advertised blockbuster drug and others in its class ( cox - 2 inhibitors developed to treat pain without the associated stomach side effects common to other nonsteroidal anti - inflammatory drugs ) before they were withdrawn from the market . while critics and supporters of dtc ads sharply disagree on many things , people all along the spectrum often seem united in their belief that dtc ads should meet four criteria . they must be: accessible . we want consumers to have access to information that could — along with the treating physician — help them make the healthcare decisions they face . to do so , the information must be understandable , accurate ( true ) , balanced , and up - to - date . understandable .