one is coverage . by a commonly cited estimate , more than 45 million people were uninsured at some point in 2007 — more than one - seventh of the population . the recession may have increased this number . without private insurance or coverage under government health programs , people can have difficulty obtaining needed care and problems paying for the care they receive . a second concern is cost and spending . health care costs are rising for nearly everyone — employers , workers , retirees , providers , and taxpayers — sometimes in unexpected , erratic jumps . costs are a particular source of anxiety for families that are planning for retirement or where someone is seriously ill. national health care spending now likely exceeds $2.5 trillion , more than 17% of the gross domestic product ( gdp ) . spending has climbed from over 12% of gdp in 1990 and 7% in 1970 . third , there is concern about quality . although the united states spends substantially more on health care per person than other industrialized countries , it scores only average or somewhat worse on many quality of care indicators . medical and medication errors harm many people annually , sometimes resulting in death . the three concerns raise significant challenges . for one thing , each is more complex than might first appear , which makes it difficult to find solutions , or at least simple or uniform solutions . if their expenditures do not increase , their income may go down , leaving them in a worse position financially . at the same time , reform would likely have the opposite effect for some of these parties , making them better off . under current congressional budget enforcement rules , health care reform legislation must not increase the federal deficit . projected spending increases and revenue reductions are to be offset by reductions in spending or increases in revenue . conceptually there are a number of ways this could be accomplished , including increasing general tax rates , reducing various tax subsidies , reducing spending for federal health programs , reducing other federal program spending , and increasing borrowing . currently , the principal offsets under consideration are medicare reductions and tax increases . the medicare changes at issue include reducing the annual updates of medicare's many fee - for - service payment rates , reducing spending in medicare advantage by basing payments on spending in fee - for - service medicare , and requiring drug manufacturers to provide rebates and discounts in specific circumstances under the part d prescription drug program . the largest tax increases being considered include limiting the tax rate that high - income taxpayers can use to reduce their tax liability by itemized deductions , an income tax surcharge on high - income taxpayers , and caps or other limits on the exclusion for employer - provided health care . for analyses of some of the proposals , see crs report r40648 , tax options for financing health care reform , by [author name scrubbed] , and crs report r40673 , limiting the exclusion for employer - provided health insurance: background and issues , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] .