this report deals only with travel cards . a gao audit of the travel program at the department of defense found that over a period of seven years , dod may have purchased more than $100 million in airline tickets that were not used and had not been processed for refunds , largely due to the want of traveler notification . similarly , a gao audit of the department of state's centrally billed travel account concluded that over an 18-month period , the department had failed to request reimbursement for $6 million in unused airline tickets , also due to a breakdown in traveler notification . audits might be requested for every agency , as the government charge card abuse prevention act proposes , or only for agencies with higher - risk travel card programs — those with the highest dollar volume ; the highest delinquency rates ; or previous audit findings that indicate significant levels of waste , fraud , or abuse . it is not known how many other agencies lack an independent method for identifying unused tickets , or the total cost to the government of lost refunds . audits of the 10 largest travel card programs , for example , would encompass approximately 90% of federal travel card dollars spent annually . congress might also require gao and agency igs to perform follow - up audits to determine the extent to which agencies had implemented the recommendations from the initial audit . another option would be to require omb to collect certain travel card data and report them to congress . information on potential and actual rebates earned , broken down by agency and by card type ( travel , purchase , fleet , or integrated ) is not currently available , for example , but might be useful in identifying agencies that are failing to maximize rebate opportunities . under the terms of their travel card contracts , agencies receive rebates from card vendors based on the dollar volume of their charge card transactions and their payment performance . generally , the higher the net dollar volume of transactions , and the quicker the agencies and individual cardholders make their payments , the greater the rebates earned by the agencies . when centrally or individually billed accounts are delinquent — outstanding for more than 60 days — agency rebates are reduced . when payments on individual accounts are more than 180 days late , the charges are usually written off as bad debt by the card vendors , which also reduces agency rebates . according to gsa , federal agencies received approximately $255 million in rebates in fy2009 for purchases made with all types of government credit cards , including travel cards . delinquencies , however , prevent the government from earning the maximum potential rebates . the most recent data available from the office of management and budget at the time this report was published showed that in september 2010 , the government - wide delinquency rates for centrally billed accounts stood at 3.10% , up from 2.06% in january 2010 .