appendix a . side letter from united states to asean concerning u.s accession to the tac and mutual understandings concerning the agreement appendix b . side letters between australia and asean concerning australia's accession to the tac and mutual understandings concerning the agreement h.e . mr somsavat lengsavad deputy prime minister and minister of foreign affairs lao people's democratic republic your excellency i have the honour to inform your excellency that australia has decided to accede to the treaty of amity and cooperation in south east asia ( the treaty ) , in accordance with article 18 . 3. should the administration send the tac to the senate for ratification ? periodically , congressional measures have called attention to asean and / or called for upgrading u.s. engagement with asean . in the 109 th congress , the senate passed by unanimous consent s. 2697 ( lugar ) , the united states ambassador for asean affairs act , which mandated the naming of an ambassador to the organization . none of the congressional measures dealing with u.s. engagement with asean mentioned u.s. accession to the tac . the tac establishes general principles governing the relations between state parties , with the intention of promoting "perpetual peace , everlasting amity and cooperation" within southeast asia . towards this end , it provides a mechanism for the pacific settlement of regional disputes between tac parties . as drafted in 1976 , the tac was open to ratification by the five original members of asean , and was only open to accession by other southeast asian states . the tac was subsequently amended in 1987 to permit the accession of states outside southeast asia with the consent of the five asean members , and to establish rules concerning when states outside southeast asia could participate in the agreement's dispute - settling mechanism . the tac was further amended in 1998 to reflect the expansion of asean to 10 members , and to make accession to the tac by any additional states outside southeast asia contingent upon the approval of all 10 asean members . article 1 of the tac announces that the purpose of the agreement is to promote peace and cooperation among the parties . article 2 provides that in their relations with one another , parties shall be guided by six principles: mutual respect for the independence , sovereignty , equality , territorial integrity , and national identity of all nations ; the right of every state to lead its national existence free from external interference , subversion , or coercion ; non - interference in the internal affairs of one another ; settlement of differences or disputes by peaceful means ; renunciation of the threat or use of force ; and effective cooperation among themselves . while tac article 2 describes these principles as "fundamental," it does not specify that they are the sole principles that may inform relations between parties . tac article 3 obliges parties to endeavor to develop and strengthen their mutual relations and fulfill their obligations under the agreement in good faith . tac articles 4-9 outline party obligations concerning mutual cooperation .