the language in h.r . 1346 / s. 540 was incorporated in h.r . 4816 , the food and drug administration improvement act of 2010 , in the 111 th congress , which was referred to committee but did not see further action . the aarp , the american association for justice , the national conference of state legislatures , public citizen , state attorneys general , consumer groups , and several members of congress either supported the riegels' case and / or support overturning the court's decision , which some have argued impacts patients and states with strong consumer protection laws . a former fda chief counsel and the american tort reform association opposed the legislation , and the latter reportedly called the bill "little more than an economic stimulus for personal injury lawyers. if congress does not overturn the riegel decision , but is interested in providing a remedy for injured medical device consumers , one approach would be to establish a compensation fund . in riegel , the dissent argued that congress would not have , "'without comment , remove[d] all means of judicial recourse' for consumers injured by fda - approved devices. the majority opinion responded by stating: it is not our job to speculate upon congressional motives . if we were to do so , however , the only indication available — the text of the statute — suggests that the solicitude for those injured by fda - approved devices , which the dissent finds controlling , was overcome in congress's estimation by solicitude for those who would suffer without new medical devices if juries were allowed to apply the tort law of 50 states to all innovations . ( emphasis added ) it could be argued that if congress had intended to preempt state common law claims , it may have considered a victims' compensation fund of some sort . in the past , congress has created compensation schemes when it has removed an individual's ability to sue . for example , the national vaccine injury compensation program prohibits suits under state tort law against manufacturers and administrators of specified vaccines unless the claimant first files a claim for limited no - fault compensation with the national vaccine injury compensation program . congress also created the september 11 th victim compensation fund of 2001 , under which a victim or a victim's estate could seek no - fault compensation from the program or bring a tort action against an airline or any other party , but could not do both , except to sue "any person who is a knowing participant in any conspiracy to hijack an aircraft or commit any terrorist act. the riegel court held that "[a]bsent other indication , reference to a state's 'requirements' includes its common law duties. it appears that the supreme court arrived at this conclusion based on previous supreme court decisions addressing the term "requirements" in the state common law context , without relying on congressional intent , the fda's own regulation , or the agency's change in its position regarding preemption , which could be a motivation for congressional legislative action .