that deadline was not met . the u.n. assistance mission — iraq ( unami ) also is continuing its efforts to forge a grand settlement of kirkuk and other disputed territories , and unami submitted a report to iraqi leaders in late april . depending on political outcomes , there could be further elections . among them would be a referendum on any agreed settlement on kirkuk and a vote on amendments to iraq's 2005 constitution . more so than who prevails in the upcoming elections in iraq , most say , the u.s. interest is that they are held peacefully , with maximal participation from the diverse spectrum of iraqi factions . political competition through the ballot box could be one factor that could insure that the planned draw - down of u.s. troops from iraq — now set to be completed by the end of 2011 — continues without major interruption . security was also a concern during the registration process . u.s. / nato military operations in some areas , including in helmand in january 2009 , were conducted to secure registration centers . still , registration percentages in restive areas were lower than in more secure areas . the elections are expected to cost about $200 million ; on march 31 , 2009 , at a u.n. - led conference in the netherlands , the united states committed $40 million of that amount . iraq is scheduled to hold national elections on january 30 , 2010 , upon the expiration of the term of the existing council of representatives . the remaining 34 seats in the upper house are appointed by the president . the national elections will determine the next four - year government to follow the current government headed by prime minister nuri al - maliki . the election date has been a particularly controversial issue that encapsulates karzai's differences with political rivals , particularly those among non - pashtun ethnic minorities . voter registration ( updating of 2005 voter rolls ) began in october 2008 and was completed by march 2009 . however , there were reports of some registration fraud , with some voters registering on behalf of women who do not , by custom , show up at registration sites . women are legally permitted to register and vote , but they must do so in person . while the specifics of the contest are not yet clear , the results of the provincial elections , held on january 31 , 2009 , might be instructive when looking ahead to the national elections . some primary features of the provincial elections appear to be tied to the results for the two main shiite parties , whose fates differed dramatically . in the mostly shiite southern provinces , the islamic supreme council of iraq ( isci , shahid mihrab list ) and maliki's da'wa "state of law coalition" offered competing lists . maliki's post - election political position apparently was enhanced by the strong showing of his list . with 28 out of 57 seats , the maliki slate is in effective control , by itself , of the baghdad provincial council ( displacing isci ) .