deflation is a decline in the overall level of prices . how can economic policy contain or mitigate the potentially large negative economy - wide effects of a deflation caused by a negative demand shock ? the simple answer is that the government can take actions to support current aggregate spending . increased current spending that exerts upward pressure on the price level is a counterforce to a negative demand shock . if these policies also induce economic agents to expect future prices to be higher than current prices , they are likely to shift their spending toward current goods and away from future goods . there are two general classes of policy responses to be applied , separately or in combination , as the severity of the deflation problem warrants . the second class is greater use of the fed's traditional role of "lender of last resort. all of these policy tools were used in response to the 2008-2009 turmoil in financial markets and the economy's slide into recession . arguably those policy measures , in addition to supporting economic activity , forestalled deflationary momentum during this period of economic contraction . further actions of this type could be used to counter any further weakening of economic activity and any further deflation threat . deflation generated by a negative demand shock can be disruptive and costly , particularly if it gets built into price expectations that can magnify the negative impulse and increase the economic costs . the experience of the united states during the great depression and that of japan since the 1990s gives strong testimony of this . several indicators suggest that the risk of deflation in the united states continues despite nearly 30 months of economic recovery . the consumer price index shows that the inflation rate is low and decelerating , a large output gap persists , and nominal short - term interest rates continue to be at the zero bound . together these factors suggest a continuing significant risk of deflation . nevertheless , there is no direct evidence , so far , that a broad - based and sustained decrease in the price level is occurring . mainstream economic theory argues that monetary and fiscal stimulus are the macroeconomic policies needed to fight deflation . all are measures aimed at directly or indirectly increasing aggregate demand to boost economic activity , but they will also work in theory to shift consumer and business expectations from deflation to inflation and exert the upward pressure on the price level needed to counter any deflationary forces that may arise . the first class of policies comprises the standard macroeconomic policy tools of monetary and fiscal policy . a more pointed example of deflation's malign effect on economic activity was the experience of the united states in the great depression of the 1930s . from the 1929 stock market crash to the economy hitting bottom in 1933 , the price level fell about 25% , real gdp fell about 30% , and the unemployment rate increased from 4% to near 25% . however , there are also examples of relatively benign deflations when economic activity expanded despite a falling price level .