transmission permitting . financing and cost allocation . system modernization and the smart grid . the planning proposals typically make available certain benefits , such as a federal permitting option , to projects included in the plan . these benefits could lead developers to add unnecessary features and costs to qualify proposals to meet plan criteria . avoiding these distortions will require careful oversight or , arguably , limiting the benefits associated with the plan ( for example , putting all new power lines or none , whether or not they are in the plan , under federal government permitting authority ) . is the scheme for managing and financing t he planning process realistic ? an effective planning process will need realistic schedules and sufficient resources to timely develop and update transmission plans . transmission line permitting is primarily under the control of the states . current proposals would extend federal authority , perhaps by completing displacing the state role . issues include: should the grid be viewed from a national perspective ? the grid evolved as local systems serving limited utility service areas . now that the system has evolved into three separate synchronized interconnections , each spanning ( other than ercot ) many states . the question is whether a state - by - state or national view of the grid is most appropriate . the issue does not necessarily have a single answer ; for example , a state perspective may be appropriate for "routine" projects , while a national perspective could be applied to "national interest" projects . can transmission s ystem reliability be separated from authority over new transmission construction ? in epact05 congress put the reliability of the grid under federal jurisdiction . by extension , should the federal government have control over the permitting of transmission lines aimed at enhancing system reliability ( which could mean almost any new line in an interconnected power systems ) ? how important is it to accelerate the construction of new transmission lines ? one criticism of the current regulatory regime is that it takes many years to move a transmission project through the permitting steps . expanding federal authority over permitting is viewed as a means of accelerating the process . the question is how important is it to quickly build transmission lines to meet reliability , environmental , and other objectives . management of the permitting process . if ferc or some other agency is assigned a federal permitting role , it will need the resources to expeditiously process applications . otherwise the whole point of giving more permitting power to the federal government would largely be obviated . building new transmission lines could cost billions of dollars . even more contentious than how to fund these projects is the question of how the costs of interstate transmission lines should be allocated to utility customers . issues include: should the federal government help pay for new transmission lines ? some proposals call for the federal government , possibly acting through the federal utilities , to help pay for new transmission lines , pay for expanding projects to meet future needs , or actually build new transmission . how far should the federal government go into financing the expansion of the transmission grid ?