by comparison , h.j.res . american presidential elections have generally been dominated by two major parties since the early 19 th century , with major party candidates for president and vice president having won a majority of electoral votes in every election since 1836 . the 12 th amendment's existing quorum requirement of a member or members from two - thirds of the states is markedly less rigorous ; in fact , it would be theoretically possible to hold a contingent election session under the present arrangements with as few as 34 members present . the argument favoring this change is straightforward: since contingent election of the president is one of the most constitutionally significant functions assigned to the house of representatives , it is appropriate that the largest possible number of members be present for this session . such candidacies have , in fact , emerged in four presidential elections since 1968 . what are some of the factors the house or senate might consider should either chamber — or both — be called on to perform this function in the contemporary context ? the 12 th amendment , as noted earlier , imposes fewer procedural demands on the senate in its language establishing contingent election of the vice president than it does on the house of representatives . the comparative simplicity of the process would thus arguably require fewer process - driven decisions by the senate if it were called on to elect a vice president today . as noted earlier in this report , in 1837 , the roll was called and the senators declared their preference viva voce — by voice vote . further , it is likely that the proceedings were open to the public , since neither the register of debates in congress nor the journal of the senate provides any indication that the galleries were cleared , or that the senate otherwise met in closed session . for the senate , therefore , historical precedent appears to support , but does not mandate , a voice vote in open session . in the senate , proposals relating to procedures for contingent election of the vice president would likely be referred to the committee on rules and administration . under the rules of the senate , this committee has jurisdiction over both "congressional ... rules and procedures , and senate rules and regulations , including floor ... rules," and "federal elections generally , including the election of the president [and] vice president.... " the senate customarily refers each measure in its entirety to the committee with predominant jurisdiction over the subjects in the legislation . as in the house , the senate committee on the judiciary has jurisdiction over constitutional amendments , and would presumably receive proposals for constitutional change in this area . during the 108 th through 110 th congresses , constitutional amendments were proposed that would have changed house of representatives voting in a contingent election of the president . in addition , contingent election has traditionally figured indirectly in most proposals to reform the electoral college or establish direct popular election .