in its report on h.r . 2647 , the house armed services committee offered specific recommendations for how the army should modernize its combat vehicle fleet in the absence of fcs , taking into account the large amounts spent to modernize existing vehicles in recent years . the committee recommended that current fleet of m - 1 tanks , paladin cannons and stryker armored combat vehicles should be given upgrades — including some technologies developed as part of fcs , such as the "active defense system" intended to shoot down approaching anti - tank missiles . two other types of armored carriers — bradleys and the older m - 113s — should be candidates for replacement by new vehicles , the committee said . the conference report includes , in modified form , several provisions in the senate version of the bill that amend the military commissions act of 2006 ( p.l . 109-366 ) , which codified rules under which military tribunals could try non - u.s. citizens detained in the course of the war against terrorism ( sections 1801-07 ) . regarding military commissions , some key provisions of the final version of h.r . more money is one alternative . other alternatives may include backing away from plans to add 92,000 active duty troops to the army and marine corps ; shifting resources among the military services to reflect new challenges rather than allocating them roughly the same proportions every year ; reviewing requirements for expensive new technologies in view of the presence or absence of technologically peer or near peer competitors ; and shifting resources from military responses to global threats toward non - military means of prevention . secretary gates stated that the budget decisions that he announced on april 6 , 2009 , were intended to "reshape the priorities of america's defense establishment. those decisions focused almost exclusively on "means," rather than on desired "ends" based on policy decisions , or "ways" designed to utilize given means to achieve desired ends . that emphasis on resources , together with the relatively broad scope of the announced programmatic decisions , raises key questions about the relative weight of strategy and budget in driving defense priorities . on april 6 , 2009 , roughly a month before the details of the fy2010 budget were released , secretary gates announced several key recommendations all of which were incorporated into the administration's fy2010 budget request released may 7 . gates said this "unorthodox" procedure was warranted by the scope and significance of the decisions and by his desire to publicize them as elements of his effort to change dod's strategic direction . the conference report on the annual congressional budget resolution ( s.con.res . 13 ) includes a recommended ceiling on fy2010 budget authority and outlays for the "national defense" function of the federal budget that matches president obama's request . the budget resolution's ceilings on budget authority and outlays for national defense and other broad categories ( or functions ) of federal expenditure are not binding on the appropriations committees , nor do they formally constrain the authorizing committees in any way .