sentencing commission . however , it includes additional provisions that are not found in s. 3397 . 5809 includes a provision that would require the attorney general to allow long - term care facilities to deliver for disposal controlled substances on behalf of ultimate users ( unlike s. 3397 , which states that the attorney general may authorize this activity ) . 5809 would direct the ondcp director , in consultation with the epa administrator , to carry out public education and outreach campaigns to increase awareness of lawful and safe disposal of prescription drugs . the legislation would require the comptroller general of the united states to collect data on disposal of controlled substances by ultimate users and submit its findings and recommendations to congress regarding the use , effectiveness , and accessibility of disposal programs . finally , h.r . 5809 would direct the epa administrator to conduct a study ( and report to congress the results of such study ) that examines the environmental impacts of disposal of controlled substances "through existing methods," offer recommendations on disposing controlled substances that take into consideration such impacts ( as well as the ease and cost of implementing drug take - back programs and participation in such programs by various communities ) , and "identify additional authority needed to carry out such recommendations if the administrator determines that the administrator's existing legal authorities are insufficient to implement such recommendations. on july 28 , 2010 , the house energy and commerce committee approved the bill and ordered it to be reported . the house passed h.r . 5809 on september 22 , 2010 . introduced on february 25 , 2009 , by representative inslee and on june 24 , 2009 , by senator murray , the safe drug disposal act of 2009 ( h.r . 1191 , s. 1336 ) would amend the csa to allow states to operate drug disposal programs that accept from patients unwanted or unused controlled substances without requiring the presence of law enforcement personnel . specifically , the bill would direct the attorney general to promulgate regulations that describe five drug take - back program models from which states may choose and implement , to permit an ultimate user ( or a care taker ) to dispose of unused or partially used controlled substances through delivery to a designated facility . beyond these five model state programs , the regulations must also allow states to devise an alternative means of disposal that best suits the state and that receives the approval of the attorney general . the bill requires that any approved state drug disposal program must , among other things , permit ultimate users to dispose of controlled substances through non - law - enforcement personnel and incorporate environmentally sound practices for disposal . furthermore , the bill would amend section 505 of the federal food , drug , and cosmetic act and section 351 of the public health service act to require the secretary of health and human services to ensure that the labeling for drugs or biological products does "not include any recommendation or direction to dispose of the drug by means of a public or private wastewater treatment system , such as by flushing down the toilet.