in general , the medical reports are valid for one year . mere presence of one of the designated diseases does not always lead to exclusion . appendix a. cdc quarantine stations appendix b. cdc technical guidance as previously discussed , policies and procedures established over the years by the cdc spell out the obligations of the physicians who are designated to conduct the medical examination to meet the statutory requirements of the ina . according to the cdc's technical guidance for the physicians performing the medical examination , they are required to make the following assessments of the foreign nationals seeking visas: a medical history , obtained by the civil surgeon or a member of the physician's professional staff , from the applicant ( preferably ) or a family member , which includes ( 1 ) a review of all hospitalizations ; ( 2 ) a review of all institutionalizations for chronic conditions ( physical or mental ) ; ( 3 ) a review of all illnesses or disabilities resulting in a substantial departure from a normal state of well - being or level of functioning ; ( 4 ) specific questions about psychoactive drug and alcohol use , history of harmful behavior , and history of psychiatric illness not documented in the medical records reviewed ; and ( 5 ) a review of chest radiographs and treatment records if the alien has a history suggestive of tuberculosis . a review of any other records that are available to the physician ( eg , police , military , school , or employment ) that may help to determine a history of harmful behavior related to a physical or mental disorder and to determine whether illnesses or disabilities are present that result in a substantial departure from a normal state of well - being or level of functioning . a review of systems sufficient to assist in determining the presence and the severity of class a or class b conditions . ( 3 ) are the resources provided for frontline agencies charged with screening foreign travelers adequate to identify potentially infected travelers ? the department of state ( dos ) and the department of homeland security ( dhs ) each play key roles in administering the law and policies on the admission of aliens . dos's bureau of consular affairs ( consular affairs ) is the agency responsible for issuing visas , dhs's u.s . the physical examination is to include a mental status examination that includes , at a minimum , assessment of intelligence , thought , cognition ( comprehension ) , judgment , affect ( and mood ) , and behavior . a physical examination that includes , at a minimum , examination of the eyes , ears , nose and throat , extremities , heart , lungs , abdomen , lymph nodes , skin and external genitalia . all diagnostic tests required for the diagnosis of the diseases identified as communicable diseases of public health significance and other tests identified as necessary to confirm a suspected diagnosis of any other class a or class b condition .