figure 1 . map of costa ricasource: map resources . adapted by crs graphics . successive costa rican administrations have sought to address extensive deforestation and environmental degradation that resulted from decades of logging and agricultural expansion . the country's strong conservation system and innovative policies have done much to restore costa rica's environment and ecotourism has provided a significant source of economic growth . costa rica's efforts also have led many observers to recognize it as a world leader in environmental protection and have enabled the country to play an outsized role in the formulation of global environmental policies . despite these accomplishments , some maintain that there are a number of environmental problems that must still be addressed by the country . relations between the united states and costa rica traditionally have been strong as a result of common commitments to democracy , free trade , and human rights . u.s. intervention in central america during the 1980s , however , slightly strained the relationship . president arias responded to the various conflicts in the region by crafting a peace plan during his first administration , which excluded the involvement of extra - regional powers . as a result of his efforts , arias was awarded the nobel peace prize in 1987 . u.s. policy in iraq also strained relations between costa rica and the united states . although then president pacheco ( 2002-2006 ) supported the u.s. invasion , costa rica's constitutional court ruled that listing the country as a member of the "coalition of the willing" violated the country's constitutionally mandated neutrality . president arias has questioned the priorities of the united states for spending substantial funds in iraq while allocating comparatively little to assist allies in central america . current relations between the united states and costa rica could be characterized as friendly . costa rica finally implemented cafta - dr in january 2009 . the agreement will likely strengthen costa - rica's already significant trade relationship with the united states . vice president biden visited costa rica during his first trip to central america , leading the arias administration to describe the meeting as "a clear recognition of the trajectory of costa rica as the united states' strategic partner in the region. additionally , president arias criticized the anti - americanism of some of his fellow latin american leaders at the fifth summit of the americas , and the united states strongly supported president arias' role as mediator in the political crisis in honduras . for more than a decade , costa rica has not been a large recipient of u.s. assistance as a result of its relatively high level of development ; however , this is likely to change somewhat as a result of the "mérida initiative" and its successor program , the central america regional security initiative ( carsi ) . the peace corps has been operating in costa rica since 1963 and generally has been the largest source of u.s. assistance to the country since the u.s. agency for international development mission closed in 1996 .