law. this phrase opened the door to the negotiation of provisions that go beyond the level of protection provided in the wto trade related aspects of intellectual property ( trips ) agreement . for example , the united states has sought to have its partner countries sign onto the world intellectual property organization's ( wipo ) performances and phonograms treaty , an agreement to which new zealand is not a party . ustr's 2010 u.s. foreign trade barriers report ( ftb ) noted that new zealand is an active participant in efforts to strengthen international ipr enforcement by participating in the negotiations on a multilateral anti - counterfeiting trade agreement , and that it had passed a new copyright protection act in april 2008 . despite welcoming chile's "significant commitment" to address outstanding intellectual property rights ( ipr ) issues under the u.s. - chile fta , the country remained on the united states "special 301" 'priority watch list' of countries' meriting bilateral attention in 2011 . in addition , brunei , malaysia , peru , and vietnam were placed on the "watch list. for its part , new zealand reportedly floated a discussion document that favors a "trips - aligned" position , one that would be consistent with , but not go beyond , international standards already found in the trips . in contrast , u.s. business groups have favored the trips+ provisions found in the proposed u.s. - korea fta as a baseline for future negotiations . the debate over the ipr provisions in the tpp relating to pharmaceuticals and access to medicines , some of the most controversial provisions in u.s. - negotiated ftas in recent years , revolves around whether to assert the more far - reaching ipr provisions of the u.s - korea fta or to adopt the somewhat looser "may 10" fta provisions found in the colombia , peru , and panama ftas . based on published reports , it seems that u.s. negotiators are trying to reconcile stronger protections found in the korea fta with the aims of greater access to medicines found in the may 10 agreement . the u.s. ipr proposal was tabled in the september 2011 chicago negotiations . known as the trade enhancing access to medicines ( team ) initiative , it reportedly would make stronger patent term extensions , data exclusivity , and patent linkage provisions available to firms who apply for marketing approval for their products through a "tpp access window" of an , as yet , unspecified time period . to encourage companies to market innovations in tpp countries more quickly , companies reportedly would receive a korea - fta standard of five years of data exclusivity , mandatory patent linkage and patent term extension provisions , rather than capping data exclusivity at five years from u.s. market approval , and optional patent linkage and patent term extension provisions found in the may 10 provisions . according to the ustr , this provision would allow for expedited introduction of generic medicines . however , opponents of this approach fear that it would delay the introduction of generic medicines by delaying submitting new products for marketing approval under the access window as long as possible .