ยง4321 et seq. ) declared a national policy to protect the environment . to implement this policy , nepa requires federal agencies to provide a detailed statement of environmental impacts , subsequently referred to as an environmental impact statement ( eis ) , for every recommendation or report on proposals for legislation and other major federal action significantly affecting the quality of the human environment . although nepa also created the council on environmental quality ( ceq ) in the executive office of the president , it did not authorize ceq to promulgate regulations to implement the eis requirement or to enforce the law . nepa establishes the basic framework for integrating environmental considerations into federal decision making . however , the law itself does not detail how this process should be accomplished . with an initial absence of regulations specifying implementation procedures , and no agency authorized to enforce its requirements , federal agencies reacted in different ways to nepa's requirements . in the 1970s , many agencies had difficulty complying with the law . in addition to the courts , ceq played a significant role in determining how nepa would be implemented although it had no enforcement authority . during the 1970s , ceq issued non - binding guidelines for basic requirements of eis preparation . ceq left nepa implementation largely to the federal agencies , which were to use the ceq guidelines to prepare their own procedures . during the early 1970s , there were frequent complaints regarding the delays that the nepa process was perceived to cause . some observers attributed these problems to a lack of uniformity in nepa implementation and uncertainty regarding what was required of federal agencies . also , in response to increasing nepa - related litigation , agencies often produced overly lengthy , unreadable , and unused eiss . in an effort to standardize an increasingly complicated nepa process , president carter directed ceq to issue regulations that would be legally binding on federal agencies ; final regulations became effective on july 30 , 1979 . the ceq regulations were intended to be generic in nature . each federal agency was required to develop its own nepa procedures that would be specific to typical classes of actions undertaken by that agency . separately , ceq regulations directed federal agencies to review their existing policies , procedures , and regulations to ensure that they were in full compliance with the intent of nepa . many of the problems identified by the commission remain today . project planning has moved away from the recommended multi - objective or river basin planning approach recommended by the commission . water resource projects today are still largely authorized in piecemeal fashion , and water programs are rarely coordinated . shifts in organizations and institutional arrangements since 1973 have reduced coordination of federal water agencies and planning . available funding and political clout in some cases appear to be the significant factors in successfully pursuing projects , instead of overall benefits to the nation . state - federal tensions over proper and respective roles and responsibilities in water resource development , management , and allocation , continue to cloud resolution to the most difficult water resource issues .