however , renewable energy from biomass is the exception . biomass is the largest source of renewable energy in the united states . 890 , would establish a renewable electricity standard ( res ) . in the senate , a renewable electricity standard was introduced in s. 433 . although offshore wind in the region may have promise for southeastern coastal states , there are no commercially operating offshore wind farms anywhere in the united states . the region is home to 44% of the nation's total energy from woody biomass and a significant portion of other biomass types . not all biomass is recognized as "eligible" to meet federal res requirements due to differences in federal legislation and tax provisions defining biomass . these definitions have varied over time with changes in the law and regulations , reflecting policy goals and technological change . the definition of biomass would be critical to determining which technologies and processes would be available to meet possible res requirements . the next section discusses current and future possible sources of biomass and technologies for renewable energy . nowadays , combined heat and power turbine - generator sets are a mainstay of several industries and industrial applications . the pulp and paper industry dominates the cogeneration sector today fueled largely by biomass from wood wastes . state governments have generally led the way in deploying other renewable energy technologies . picking up where federal research and development dollars left off , states are using the concept of a renewable portfolio standard ( rps ) to create a market for renewable energy via mandatory goals . rps requirements oblige electric utilities to provide electricity from renewable energy sources in increasing amounts over a specified period of years . through february 2009 , rps requirements or goals have been established in 29 states plus the district of columbia . a major argument that has been advanced for a national renewable energy ( or electricity ) standard is that it would encourage increased use of renewable energy . thus far , two bills have been introduced in the 111 th congress that would amend purpa . the american renewable energy act , h.r . senator bingaman had previously released a draft bill to discuss a federal renewable portfolio standard on february 11 , 2009 . with biomass representing the most widely used ( and ostensibly the least expensive ) renewable energy resource in the united states , its potential use in meeting res requirements is key to the success of any res that may be enacted . much of the debate over an res revolves around whether there is a need for a federal requirement for renewable energy use by electric providers and whether the momentum in the states is truly moving the use of renewable energy forward . the production tax credit and the investment tax credit have been used by the federal government to support renewable energy . recent consideration has also been given to implementing a federal "feed - in tariff" ( fit ) law . feed - in tariffs are incentive structures for generating renewable electricity usually at above - market rates for a set number of years , reducing the payback period and adding certainty to the return on the investment .