the america competes act is an authorization act . the acts funded the establishment of doe's arpa - e and nsf's psm program . also , portions of the p - 16 alignment of secondary school graduation requirements with the demands of 21 st century postsecondary endeavors and support for p - 16 education data systems were funded through the arra . the act mainly addresses concerns about the adequacy of investment in these areas . the america competes act authorizes an increase in federal science and engineering research funding and support for stem education from kindergarten through the postdoctoral level . the act authorizes funding increases through fy2010 for the national science foundation ( nsf ) , the national institute of standards and technology ( nist ) laboratories , and the department of energy office of science ( doe sc ) . the act also authorizes within doe the establishment of the advanced research projects agency – energy ( arpa - e ) and discovery science and engineering innovation institutes . in addition , the act authorizes new stem education programs at doe , the department of education ( ed ) , and nsf , and increases the authorization levels for several existing nsf stem education programs . new programs authorized by the act will not be established unless funded through subsequent appropriations acts . similarly , realization of the higher authorization levels of existing programs in the act depends on subsequent appropriations . the america competes act was passed after much of the fy2008 appropriations process had already taken place during the 110 th congress . although america competes act programs were not funded at their fy2008 authorized levels , the 110 th congress did provide fy2008 appropriations to establish ed's teachers for a competitive tomorrow program , and nist's technology improvement program ( tip ) , which replaced the agency's advanced technology program . the 111 th congress provided funding in fy2009 for r&d and stem education through the omnibus appropriations act , 2009 ( p.l . 111-8 ) and the american recovery and reinvestment act ( p.l . some america competes act programs were funded at authorized levels ; others were not . the following activities were funded at or above authorized levels: nist's scientific & technical research and services ( strs ) and construction and maintenance ; doe's office of science ; and nsf's research and related activities , major research instrumentation , major research equipment and facilities construction , professional science master's program , robert noyce teacher scholarship program , and graduate research fellowship program . other programs were funded either below authorized levels or not funded .