it is not a law . it is not signed by the president nor can it be vetoed . instead , its purpose is to establish a framework within which congress considers legislation dealing with spending and revenue . the budget resolution is not intended to establish details of spending or revenue policy . instead , details of such policy , and legislative language to implement it , are to be included in legislation reported from the committees with legislative jurisdiction subsequent to the adoption of the budget resolution . all spending or revenue legislation reported from legislative committees , however , is expected to be consistent with the levels and priorities agreed to in the budget resolution . the spending policies in the budget resolution encompass two types of spending legislation: discretionary spending and direct ( or mandatory ) spending . discretionary spending is controlled through the appropriations process . appropriations legislation is considered annually for the fiscal year beginning october 1 . appropriations legislation provides funding for numerous activities such as national defense , education , and homeland security , as well as general government operations . direct spending , alternately , is provided for in legislation outside of appropriations acts . direct spending programs are typically established in permanent law that continue in effect until such time as they are revised or terminated by another law . the actual annual cost of direct spending is not determined by congress . it is instead dictated by formulas within the legislation providing for the program . the overall cost of a program depends on the eligibility requirements and benefits set forth in the legislation . these criteria determine who will be eligible to receive benefits and how much benefit they will receive . only by altering these formulas can congress adjust how much money will be spent . the budget resolution sets forth levels for new budget authority , outlays , revenue , and public debt for the budget year and four outyears . the levels in the budget resolution deal with aggregates , not programmatic spending details . assumptions concerning some major programs may be discussed in the reports accompanying the budget resolution , but these assumptions are not in the form of legislative language and are not binding on the committee of jurisdiction . the house budget resolution provided for revenue levels of $2,328 billion and outlays of $3,550 billion in fy2010 , differing slightly from the senate budget resolution levels of $2,288 billion in revenues and $3,534 billion in outlays . the house budget resolution also included reconciliation instructions to allow for health care and education initiatives , while the senate did not include any reconciliation instructions . there were some other differences in the house and senate budget resolutions , including assumptions regarding future legislation concerning estate tax rates and the number of years for which the alternative minimum tax ( amt ) would be patched , as well as the number of reserve funds . a budget resolution conference agreement was filed on april 27 , 2009 and included $2,322 billion in revenues and $3,555 billion in outlays for fy2010 , resulting in a projected deficit of $1,233 billion . by fy2014 , the budget resolution cuts the projected deficit by half to $523 billion .