, landsat ) . 2787 , the commerce , justice , science , and related agencies appropriations bill , 2014 , house appropriators ( majority ) objected to nasa's budget request for new projects "that solely or primarily support the requirements of other agencies , including the united states geological survey. the report stated that such projects would have significant and undefined outyear costs and "crowd out long term investments in nasa's own scientific priorities. accordingly , report language instructed that "no funds should be spent in pursuit of a new land imaging system for usgs. in the "minority views" section of the report , appropriators expressed disappointment in the elimination of "funding for several upcoming climate satellite programs , including: ( 1 ) nasa's landsat , which provides valuable data in support of agriculture , forestry , and regional planning. in the fy2014 omnibus appropriations bill , enacted as p.l . 113-76 , the senate view was adopted , and $30 million was provided for land imaging at nasa for the next landsat - like mission after landsat 8 . house appropriators made no mention of landsat or land imaging spending in the fy2015 appropriations bill ( h.r . 4660 ) that passed the house or in the accompanying report ( h.rept . earlier objections — expressed in the fy2014 house appropriations bill report — to a landsat - like land imaging satellite as not aligning with the nasa mission were not voiced in the fy2015 appropriations bill . that earlier objection was likely part of a debate regarding the mission focus of nasa , and whether it should be responsible for funding satellites that are turned over to other federal agencies to operate , such as landsat ( operated by usgs ) and the nation's civilian weather satellites ( operated by noaa ) . senate appropriators had also raised concerns about a joint satellite program — civilian weather satellites — between nasa and noaa in the fy2013 budget process , but with the opposite recommendation from that of the house . as with the joint - agency landsat program , nasa acquires the weather satellites and their instruments , launches them into orbit , and then hands over operations to another agency , in this case noaa . in contrast with landsat , however , congress appropriates funds directly to noaa for procuring the weather satellites ; noaa then transfers funds to nasa for satellite and instrument acquisition . in the report accompanying the fy2013 appropriations bill for commerce and justice , science , and related agencies , senate appropriators chose to transfer funding and responsibility for procuring noaa's operational satellites to nasa . their decision was not based on a debate over respective agency missions , which seemed to be the case for house majority appropriators in the fy2014 appropriations process , but was based on the view by senate appropriators that noaa was mismanaging the satellite procurement process and nasa could do a better job . the weather satellite procurement issue illustrates the different views held by house versus senate appropriators over the role of nasa in satellite procurement for joint - agency satellite programs .