sentencing guidelines . second , under federal law , those who aid and abet a perpetrator are treated as principals and are typically punishable for commission of the underlying offense . some individuals have raised concerns regarding additional federal criminalization of white collar crimes . this caution might be especially relevant given the increased penalties that have been established for existing federal crimes over the past few decades . however , as discussed , congress may choose to amend federal criminal statutes , such as the financial institutions fraud and false statement on a mortgage loan application provisions , to include a broader basis for federal prosecutorial authority in cases involving criminal actions taken related to mortgages . any legislative proposal to amend criminal provisions will inevitably be shaped by the broader response to the financial downturn . in the mortgage fraud arena , many activities likely walk a fine line between maneuvers that were legal under loose regulatory enforcement , on one hand , and illegal activity , on the other . partly for that reason , there has been renewed attention given to revamping the federal financial institution regulatory structure . for example , the acting director of the federal office of thrift supervision has called for amendments to existing regulatory authorities that would ensure that more housing debt and finance entities would be subject to federal supervision . in addition , some agencies , such as the federal reserve board and the securities and exchange commission , have recently enacted new regulations for which statutory authority already existed or are considering boosting enforcement activities under current authorities . in many cases , such actions would trigger the existing criminal provisions which provide penalties for violations of regulatory provisions . thus , in some cases , regulatory reforms might effectively expand the scope of federal authority in criminal prosecutions involving mortgage fraud . the measure has drawn support from the obama administration and some commentators . statements of support have generally focused on the likely return on investment from added resources for prosecutions or on the need for amendments to the false claims act and have not emphasized the perceived inadequacy of criminal provisions related to mortgage fraud . multiple , interrelated federal criminal provisions provide alternative bases for criminal liability in mortgage fraud prosecutions . federal criminal statutes most commonly relied upon include mail and wire fraud , financial institutions fraud , and false statements . other criminal provisions , including some arising from banking law and others that establish criminal penalties to enforce federal regulations in specified areas , are also relevant . in addition , federal money laundering , conspiracy , and racketeer influenced and corrupt organizations provisions may provide secondary bases for federal criminal liability in some situations . a few preliminary points regarding federal criminal law are relevant . first , although criminal provisions provide maximum penalty amounts , which serve as upper limits for federal courts during the sentencing process , courts determine specific sentences in individual cases after considering recommendations in the u.s . it is also possible to describe general categories and trends . for example , the federal bureau of investigation has drawn a general distinction between fraud - for - housing and fraud - for - profit schemes .