, those activities that substantially affect interstate commerce. food safety regulation is not limited to processing plants . usda has authority to exercise food safety oversight and enforcement on farms as well . four statutes that provide the most significant authority related to on - farm activity and food safety are the animal health protection act , the plant protection act , the agricultural marketing agreement act of 1937 , and the agricultural marketing act of 1946 . usda's role in the current food safety system appears to focus on inspections during production , but usda appears to have authority under numerous statutes to regulate at least some on - farm activities . although this authority does not explicitly provide for oversight of farm operations , the statutory language does not explicitly prohibit usda from carrying out its authority on farms . thus , it appears that usda may apply its statutory authority to on - farm activities , if the on - farm activity is one that is generally covered by the relevant statute . the statutory authorities discussed in this report generally require that exercise of the authority provided be linked to products in interstate commerce . in the debate over food safety regulation on the farm , some have raised arguments that on - farm activities may not be sufficiently linked to commerce to justify congressional regulation . as a result , usda's authority to implement programs related to food safety on farms before the agricultural products in question actually enter commerce has become an issue . although it might seem obvious that agricultural products sold in stores are a part of commerce , one may question whether usda would be authorized to take actions under these statutes on farms that do not sell their products , but rather are self - sufficient . it is likely that any farm would be subject to usda's regulatory authority in the context of these statutes because of congress's broad authority to act under the commerce clause of the u.s. constitution . the constitution empowers congress "to regulate commerce with foreign nations , and among the several states , and with the indian tribes," and "to make all laws which shall be necessary and proper for carrying into execution the foregoing powers. the u.s. supreme court has found that the commerce clause allows for three categories of congressional regulation: the channels of interstate commerce ; the instrumentalities of interstate commerce ; and "those activities having a substantial relation to interstate commerce .. . one of the court's most expansive commerce clause rulings , wickard v. filburn , concerned congress's ability to regulate the production and consumption of homegrown wheat . the court held that economic activities , regardless of their nature , could be regulated by congress if the activity "asserts a substantial impact on interstate commerce. in wickard , a farmer challenged a monetary penalty he received for growing wheat in excess of a quota established by the usda to regulate wheat prices , arguing that the wheat never went to market but was grown and consumed on his own farm and thus outside the scope of interstate commerce .