appendix a . 403-3b ( extract ) ( a ) national intelligence council there is a national intelligence council . this is an achievable goal . it is also to be hoped that analysts can provide warning of imminent threats , but this is not always achievable given the multitude of players and the variety of threats . nevertheless , the members of the nic serve as "the senior intelligence advisors of the intelligence community for purposes of representing the views of the intelligence community. as such they have access to the full extent of information obtained by all u.s. intelligence agencies and they have access to all intelligence analysts in the government . they will in addition hopefully have understanding of ways that a particular issue fits into the entire international environment . although any able analyst who spends years on a narrow issue may have unique insights , the nios should be able to provide the sense of context and a degree of perspective that comes from the service on the nic . most observers would probably agree that the role and missions of the nic and of the national estimative process have not yet been fully developed . the nic supports the dni and reflects the views of the intelligence community in interagency discussions . they keep abreast of the work of intelligence agencies in their subject areas . they must avoid the classic temptations of either preparing academic treatises unrelated to policymaker concerns or becoming so close to the policy dialogue that they are unable to provide perspective or to offer evidence that might undermine the chosen policies of a given administration . few nios or chairs of the nic in recent years have fully met the outlines of the position as envisioned by earlier intelligence leaders or by the drafters of statutory language regarding the nic . as issues become more challenging and interrelated , the role of the nic may grow . in addition , congress may perceive a need for increased scrutiny of nic products and for more extensive legislative branch oversight of the intelligence community's analytical efforts . arguably congress can have a broadened role in supporting the nic . congressional oversight can test analysts' conclusions from the multiple perspectives usually found within congressional committees . the back - and - forth that may result from oversight hearings may be uncomfortable for analysts and nios , but , given the inherent uncertainties in most intelligence analysis and the importance of the issues at stake , some observers suggest that rigorous exchanges can serve the national interest and maintain that their absence in the past led to policy errors or unfairly exposed the intelligence community to ex post facto criticism . all should recognize , however , that all intelligence is an intellectual activity that inevitably carries with it some degree of uncertainty . ( b ) composition ( 1 ) the national intelligence council shall be composed of senior analysts within the intelligence community and substantive experts from the public and private sector , who shall be appointed by , report to , and serve at the pleasure of , the director of national intelligence .