no further action was taken . the president and the executive branch in 1962 , president john f. kennedy issued an executive order ( e.o . 11007 ) that reinforced the doj advisory committee requirements . the executive order defined an advisory committee as any committee , board , commission , council , conference , panel , task force , or other similar group ... that is formed by a department or agency of the government in the interest of obtaining advice or recommendations ... that is not composed wholly of officers or employees of the government . 11007 also limited the lifespan of all federal advisory committees to "two years from the date of its formation" unless special actions were taken by an agency or department head to continue the committee . on march 2 , 1964 , the bureau of the budget issued circular no . 92-463 ) on october 6 , 1972 . following the signing of faca , then - president nixon rescinded e.o . 11671 , which previously had been the primary document guiding the creation and operation of federal advisory bodies . legislative and executive branch efforts after faca's enactment in the years since faca's enactment , congressional oversight hearings have resulted in legislative and executive branch attempts to clarify the statute or streamline the number of faca committees . one substantial amendment to faca was the 1977 federal advisory committee act , which incorporated the sunshine act ( p.l . 94-409 ) into the law . the sunshine act is specifically designed to make government agency meetings more publicly accessible and transparent . another significant change in faca's administration came in december 1977 when executive order 12024 transferred advisory committee oversight duties from the director of omb to the administrator of general services . additional executive orders have been issued since the law's inception ; many of them abolished particular federal advisory committees or lengthened the lifespan of others . from 1983 through 1989 , legislation was introduced in congress to strengthen faca's management controls , as well as to establish new ethical , financial , and conflict - of - interest disclosure requirements for committee members . none of these bills were enacted . on february 10 , 1993 , president william j. clinton issued executive order 12838 , which required each executive department to "terminate not less than one - third of the advisory committees subject to faca ( and not required by statute ) ... by the end of fiscal year 1993. . agency heads were required to review all advisory committees under their jurisdictions and eliminate them or justify in writing why they were necessary to continue . committees would need approval from the omb director to continue operation . the following year , as part of the national performance review , vice president albert gore issued a memorandum requiring all agencies to reduce advisory committee costs by 5% . the memorandum also stated that president clinton would not support legislation that established a new advisory committee or exempted an advisory committee from faca . on october 5 , 1994 , alice m. rivlin , then - acting director of omb , released a circular detailing management policies for remaining faca committees .