these standards cover my2014-my2018 trucks . a second round of standards , covering trucks from my2021-my2027 and trailers from my2018-my2027 , was promulgated in october 2016 . separate from epa's authority to set ghg standards , the energy independence and security act of 2007 ( eisa , p.l . 110-140 ) , directed nhtsa to study the potential for fuel efficiency standards for medium - and heavy - duty trucks , and , if feasible , set efficiency standards reflecting the "maximum feasible improvement. thus , as with light duty vehicles , in order to harmonize their ghg and fuel efficiency requirements , epa and nhtsa have cooperated on the setting of standards . medium - and heavy - duty trucks are trucks with a gross vehicle weight of 8,500 pounds or more . the largest emitters , tractor - trailers ( class 8b trucks ) , account for roughly 30% of the total number of medium - and heavy - duty trucks , but , because they are heavier and are driven longer distances , they consume 67% of all fuel used by these vehicles and presumably emit about the same percentage of medium - and heavy - duty trucks' ghgs . although the cpp is currently stayed by the supreme court pending the outcome of judicial proceedings , resolving its future arguably poses a higher priority for the trump administration and many in congress than the pending decisions regarding mobile sources . ( for additional discussion of the clean power plan , see crs report r44341 , epa's clean power plan for existing power plants: frequently asked questions . ) as shown in table 1 , medium - and heavy - duty trucks emitted more than 400 million metric tons of ghgs in 2014 , nearly 27% of ghg emissions from motor vehicles . congress may take an interest in that final determination . congress may also take an interest in the phase 2 medium - and heavy - duty truck standards . these standards , which were promulgated in october 2016 , would reduce oil consumption by up to 2 billion barrels over the lifetime of the vehicles sold under the program , saving vehicle owners fuel costs of about $170 billion according to epa . for the past five years , icao had been working with the aviation industry and other stakeholders to develop international co 2 emission standards for aircraft engines . epa has authority to regulate emissions from aircraft under section 231 of the caa . the language is similar to that for other mobile sources . it requires the administrator to issue standards for the emission of any air pollutant from any class or classes of aircraft engines which , in his judgment , causes or contributes to air pollution which may reasonably be anticipated to endanger public health or welfare . the regulations are to take effect "after such period as the administrator finds necessary ... to permit the development and application of the requisite technology , giving appropriate consideration to the cost of compliance.