for example , h.r . the broadening of the desired outcomes in h.r . 1145 during house science committee markup to include water quality provisions reflects that concern and also interest in furthering water quality research . whether some of the bill's provisions as passed by the house call for research , programs , and studies that may partially duplicate current efforts is another concern . 1145 would require the epa to establish a wastewater and stormwater reuse technology demonstration program ; the bureau of reclamation has an ongoing research and demonstration program of some wastewater reuse technologies . 1145 would not increase the authorized funding levels for federal research activities . instead , it is focused on improving coordination in setting agency research agendas , increasing transparency in water research budgeting , and reporting on progress toward the research outcomes specified in the bill . some stakeholders may question whether additional transparency and information alone ( without increased funding ) would result in significant changes to the status quo . membership in swaq has represented the following departments , agencies , and offices: department of agriculture agricultural research service cooperative state research , education , and extension service economic research service forest service natural resources conservation service department of commerce national oceanic and atmospheric administration , office of atmospheric research national oceanic and atmospheric administration , national weather service department of defense u.s. army corps of engineers department of the interior bureau of reclamation fish and wildlife service national park service u.s. geological survey department of energy office of energy efficiency and renewable energy office of science department of state environmental protection agency office of research and development office of water national aeronautics and space administration national science foundation tennessee valley authority executive o ffice of the president office of management and budget office of science and technology polic . ( see the appendix for the membership of swaq. ) 1145 would codify swaq into a formal interagency committee , with an ostp chair . a september 2007 report by swaq , a strategy for fed e ral science and technology to support water availability and quality in the united states , stated: "given the importance of sound water management to the nation's well - being , it is appropriate for the federal government to play a significant role in providing information to all on the status of water resources and to provide the needed research and technology that can be used by all to make informed water management decisions" ( p. 7 ) . 1145 attempts to coordinate federal water research in order for the federal government to more effectively perform the role described in the swaq report . while the nrc stated the benefits of a coordinated research program , a concern is that the increased focus on the outcomes identified in the bill might result in a shift away from other research areas that are central in the roles of some agencies . for example , much of the epa's research is in support of its regulatory role ; that is , it has performed little treatment technology research and development in recent years . some stakeholders may be concerned that , unless additional funds are made available for water research , enactment of h.r .