some of the functions of this airbase were moved to manas . in october 2005 , kyrgyz president kurmanbek bakiyev demanded either that the united states greatly increase fees paid for use of the manas airbase or close it . after protracted negotiations , agreement was reached in july 2006 on an increase from $2 million per year for leasing the base to $17.4 million for a five - year period . similar to the case in 2006 — when the united states and kyrgyzstan agreed on a revised rental agreement — current talks on keeping the airbase open , if successful , could result in an administration request to congress to approve added funding or other legislative action . for some members , the issue at this time may include whether the advantages of keeping the airbase open outweigh kyrgyzstan's apparently declining democratization progress . among recent legislative action , division e of the consolidated security , disaster assistance , and continuing appropriations act for fy2009 ( h.r . 110-329 ) provided $6 million for constructing a hazardous cargo pad at the manas airbase . construction was originally planned to begin on april 9 , 2009 . the consolidated appropriations act , 2008 ( h.r . 110-161 ) provided $30.3 million for construction of a parking ramp at the airbase . perhaps of some significance to possibly re - aligning some functions carried out at the manas airbase , a parking ramp for wide - body strategic airlift is being built at bagram airbase in afghanistan . strategic airlift currently must land at manas and offload cargo for airlifting to bagram , where cargo is again reloaded for airlift to forward operations bases . at a hearing of the senate armed services committee in mid - march 2009 , senator john mccain raised concerns about the impact the possible closure of the manas airbase would have on transportation and logistics risks associated with the shift of resources and personnel from iraq to afghanistan . at a hearing in late april 2009 on the president's request for supplemental appropriations for fy2009 , representative chet edwards asked about whether a new $30 million request for air traffic control system upgrades at the manas airbase was still warranted in light of kyrgyzstan's demand for the closure of the airbase . he also noted that the previously appropriated $36 million ( the $30.3 million ramp and the $6 million pad mentioned above ) had not yet been expended , and encouraged ongoing u.s. - kyrgyz talks to keep the airbase open . gen. david petraeus , commander of u.s. central command , responded that "if , of course , it came that we were to leave [the manas airbase] , obviously we would not invest in that particular air traffic control improvement . i don't want to get ahead of things , but we need to give this time.... it's our hope that actually all parties in the region , and this includes russia , could [join in] a broad partnership against transnational extremism and the illegal narcotics activities. supplemental appropriations for fy2009 ( signed into law on june 24 , 2009 ; p.l .