to be reconciled ? are some approaches to oversight more helpful than others ? do some approaches produce unintended consequences ? does the experience with arra offer lessons learned for the "normal" systems of oversight ? if so , are some changes in the "normal" system of oversight advisable ? what approaches to oversight work well in a separation of powers system , in which federal government branches compete for control over public policy , and in a federal system , in which the federal government and states have potentially overlapping lines of authority ? if congress wishes to assess the overall oversight framework for arra , several overarching considerations about federal oversight may be relevant to assessing questions like the foregoing . a number of these considerations are analyzed below . as a threshold matter , the federal government might be viewed as embodying a system of "nested" oversight . that is , multiple entities engage in simultaneous and multi - tiered oversight activities . for example , congress oversees the president , eop ( including omb ) , agencies , and nonfederal entities . furthermore , congress has established , structured , and funded executive agencies to allow for oversight of agency actions . congress also has passed a variety of "general management laws" for executive agencies to establish procedures that may be overseen . at the same time , igs and congressional support agencies such as gao provide assistance to congress , agencies , and the president with oversight . within the executive branch , omb has a statutory responsibility to provide management leadership for many agencies , including monitoring and oversight of their activities . agencies oversee their own activities , the activities of regulated entities , and the activities of recipients of federal funds . agencies undertake these tasks through a variety of organizational and procedural arrangements , often as congress has mandated via statute . when state governments receive federal dollars , they may oversee the activities of local governments . all of the foregoing entities also oversee in many respects the activities of industries , firms , and other nongovernmental actors . viewed together , for example , gao may attempt to oversee omb's oversight of an agency's oversight of a state agency , which in turn attempts to oversee the use of funds it made available via contract or grant to a firm , local government , or nonprofit organization . throughout , tools such as monitoring , analysis , and evaluation may be utilized . in assessing and potentially considering how to modify an oversight framework , there also are multiple perspectives on the potential objectives of oversight .