set a year earlier . usda forecasts the 2009 average annual farm price at roughly $12.10 per cwt. , down 18% from the 10-year average of $14.83 per cwt . the decline in milk prices has been especially painful for dairy producers because feed costs remain relatively high . for example , the farm price of alfalfa , a primary feedstuff for many dairy farms , averaged $143 per ton during january - march 2009 , up 3% from a year earlier and up 31% from the 10-year annual average of $109 per ton . declines in the farm milk price have already triggered two federal government programs designed to financially support dairy farmers . in fall 2008 , under the dairy product price support program , the commodity credit corporation ( ccc ) began purchasing nonfat dry milk and butter from dairy processors at purchase prices established in the 2008 farm bill . the program indirectly supports the farm price of milk . the second program , the milk income loss contract ( milc ) program , was activated when declining milk prices in february 2009 triggered direct payments to producers . payments have continued this spring because milk prices remain below the target price established in the 2008 farm bill . the federal milk marketing order ( fmmo ) system is another major federal program , which operates regardless of the market situation . fmmos mandate minimum prices that processors pay producers for milk . these minimums , however , are derived from dairy product prices established in the marketplace rather than by law . for more information on these federal programs , see crs report r40205 , dairy market and policy issues ; and crs report rl34036 , dairy policy and the 2008 farm bill . the dairy export incentive program ( deip ) is a federal dairy policy tool that provides cash bonuses to exporters of u.s. dairy products . the program was initially intended to counter foreign dairy subsidies , mostly by the eu . during periods of large supplies , such as the late 1990s , when almost all u.s. milk powder exports were deip - assisted , the program essentially served as a de facto surplus removal program . as a result , deip helped reduce expenditures associated with supporting the price of milk . subsequent farm bill reauthorizations have added market development ( establishing and sustaining sales ) to the role of deip . the united states' ability to provide export subsidies under deip is constrained by world trade organization ( wto ) annual limits on quantities and budgetary outlays that can be provided as export subsidies . the allowable quantities and budgetary outlays for agricultural export subsidies , including dairy export subsidies , were negotiated as part of the wto uruguay round agreement on agriculture . maximum wto allowable export subsidies for dairy products in the european union ( eu ) dwarf those of the united states ( table 1 ) . the eu can subsidize nearly 2 million metric tons of butter , skim milk powder ( smp ) , cheese and other milk products , while deip is limited to less than 93,000 metric tons of dairy products — about one - twentieth of the eu quantity .