appendix a . evidence on elasticities for inter - vivos giving table a - 1 reports the results of six different studies ( with a number of specifications which attempt to measure both permanent and transitory effects of changes in price and income on charitable giving . two of these studies ( bakija , and bakija and mcclelland ) also provided some critiques of other studies and some sensitivity analysis that is useful in understanding the studies and their strengths and weaknesses . results that are not statistically significant have an asterisk . lack of statistical significance means that , although a relationship that most closely fits the data is estimated , there is such deviation from that relationship in the observations that there is not a clear causal effect . they are usually , although not always , associated with very small values that are close to zero . while the studies differ in methodology , as discussed below , one difference is the type of data used . tax return data are available for general use only to researchers in the treasury department and the joint committee on taxation . ( the congressional budget office , cbo , has access to taxpayer data but must have uses approved by the joint committee on taxation. ) the data on giving and tax rates are probably superior in these studies and contain a larger sample of high - income taxpayers ; however , such research cannot be replicated or subjected to any sensitivity analysis by others . other researchers have to use public use data constructed from other sources . of the six studies in table 3 , three ( randolph , auten et al. , and bakija and heim ) used taxpayer data and all had as authors or coauthors a treasury employee . the bakija and mcclelland study , with a cbo coauthor , included a sensitivity analysis for the auten et al . study , but used a public use file , not the tax data . the other two studies also used a public use file . many of the studies listed below report multiple results using different specifications and , in general , an attempt is made to report the results that appear to be preferred by the author ( s ) . for comparison with this table and to illustrate the importance of dealing with transitory effects , bakija and mcclelland , who presented a range of strategies , also estimated a standard pooled cross section estimate , the type that had been done prior to the evidence shown by the 1980s tax cuts that did not deal with transitory effects . income elasticities may be biased in the other direction but should be above the cross section results for that era and typical of the past ( 0.84 ) so , for that reason , and for reasons stated in the body of the paper , a unitary elasticity is used . appendix b . methodology for estimating effects by type of charity and charitable purpose the first step in the estimation is to measure the ratio of the charitable giving share for each type of charity to the total share .