during floor debate on h.r . 2765 two voucher - related amendments were offered . the first , offered by delegate norton , would have eliminated the proposed voucher program . the amendment failed to pass by a vote of 203 to 203 . a second amendment was offered by representative tom davis that would have established eligibility criteria for students to receive a voucher and cap the maximum amount of funding a voucher could provide for any given school year . the amendment passed by a vote of 209 to 206 . the senate's version of the fy2004 district of columbia appropriations bill ( s. 1583 ) included the dc student opportunity scholarship act of 2003 . this bill was substantively similar to h.r . 2556 , and contained the framework on which the final provisions for the dc school choice incentive act were based . it was placed on the senate calendar but was never considered on the senate floor . the senate - passed version of h.r . 2765 , however , did not include funding to establish a scholarship program for low - income students . it did include funding for school improvement for traditional public schools and public charter schools in the district of columbia . the house - passed version of h.r . 2765 did not include funding for these specific purposes . the dc school choice incentive act , which created the opportunity scholarship program , was authorized and funded by the consolidated appropriations act , 2004 ( h.r . 108-199 ) , which included the fy2004 district of columbia appropriations bill . specific funding for the opportunity scholarship program was provided under the header "federal payment for school improvement," which also included funding for the district of columbia public schools ( dcps ) for the improvement of public education and the state education office ( seo ) for the expansion of public charter schools . this approach , commonly known as the three - prong approach to funding elementary and secondary education in the district of columbia , was initially suggested by mayor williams when he asked for federal assistance for public education in the district of columbia . the proposal was supported by the administration and many members of congress . while concerns were raised during consideration of the bill that only the opportunity scholarship program — not school improvement funding for dcps or public charter schools — was authorized for five years , each year the opportunity scholarship program has been funded , the federal government has also provided funds to support school improvement in the city's traditional public schools and public charter schools . the dc school choice incentive act ( p.l . 108-199 , title iii ) authorized a scholarship or voucher program to provide the families of low - income students , particularly students attending elementary or secondary schools identified for improvement , corrective action , or restructuring under the esea , as amended by the no child left behind act ( nclb ; p.l . 107-110 ) , with expanded opportunities to enroll their children in schools of choice located in the district of columbia . the program was authorized for fy2004 through fy2008 .