other research challenges these conclusions . for example , based on their analysis of the literature , rob greenwald et al . concluded: "[r]esource variables that attempt to describe the quality of teachers ( teacher ability , teacher education , and teacher experience ) show very strong relations with student achievement. regardless of the strength of the relationship between teacher quality and student achievement , the single salary schedule ( and perhaps low overall pay , see box below ) is argued by some to fail to draw the highest caliber of potential teachers into the field ; to fail to reward teachers who are exceptionally productive ; or to fail to allocate the supply of teachers to fields where they are most needed ( like math and science ) . criticism of the single salary schedule has undergirded efforts to implement performance - based pay plans in elementary and secondary education . another element of the debate over pay reforms may occur around what level of the educational system these reforms are best applied . that is , either under tif or through a different program , congress may consider whether it wants federal involvement in this area to focus on state reforms or local reforms . programs reviewed in the previous section of this report show reforms occurring at both levels in numerous locations throughout the country . should future federal policy development encourage states to be more involved in compensation reform or instead provide direct support to local efforts ? scaling up federal support for tif may be easier to implement at the local level , while an expanded federal role that includes more specified program activities may be better suited to the state level . the debate over local versus state reform may also involve proposals to amend the esea title ii - a state formula grant program . currently , most of these funds go through state education agencies to local school districts and are mainly used for class size reduction and professional development ; however , "merit pay" is also included in the program's authorized activities . congress could consider placing greater priority on addressing compensation reform through esea title ii - a by strengthening current language ( sections 2113 and 2123 ) . performance measurement may be the most hotly contested issue in the compensation reform debate . current federal law governing tif requires that teacher performance be based on student achievement and teacher evaluation , but does not provide any detail as to how this should occur . traditional teacher evaluation has been common for decades , while , performance evaluation tied to student achievement is a more recent development . significant improvements have been made in the effort to connect student achievement to teacher performance , particularly in certain subjects like math . still , the research in this area provides reason for congress to give serious thought to issues such as the use of value - added methods for high - stakes decision - making for individual teachers . one reason these methods are hard to apply to individual teachers is that , to produce reliable results , the statistical modeling employed requires large amounts of data .