4247 but is not identical . this issue is controversial . some groups , such as the american association of school administrators , argue that , if the iep cannot include such provisions , communication between schools and parents about a student's needs would be inhibited . however , the prohibition on including seclusion and restraint in an iep is seen by others as discouraging the use of such practices . in addition , the listing of seclusion and restraint in a student's iep or behavior intervention plan ( bip ) may impact the reasoning in judicial decisions , making it more difficult for parents to argue that the use of seclusion or restraint techniques are inappropriate . 4247 , introduced by representative george miller and representative cathy rodgers , and as passed by the house , would require the secretary of education to promulgate regulations "in order to protect each student from physical or mental abuse , aversive behavioral interventions that compromise student health and safety , or any physical restraint or seclusion imposed solely for purposes of discipline or convenience...." these regulations would apply to preschools and public or private schools that receive , or serve students that receive , support from federal education funding . 4247 would also prohibit the use of physical restraint or seclusion as a planned intervention from being written into the child's iep plan , and would require state educational agencies ( seas ) to submit state plans to the secretary of education providing assurances that the state has in effect state policies and procedures that meet the minimum standards established by the secretary . the secretary would also be given authority to award grants to the seas to assist in establishing , implementing , and enforcing the state policies and procedures . these grants are to be awarded using competitive procedures based on merit and none of the appropriated funds may be used for a congressional earmark . 4247 would also clarify that school resource officers may use handcuffs in certain circumstances . the congressional budget office has stated that enacting h.r . 4247 as reported out would not affect direct spending or revenues . s. 2860 , introduced by senator dodd , echoes the requirements of h.r . for example , the senate bill , but not the house bill , requires notification in writing to the state protection and advocacy system of serious bodily injury or death resulting from the use of seclusion or restraint in schools . s. 3895 , introduced by senator dodd and senator burr , also would require the secretary of education to promulgate regulations to protect each student from any aversive behavioral intervention that compromises student health and safety , or any physical restraint or seclusion imposed solely for purposes of discipline or convenience. under s. 3895 , these regulations must be promulgated not later than one year after enactment ; h.r . 4247 would require promulgation within 180 days of enactment . in addition , unlike h.r . 4247 , s. 3895 does not forbid earmarks . however , as noted previously , the major distinction from h.r . 4247 is that s. 3895 would allow the use of physical restraint or seclusion to be written into a student's iep plan under certain conditions .