a range of implementation issues have arisen . new safety standards and testing and certification requirements have caused confusion and concern about possible exemptions to and appropriate compliance with new standards , compliance with testing and certification requirements , and disputes about cpsc interpretation of new standards . despite the efforts of the cpsc to issue implementing regulations and guidelines in a timely manner , a number of unanswered questions and lack of clarity remain , particularly among small manufacturers , second - hand retailers , and manufacturers / retailers of certain types of consumer products . increased statutory penalties and potential applicability of certain state laws have added to uncertainty about what constitutes compliance with the new requirements of the cpsia . this report will describe the new requirements for certification and testing and the effect of the stay of enforcement of these requirements announced by the cpsc , certain new safety standards established by the cpsia and related implementation actions and issues , implementation issues faced by small businesses and second - hand retailers , and legislative proposals to amend the cpsia to provide for exemptions from certain requirements and for special consideration for small businesses and second - hand retailers . in light of the confusion and misunderstanding regarding the certification and testing requirements of the cpsa as amended by the cpsia , this section will summarize these requirements and the cpsc's limited stay of enforcement . there are two types of compliance certification requirements: ( 1 ) a general conformity certification for consumer products , not just children's products , based on testing of each product or a reasonable testing program by the manufacturer and ( 2 ) a certification for children's products based on testing by a third - party laboratory . until a third - party testing requirement takes effect for a safety standard applying to children's products , a general conformity certification applies to that safety standard . the certification requirement applies to products manufactured on or after november 12 , 2008 . the third - party testing and certification requirements take effect at different times , on a rolling basis . both types of certification are required of either the manufacturer ( domestic product ) or importer ( imported product ) , not of a retailer or distributor . the cpsia added a requirement that the certificates must ''accompany'' each product or shipment of products subject to the certification requirements and be ''furnished'' to each distributor or retailer of the product . in addition , a copy of the certificate must be ''furnished'' to the cpsc upon request . under the cpsa as amended by the cpsia , the cpsc has the authority to designate by rule whether the manufacturer or importer ( or private labeler ) must issue the required certificate and to relieve the other parties from the requirement to furnish certificates . the implementation of new product standards for lead and phthalates in particular have caused controversy . cpsc has no authority to delay or suspend the safety standards and on these grounds has declined to stay effective dates .