everyone eats . as a result , everyone is affected to some degree by food price changes . this makes understanding food price changes and their effects on consumers an important matter for congress . this report provides information on the current status and outlook for u.s. food prices , measuring their changes and how such changes relate to u.s. consumers . the first section of the report , " consumer demand ," briefly reviews the major economic concepts underlying consumer food behavior . the second section , " the consumer price index ( cpi ) ," describes how u.s. food price inflation rates have evolved since 1915 , when federal price data collection for inflation - measuring purposes began . the third section , " consumer income and expenditures ," provides information on recent history and projections for u.s. food expenditure shares relative to total household budget , with comparisons across income quintiles , as well as internationally . the fourth section , " recent food price inflation ," examines retail food price inflation , including a review and discussion of the level of food price inflation registered by the consumer price index for all - food , at - home - food , and away - from - home - food purchases as well as for major food groups . finally , a fifth section , entitled " effect of retail price changes ," briefly discusses the impact that rapid food price inflation can have on government food programs and the more vulnerable consumer groups . each section may be read independently of the others . thus , those readers that are concerned primarily with the current status of u.s. retail food price inflation may proceed directly to the sections entitled " historic price inflation patterns ," " recent food price inflation ," or " effect of retail price changes . consumer demand is influenced by economic factors — own - price , the price of close substitutes , the price of complementary items , and household income — as well as by several non - economic factors including tastes and preferences , family size , age of family members , geographic location , shopping behavior , and lifestyle choices . economists attempt to study and measure the nature of consumer behavior in response to changes in prices , incomes , and household characteristics , with an eye for understanding the potential social welfare outcomes that may result from price and income changes across different socioeconomic groups . policymakers , in turn , often attempt to use that information to design and implement policies that mitigate the more deleterious effects of price and income changes on consumers . the cpi is perhaps the most widely reported measure of u.s. price inflation . the cpi is used both as an economic indicator of retail price inflation and as a means of adjusting current - period values for inflation . the "all - items" cpi is the index most often referred to ( i.e. , the headline cpi ) for representing consumer price inflation . it is generally divided into eight major spending categories , including a "food and beverage" category comprising 15.3% of the overall index .