see figure 2 . the ndaa '08 limits agencies' ability to use single - award to / do contracts by requiring that agency heads make the following determinations , in writing , before awarding a single - award to / do contract whose expected value would exceed $103 million , including options: ( i ) the task or delivery orders expected under the contract are so integrally related that only a single source can reasonably perform the work ; ( ii ) the contract provides only for firm , fixed - price task or delivery orders for ( i ) products for which unit prices are established in the contract or ( ii ) services for which prices are established in the contract for the specific tasks to be performed ; ( iii ) only one source is qualified and capable of performing the work at a reasonable price to the government ; or ( iv ) because of exceptional circumstances , it is necessary in the public interest to award the contract to a single source . the ndaa '08 also specifies what constitutes a "fair opportunity to be considered" in competitions for orders in excess of $5.5 million under multiple - award to / do contracts . under the ndaa , for contractors to have a fair opportunity , agencies must provide them with ( 1 ) a notice of the task or delivery order that includes a clear statement of the agency's requirements ; ( 2 ) a reasonable period of time to provide a proposal in response to the notice ; ( 3 ) disclosure of the significant factors and subfactors ( including cost or price ) that the agency expects to consider in evaluating proposals and their relative importance ; ( 4 ) a written statement documenting the basis for the award and the relative importance of quality and price or cost factors , if the award is to be made on a best - value basis ; and ( 5 ) an opportunity for post - award debriefing . finally , the ndaa '08 granted gao exclusive authority to hear protests alleging improprieties in agencies' award of task and delivery orders valued in excess of $10 million that do not increase the scope , period , or maximum value of the underlying contract . when granting such authority , congress initially included a "sunset" provision , stating that the "subsection" granting this authority would be "in effect for three years , beginning on the date that is 120 days after [its] date of enactment" ( i.e. ota helps to avoid these difficulties . also not subject to the requirement for full and open competition under cica are those procurement contracts entered into through the "use of procurement procedures ... expressly authorized by statute. there are numerous statutory provisions that allow agencies to use specific procurement procedures in certain circumstances , or otherwise allow them to limit competition for procurement contracts . one provision of the consolidated appropriations act for fy2005 , for example , allowed the u.s. agency for international development ( usaid ) to place task orders with small businesses or small disadvantaged businesses ( sdbs ) in lieu of providing a "fair opportunity" for all eligible firms to compete .