in enacting p.l . 94-142 , the original version of idea , congress provided grants to the states to help pay for education for children with disabilities , and also delineated specific requirements the states must follow to receive these federal funds . this public law contained a requirement that if there is a dispute between the school and the parents of a child with a disability , the child "stays put" in his or her current educational placement until the dispute is resolved using the due process procedures set forth in the statute . the concept of "stay put" was placed in the statute to help eliminate the then common discriminatory practice of expelling children with disabilities from school . a revised "stay put" provision remains as law in the current version of idea . in 1988 , the question of whether there was an implied exception to the "stay put" rule was presented to the supreme court in honig v. doe . honig involved emotionally disturbed children , one of whom had choked another student with sufficient force to leave abrasions on the child's neck and who had kicked out a window while he was being escorted to the principal's office . the other child in the honig case had been involved in stealing , extorting money , and making lewd comments . the school had sought expulsion , but the supreme court disagreed finding that "congress very much meant to strip schools of the unilateral authority they had traditionally employed to exclude disabled students , particularly emotionally disturbed students , from school. however , the court observed that this holding did "not leave educators hamstrung.... where a student poses an immediate threat to the safety of others , officials may temporarily suspend him or her for up to 10 school days.... and in those cases in which the parents of a truly dangerous child adamantly refuse to permit any change in placement , the 10-day respite gives school officials an opportunity to invoke the aid of the courts under section 1415 ( e ) ( 2 ) , which empowers courts to grant any appropriate relief. this statement about the school's right to seek judicial relief has come to be know as a honig injunction . the supreme court's interpretation of idea in honig did not quell all concerns about discipline and children with disabilities . in 1994 , congress amended idea's "stay put" provision to give schools the unilateral authority to remove a child with a disability to an interim alternative educational setting if the child was determined to have brought a firearm to school . although there is no specific provision allowing a court to award to expert witness fees to prevailing parents , the language regarding attorneys' fees has been interpreted by some lower courts to allow such an award . idea's statutory language states in relevant part: "in any action or proceeding brought under this section , the court , in its discretion , may award reasonable attorneys' fees as part of the costs — ( i ) to a prevailing party who is the parent of a child with a disability. the parents in arlington central school district v. murphy argued that the language on costs encompassed the payment of expert witness fees .