who refers to the virus as influenza a ( h1n1 ) . the role of swine in the emergence of this virus is under investigation . the u.s. centers for disease control and prevention ( cdc ) and other administration officials refer to it as 2009 h1n1 flu . throughout this report , the virus is referred to as h1n1 . the virus does not appear to be as lethal as h5n1 avian influenza — which reemerged in 2005 — but is slightly more lethal than seasonal flu . although h1n1 has spread enough to be characterized as a pandemic , researchers are not yet sure how virulent the virus will become . most countries , with the exception of china , have adhered to the who recommendation against banning international travel or closing borders . china has reportedly quarantined and prevented a number of mexican nationals , including those living in china at the time of the outbreak , from traveling . mexico reportedly responded by barring all flights to china until "concerns about discrimination were addressed. though no other country has reportedly quarantined mexican nationals or any other citizens from countries with outbreaks , some countries have warned against nonessential travel to the united states and mexico . on april 27 , 2009 , the european union health commissioner androulla vassiliou reportedly urged europeans to postpone nonessential travel to the united states and mexico . on the same day , the cdc recommended that u.s. travelers avoid all nonessential travel to mexico . on may 15 , 2009 , it downgraded the recommendation to a "travel health precaution. in defending the decision not to close u.s. borders with mexico , homeland security secretary janet napolitano testified at an april 29 , 2009 , senate homeland security committee hearing that "closing the border [to mexico] would yield only very marginal benefits ; at the same time , closing the border has very high costs . the strain of the virus that was first detected in mexico is already present throughout the united states , and there is no realistic opportunity to contain the virus through border closures , so our focus must now be on mitigating the virus. closing u.s. borders could involve a series of legal and logistical issues . a number of countries have reportedly installed or are in the process of installing "thermal ( temperature ) scanners" in airports to detect the body temperature of travelers and further screen those whose body temperature exceed 100 degrees fahrenheit . there is some debate , however , on the effectiveness of such measures . several countries have instituted actions to prevent the spread of h1n1 among animals . egypt is reportedly the first country to order the slaughter of pigs , though pigs have not yet been identified as a source of human transmission . several countries have also banned the import of pork and pork products from the united states , canada , and mexico . on may 1 , 2009 , usaid established the pandemic influenza response management team — composed of its bureaus of global health and democracy , conflict , and humanitarian assistance — to coordinate the u.s. humanitarian response to h1n1 outbreaks .