493 ) was introduced . the bill was intended to establish new standards applicable to surface impoundments . on february 12 , 2009 , the house committee on natural resources , subcommittee on energy and mineral resources , held a legislative hearing on the bill . a scheduled markup was canceled when epa announced that it would soon propose new regulations applicable to landfills and surface impoundments . the house transportation and infrastructure committee , subcommittee on water resources and environment , held several hearings that looked at different aspects of the kingston release , such as potential water quality impacts , causes of the release , and cleanup progress . also , on december 10 , 2009 , the house committee on energy and commerce , subcommittee on energy and the environment , held a hearing entitled "drinking water and public health impacts of coal combustion waste disposal. given its interest in this issue , it is unclear how congress may respond given the current debate regarding epa's existing authority to regulate ccw and its potential to regulate it as hazardous waste . ยง6901 et seq . ) in may 2000 , epa determined that ccw did not warrant regulation under subtitle c of rcra ( the federal hazardous waste requirements ) . epa did , however , determine that national regulations under subtitle d of rcra ( the solid waste management requirements ) were warranted for ccw when it is disposed in landfills or surface impoundments . these management methods are largely unregulated at the federal level . instead , they are regulated according to state requirements that vary from state to state . on december 22 , 2008 , national attention was turned to potential risks associated with ccw management when a breach in an impoundment pond at the tennessee valley authority's ( tva's ) kingston , tn , plant released 1.1 billion gallons of coal fly ash slurry . the release covered more than 300 acres and damaged or destroyed homes and property . the sludge discharged into the nearby emory and clinch rivers , filling large areas of the rivers and resulting in fish kills . sampling at the site in january 2009 found arsenic levels that exceeded the environmental protection agency's ( epa's ) removal action level ( contaminant levels at which time - critical response actions may be required ) . according to tva , the estimated cleanup cost will likely reach $1.2 billion . tva recognized that this estimate could change significantly depending on the method of containment or the amount of ash ultimately disposed of as well as the impact of new coal ash laws and regulations that may be implemented at the state or federal level . further , tva's estimate does not include the potential costs associated with future regulatory actions , litigation , fines or penalties that may be assessed , final remediation activities , or other settlements . epa and tva have estimated that the cleanup may take two to three years . in addition to the kingston release , other events related to ccw management have attracted national media attention , as well as the attention of various stakeholders and some members of congress .