amendments in p.l . 105-185 extended the period of food stamp / supplemental security income ( ssi ) / medicaid ( but not temporary assistance for needy families ) eligibility for refugees and asylees from five to seven years and added cuban and haitian entrants to those eligible for these benefits for seven years . despite a history of travel restrictions imposed by the castro government , cuba was one of the top immigrant - sending countries during the last half of the 20 th century and is one of the top immigrant - sending countries thus far in the 21 st century . in fy2008 , there were 49,500 cubans who became legal permanent residents ( lprs ) — surpassed only by lprs from mexico , china , india , and the philippines . yet , very few cubans have arrived in the united states through the legal immigration avenues proscribed by the ina . an analysis of the trends in cuban migrants — and how their patterns have changed over time — follows . u.s. immigration policy toward cuban migrants juggles immigration control and humanitarian compassion within a larger policy framework that remains quite contentious . the change in leadership of both the united states and cuba may provide openings for revisions in u.s. policy on cuban migration . a normalization of immigration policies , however , is not imminent nor is it likely to be easily achieved . some of the major challenges and issues that bear on u.s. policy on cuban migrants are discussed below . some consider the migrant interdiction and repatriation policy to be at odds with the rescue mission of the u.s. coast guard , while others view it as integral to maritime security role of the u.s. coast guard . a series of events in 1999 illustrate the difficulties balancing these priorities . a well - publicized incident in june 1999 provoked outrage when the u.s. coast guard used pepper spray and a water cannon to prevent six cubans from reaching surfside beach in florida . a few weeks later , a woman drowned when a boat capsized during interdiction . notably in late november 1999 , the u.s. coast guard opted to bring six - year old elian gonzalez and two other survivors of an ill - fated journey to the united states rather than taking them to cuba as the migration agreement provides . for the first five months elian gonzalez was in the united states , he was in the temporary care of his father's uncle , lazaro gonzalez , who lives in miami . when elian's father , juan miguel gonzalez , arrived in the united states in april 2000 to assume custody of his son , lazaro gonzalez defied a federal government order to turn over the child . then - attorney general janet reno ordered federal law enforcement officers to remove elian from the home of lazaro gonzalez in the pre - dawn hours of april 22 , 2000 . several incidents in 2003 offer further examples of the interdiction and repatriation dilemma . on april 11 , 2003 , the cuban government executed three men who had hijacked a ferry in havana on april 2 in an attempt to reach the united states .