this is not a requirement for racs . table 2 highlights the similarities and differences among the various contractor claims review processes . on july 11 , 2008 , john dingell , chairman of the house energy and commerce committee ; charles rangel , chairman of the house ways and means committee ; pete stark , chairman of the house ways and means subcommittee on health ; frank pallone , chairman of the house energy and commerce subcommittee on health ; and representative lois capps wrote a letter to the gao requesting that the agency undertake a study of the rac program . as part of its study , the gao will be examining any actions cms is taking to prevent future improper payments in high - risk areas identified during the demonstration as well as the agency's plans for the ongoing monitoring and oversight of its rac contractors . the oig is also conducting a study of the rac initiative , which is expected to be completed in march 2010 . improper payments pose a significant risk to medicare . in fy2010 , medicare spending is expected to exceed $500 billion for approximately 47 million elderly and disabled beneficiaries . excluding improper payments in the part c and d programs , overpayments in medicare ffs amount to over $10 billion annually . historically , cms has relied on its claims administration contractors to reduce improper payments in the medicare program . however , shortly after hhs began reporting the first medicare improper payment rate in 1996 , concerns surrounding the contractors' effectiveness at safeguarding the program began to emerge . as noted by various experts , at least one contributing factor to the perceived weakness in this area was budget constraints and the lack of incentives for contractors to direct specific efforts at reducing payment errors . prior to the mma , which mandated contracting reform , medicare statute precluded cms from offering financial incentives to its contractors to improve performance . contractors were paid under cost - based contracts , which prohibited them from making a profit . additionally , these entities were evaluated based on their ability to pay claims quickly and efficiently and not necessarily accurately . therefore the rac program , which authorizes the use of payment incentives to reimburse contractors , could be viewed as an opportunity for cms to enhance its program integrity efforts . on the other hand , paying contractors a fee for every improper payment they identify and recover has many policymakers and provider groups concerned . results from the demonstration showed that while the racs were successful in returning millions of dollars to the medicare trust funds , some of their audits were inaccurate and overly burdensome for providers , raising questions about cms's oversight of the program . the agency has since made a number of changes to the permanent program to mitigate some of these concerns , such as requiring racs to return all contingency fees for overpayments overturned on appeal , hiring a validation contractor to review rac audits , and setting limits on the number of medical records racs can request from providers at one time . however , anxiety among providers remains .