these options are analyzed further below . as congress debates means to prevent identity theft , mitigate the potential effects of identity theft , and investigate and prosecute identity thieves , there are several issues policymakers may wish to consider . one issue surrounds the extent to which reducing the availability of ssns may reduce the prevalence of identity theft . a second issue involves the degree to which increasing breach notification requirements may reduce both identity theft and the monetary burden incurred by victims . yet another issue concerns the adequacy of ( 1 ) the current legal definitions of identity theft and aggravated identity theft and ( 2 ) the list of predicate offenses for aggravated identity theft . policymakers may question what the extent of the federal government's role should be in preventing identity theft . one element of this discussion centers around the fact that identity theft is often committed to facilitate other crimes and frauds ( eg , credit card fraud , document fraud , and employment fraud ) . consequently , preventing identity theft could proactively prevent other crimes . when policymakers consider the federal government's role in preventing identity theft , they necessarily consider the government's role in preventing interrelated crimes . congress may also consider the various means available to prevent identity theft and evaluate the federal government's role — if any — in implementing them . possible ways to prevent identity theft include securing data in the private sector , securing data in the public sector , and improving consumer authentication processes . the prevalence of personally identifiable information — and in particular , of social security numbers ( ssn ) — has been an issue concerning policymakers , analysts , and data security experts . there are few restrictions on the use of ssns in the private sector , and therefore the use of ssns is widespread . some industries , such as the financial services industry , have stricter requirements for safeguarding personally identifying information . there are greater restrictions on the use of ssns in the public sector , as congress has already taken direct steps in reducing the prevalence of ssns in this arena . for example , in the intelligence reform and terrorism prevention act of 2004 ( p.l . 108-458 ) , congress prohibited states from displaying or electronically including ssns on driver's licenses , motor vehicle registrations , or personal identification cards . one document that continues to display ssns , however , is the medicare identification card . congress may consider whether the continued display of ssns on medicare cards places individuals at undue risk for identity theft as well as for becoming a victim of other crimes facilitated by identity theft and whether it should enact legislation to prohibit the display of ssns on medicare cards . proponents of legislation to remove ssns from medicare cards cite reports that as of 2013 , approximately 50 million medicare cards displayed social security numbers , potentially placing these individuals at risk for identity theft . opponents of such legislation may cite that transitioning to a different medicare identifier has most recently been estimated to cost between $255 million and $317 million .