others may be too small or dispersed to include . for example , the european union's market - based approach covers only about 40% of the eu's emissions . other instruments are used to address difficult sectors , such as transportation . thus , initiatives to use the current clean air act could be designed as a substitute for what is perceived by some as a protracted congressional debate , or as a complementary effort to address sources or gases that a future market - based system may choose to exclude from its provisions . it is possible that one size does not fit all in this debate . some sources may not respond significantly to a market - based approach because they are not particularly price - sensitive . there are also disadvantages to using existing clean air act provisions to address climate change . most of the provisions do not have statutory deadlines.... to the extent one favors cap - and - trade as a regulatory mechanism for addressing climate change , one might worry about the lack of clear authority for such a scheme under the existing statute . the naaqs program is an ungainly framework for regulating globally harmful pollutants . psd requirements are triggered for sources that are "large" when it comes to conventional pollution but "small" from the perspective of global pollutants . the technical support document does not mention some more aggressive options . these include a fuel - neutral standard or a technology - based standard . for example , for carbon dioxide emissions from a newly - constructed powerplant , a fuel - neutral standard could follow the example set by the 1997 and 2005 nox nsps and the 2005 nox nsps for modified existing sources . under those regulations , the nox emissions standard is the same , regardless of the fuel burned — solid , liquid , or gaseous . this standard is much more expensive for coal - fired facilities to comply with than for natural - gas - fired facilities , thus encouraging the lower - carbon gas - fired technologies . likewise , epa could choose to set a newly - constructed powerplant standard based on the performance of natural gas burned in a combined - cycle configuration – the fuel and technology of choice for construction of new powerplants for the last two decades . if epa wanted to encourage the rollover of the existing coal - fired powerplant fleet to natural gas , nuclear , or renewable sources , it could apply a fuel - neutral standard to modified sources as well . for example , a co 2 emission standard of 0.8 lb . per kilowatt - hour output could be met by a new natural gas - fired , combined - cycle facility , as well as any non - emitting generating technology , such as nuclear power or renewables . in contrast , the standard would require a 60% reduction in emissions from a new coal - fired facility – forcing the development of a carbon control technology , such as carbon capture and storage ( ccs ) , in order for a new coal - fired facility to be built or modified .