they are also more likely to live in poverty . further , the young children of disconnected youth are at risk of growing up in poverty , which as discussed above , can have far reaching consequences in adulthood . the costs to society may also be great , though little research has been done in this area . youth who are disconnected may pose a financial burden if they rely on cash and non - cash assistance programs , or if they become homeless . in an increasingly global economy and with retirement underway for baby boomers , society is seen as having a strong interest in ensuring that all young people have the educational attainment and employment experience to become skilled workers , contributing taxpayers , and participants in civic life . interventions to connect youth to school and work depend on a number of factors . the research literature has devoted attention to the timing of interventions . the timing can target early childhood , the elementary and middle school years , or the high school years and just beyond . during each of these phases , developmental outcomes are influenced by numerous environmental and social factors , including family structure , stability , and functioning ; economic circumstances ; education ; health care ; and schooling . they are also influenced by innate and inherited characteristics . these factors can influence how well youth ultimately make the transition to adulthood . the research literature has identified certain markers of risk and problem behaviors in the middle and older youth years that are associated with later negative outcomes . markers of risk suggest that youth will likely experience poor outcomes in adolescence and beyond . these markers are tangible indicators that can be measured or documented , and include low school performance and involvement in the child welfare system . problem behaviors are activities that have the potential to hurt youth , the community , or both . these findings are discussed in greater detail below . it might be expected that a higher percentage of males than females are disconnected , given that a greater share of males ages 16 through 24 have dropped out of high school and that males appear to be more vulnerable to losing jobs . however , consistent with other studies of disconnected youth , the crs analysis shows that females are more likely than males to be disconnected . the difference in the rates between males and females ages 16 through 24 is relatively small — 6.3% of females and 5.8% of males , as depicted in figure 2 . the higher rates for females appears to be explained by the fact they were more likely to be parenting . overall , 2.2% of females and 0.3% of males were disconnected and parenting . it is possible that their parenting responsibilities kept them from working or attending school . ( as shown in figure 1 , an estimated 13.5% of youth reported they were not connected in 2014 because they were taking care of home or family , and had children. )