discoveries. in accordance with the patent act of 1952 , an inventor may seek the grant of a patent by preparing and submitting an application to the uspto . uspto officials known as examiners then determine whether the invention disclosed in the application merits the award of a patent . uspto procedures require examiners to determine whether the invention fulfills certain substantive standards set by the patent statute . to be patentable , the invention must be novel , or different , from subject matter disclosed by an earlier patent , publication , or other state - of - the - art knowledge . in addition , an invention is not patentable if "the subject matter as a whole would have been obvious at the time the invention was made to a person having ordinary skill in the art to which said subject matter pertains. this requirement of "nonobviousness" prevents the issuance of patents claiming subject matter that a skilled artisan would have been able to implement in view of the knowledge of the state of the art . the invention must also be useful , a requirement that is satisfied if the invention is operable and provides a tangible benefit . even if these requirements of novelty , nonobviousness , and utility are met , an invention is not patentable unless it falls within at least one category of patentable subject matter . according to section 101 of the patent act of 1952 , an invention which is a "process , machine , manufacture , or composition of matter" may be patented . the range of patentable subject matter under this statute has been characterized as "extremely broad. the courts and uspto have nonetheless concluded that certain subject matter , including abstract ideas and laws of nature , is not patentable under section 101 . this report further discusses this legal standard below . in addition to these substantive requirements , the uspto examiner will consider whether the submitted application fully discloses and distinctly claims the invention . in particular , the application must enable persons skilled in the art to make and use the invention without undue experimentation . in addition , the application must disclose the "best mode," or preferred way , that the applicant knows to practice the invention . if the uspto allows the patent to issue , its owner obtains the right to exclude others from making , using , selling , offering to sell , or importing into the united states the patented invention . those who engage in those acts without the permission of the patentee during the term of the patent can be held liable for infringement . adjudicated infringers may be enjoined from further infringing acts . the patent statute also provides for an award of damages "adequate to compensate for the infringement , but in no event less than a reasonable royalty for the use made of the invention by the infringer. the maximum term of patent protection is ordinarily set at 20 years from the date the application is filed . at the end of that period , others may employ that invention without regard to the expired patent . patent rights do not enforce themselves .