in addition , the ricci decision has implications for congress . the supreme court granted review to resolve the dispute . a classification will not offend the constitution unless it is characterized by invidious discrimination . according to justice kennedy , who wrote the majority opinion , the city's rejection of the racially disparate exam results was , despite its seemingly well - intentioned attempt to avoid disparate impact liability , an explicitly race - based decision that would violate the disparate treatment prohibition in the absence of a valid defense . justice alito also wrote a concurring opinion in which he was joined by justices scalia and thomas . the primary purpose of justice alito's opinion appeared to be to rebut several arguments made by the dissenting justices , particularly the dissent's interpretation of the evidentiary record . over the years , the court has interpreted the equal protection clause in a way that requires different degrees of scrutiny for such classifications , depending on the category of persons affected . under the strict scrutiny test , which is the most stringent form of review and applies to classifications based on race , the government must show that the classification drawn by a statute is narrowly tailored to meet a compelling governmental interest . the question that arose in ricci was whether the city's failure to certify the test results violated title vii's prohibition against disparate treatment or the constitutional requirement for equal protection . the firefighters who sued argued that the city's refusal to promote them constituted discrimination on the basis of race in violation of both title vii and the equal protection clause . city officials defended their actions , arguing that the city was attempting to comply with title vii and avoid a lawsuit when it refused to certify test results that had a disparate impact on minority firefighters . ultimately , the court ruled in favor of the white firefighters , holding that the city had violated title vii's prohibition against disparate treatment when it discarded the test results . in order to reconcile what the majority viewed as two competing provisions of title vii , the court established a new standard ─ imported from its equal protection jurisprudence ─ for evaluating when attempts to avoid disparate impact liability excuse what otherwise would be prohibited disparate treatment under title vii . according to the court , "before an employer can engage in intentional discrimination for the asserted purpose of avoiding or remedying an unintentional disparate impact , the employer must have a strong basis in evidence to believe it will be subject to disparate - impact liability if it fails to take the race - conscious , discriminatory action. the court explained: applying the strong - basis - in - evidence standard to title vii gives effect to both the disparate - treatment and disparate - impact provisions , allowing violations of one in the name of compliance with the other only in certain , narrow circumstances . the standard leaves ample room for employers' voluntary compliance efforts , which are essential to the statutory scheme and to congress's efforts to eradicate workplace discrimination .