reliability . some argue that producers hesitate to adopt anaerobic digestion technology due to the poor performance rate observed in the 1970s . ad system performance has improved over time due to better engineering , construction materials , and management . communicating current performance rates may provide producers with the information needed to gain more confidence in the improved technology . ad system performance data may be expanded with mandatory reporting on a periodic basis by an independent third party , which might bolster performance claims made by some ad system construction companies . information ( eg , demonstration projects , long - term performance records ) that communicates recent performance may mitigate producers' doubts about technology reliability and may verify energy generation and greenhouse gas emission reduction data reported . some producers and construction companies are opposed to a national reporting program because of the release of potentially proprietary information . lack of an engineering practice standard . a national practice standard that lists performance criteria , safety precautions , technical components , and design elements and has undergone review from a standards developing organization is not available for anaerobic digestion technology . some producers may be reluctant to make a financial investment in a technology that may or may not meet future environmental and technical requisites . the usda natural resources conservation service ( nrcs ) issued an anaerobic digester conservation practice standard in 2009 . utility collaboration . rates paid by utilities for the electricity generated from ad systems vary by state and within each utility . it may not be economically attractive for a producer to sell the renewable energy generated depending on the cost per kilowatt - hour offered . some net - metering agreements pay wholesale rates instead of retail rates for the electricity generated , thus limiting potential profitability . some gas utility companies may be reluctant to accept a renewable energy fuel originating from a technology with no official standard that may contaminate an otherwise clean energy source . unquantifiable co - benefits . certain benefits ( eg , odor reduction ) may not be quantifiable in dollar terms but may add to the value of an ad system . operation and maintenance . ad systems perform optimally when they are well maintained . some estimate that daily ad system operation and maintenance may require 30 minutes to an hour . the producer may have to acquire a level of technical expertise not previously necessary . congress is faced with proposed legislation centered on clean energy and the environment . there may be an opportunity for the agricultural community , particularly the livestock industry , to participate in forthcoming efforts for energy generation and greenhouse gas emission reduction with anaerobic digestion technology . prior to incorporating anaerobic digestion technology into legislation , congress may choose to consider: identify ing the primary benefit offered by an ad system . selecting a primary benefit ( renewable energy generation or greenhouse gas emission reduction ) may assist with determining which policy vehicle could support technology deployment ( e.g . energy legislation , climate change legislation , agricultural legislation ) . a single message regarding the technology benefit may encourage producers to adopt the technology to achieve the policy goal .