in addition , h.r . 3962 has some additional restrictions on health related tax provisions: it would limit health flexible spending arrangements in cafeteria plans to $2,500 , indexed to inflation ( $13.3 billion ) ; increase the penalty for nonqualified distributions from health savings accounts to 20% ( $1.3 billion ) ; and disallow the deduction for subsidies related to medicare part d ( $3.0 billion ) . it would also impose a 2.5% excise tax on the first taxable sale of medical devices ( i.e. the president is signed h.r . 111-148 ) on march 23 ; h.r . 4872 was approved by the house and senate on march 25 and signed by the president ( p.l . 111-152 ) on march 30 . detailed revenue estimates of the three versions ( the house bill , the senate bill , and the senate bill with the reconciliation modifications , the enacted bill ) are in the appendix . the tax proposals differ in their effects on behavior and where the burden falls in the income distribution . although most taxes rise with income in absolute amounts , the burden relative to income may fall more heavily on higher - income taxpayers ( a progressive change ) , about equally on all taxpayers ( a proportional change ) , or more heavily on lower - income taxpayers ( a regressive change ) . for instance , the limit on itemized deductions increases taxes for high - income taxpayers ( roughly the top 2% ) and is a highly progressive change ; similarly , the tax on high adjusted gross incomes largely affects the top 1% . the burden of limiting health - related income and payroll - tax exclusions tends to increase taxes as a percent of income proportionally more in the middle income brackets , with smaller effects at both the low and high ends of the income distribution . excise taxes tend to be regressive and fall more heavily on lower - income classes . note that the distributional analysis in this report refers only to the financing mechanism and not to the distributional effects of the entire health care reform proposals , as the health care benefits are likely to favor lower - income families . thus even with a regressive revenue source , the overall proposal might redistribute in favor of lower - income individuals . after a brief summary of the provisions adopted , this report reviews the revenue raisers proposed in the house and senate bills and by president obama . other financing proposals are presented including earlier proposals made by the obama administration and those introduced in earlier congressional work . the final sections discuss other proposals suggested by the round - table discussion participants . the most important revenue raiser in the final legislation is the increased medicare tax ( an additional 0.9% of wage income and a 3.8% tax on investment income ) , which accounts for 48% of the revenue over fy2010-fy2019 . the next largest revenue raisers are also health related: the fee on health insurance providers ( 14% ) , the "cadillac" tax on employer health insurance premiums above certain levels ( 7% ) , and the fee on branded drugs ( 6% ) .