more information on each is provided below . as noted at the beginning of this report , the federal civil service system has become increasingly fragmented in recent decades . the next two sections are included to provide context for this complexity and to help explain the configuration of statutory authorities that relate to hiring and pay of the federal government's s&t workforce . the two sections briefly outline developments relating to statutory authorities that are ( 1 ) executive - branch - wide and ( 2 ) agency - specific in nature . a number of organizations have analyzed the federal s&t workforce . these reports have identified some possible policy options that congress and federal agencies might consider undertaking in order to better recruit and retain the federal s&t workforce . human resource management issues relating to s&t personnel have been of ongoing concern to congress , both government - wide and for particular agencies . if congress wishes to evaluate the ability of the federal government and its agencies to recruit and retain s&t personnel , the variety of statutory authorities provide illustrations of topics that might be examined . in addition , the federal government's experience with these statutory authorities might inform congress's deliberations , if congress wished to consider modifying the ability of the federal government to recruit highly - qualified scientific , engineering , and technical personnel . in evaluating current efforts or considering future modifications , congress may wish to consider factors that include the following: given perceived problems regarding recruitment and retention of federal s&e personnel , agency - specific and executive - branch - wide approaches could be considered . if an executive - branch - wide approach were pursued , it may be possible to structure legislation to leverage the involvement of entities such as opm , the federal chief human capital officers ( chco ) council , ostp , and omb , in addition to agencies with s&e workforces themselves . tools to galvanize action by agencies , opm , and omb might be pursued through several means , including requirements for strategic planning , coordination , evaluation , and solitary or joint reporting . although many statutory authorities have focused on providing additional flexibilities to agencies , it is not clear how much accountability has been gained in exchange . a number of observers have , over extended periods , expressed concerns about the ability of opm to effectively oversee agency use of these authorities . the goal of a number of programs is to recruit staff for term appointments of one to five years . however , if the goal is for an agency to build a long - term workforce who stay for more than five years , reliance on short - term appointments may not be an appropriate model . further , even if an agency has the goal of building a shorter - term workforce of five years or less , prospective recruits may be unwilling to take a position that has a pre - determined endpoint , even if the rate of compensation is higher . several of the programs only apply to a small number of individuals .