appendix a . , what may be contracted out ? ) to questions of policy ( i.e. , which of the functions that may lawfully be contracted out should be contracted out ? ) proposals of the latter sort are not definitional and are discussed in the section on " focusing on questions of contracting policy " below . proposals of the former sort — to replace inherently governmental functions with another phrase that defines which functions agencies may lawfully contract out — would seem to be premised on the belief that agencies will more easily and accurately ascertain which functions they must perform in - house if they can consider specific functions in relation to a defined word or phrase that more clearly expresses the grounds for their decision making . by its name , a "core function" would seem to be one central to an agency's activities ; a mission essential function , one necessary for the successful accomplishment of a task ; and a critical function , one that could have harmful consequences if not performed . all of the terms suggested as definitional replacements for "inherently governmental functions" could also potentially connote a broader set of functions than those encompassed by the term inherently governmental functions , especially under its current definition . if dod decided to convert the function after these studies were completed , the secretary of defense had to report this decision to congress . many of these changes have not yet been fully implemented . similarly , the obama administration has recently signaled its commitment to have more functions , in general , performed by the federal government and to ensure that inherently governmental functions , in particular , are not improperly contracted out . some commentators attributed the alleged contracting out of inherently governmental functions during the george w. bush administration , in part , to president bush's "management agenda," which prominently featured a competitive sourcing initiative . the obama administration , in contrast , apparently intends to in - source , as a matter of policy . members of the administration have signaled their belief that contractors have performed inherently governmental functions , and that too many functions were contracted out in prior administrations . additionally , omb released guidance concerning "managing the multi - sector workforce" in july 2009 that cautions against "overreliance on contractors" and instructs agencies to ensure that functions which are "critical" but not "inherently governmental" be performed only with federal employees to the extent required to retain control of the agency mission and operations . however , once the agency has "sufficient internal capacity" to control its mission and operations , such "essential functions" can be performed by either contractor or governmental personnel , as can functions that are "essential" but not "inherently governmental. executive agencies have also made some plans for in - house performance of two functions — acquisitions work and provision of security services — whose performance by contractors has been of particular concern to congress . such changes in policy may suggest that the executive branch is no longer likely to contract out functions that some allege are inherently governmental .