budget enforcement . in the senate , a point of order rule can be applied if the cost of legislation increases the budget deficit by more than $10 billion in any fiscal year covered by the concurrent budget resolution , unless the proposed expenditures are offset by spending reductions in other programs . in general , medicaid and chip spending are not controlled through the annual appropriations process . as an entitlement program , medicaid's spending level is determined by the underlying benefit and eligibility criteria established in law . thus , federal medicaid expenditures vary depending on the amount of services required and the number of beneficiaries that enroll in any federal fiscal year . chip is a grant program , so federal spending is capped , with annual chip appropriations specified by law . the medicare , medicaid , and chip extension act of 2007 ( mmsea , p.l . 110-173 ) provided fy2008 and fy2009 chip allotments through march 31 , 2009 , with enough additional funding to cover the federal share of chip spending through march 31 , 2009 . as noted above , with passage of the children's health insurance reauthorization act of 2009 ( chipra , p.l . 111-3 ) , chip funding was extended through fy2013 . even though annual medicaid and chip appropriations are not controlled through the appropriations process , congress can exercise some authority over medicaid and chip spending through the appropriations process by limiting funds for specified activities . reconciliation instructions . in the senate , both the committee on finance and committee on health , education , labor , and pensions were required to reduce the federal budget deficit for programs under their jurisdictions by $1 billion over the period from fy2009 to fy2014 . similarly , in the house , the committees on energy and commerce and ways and means were required to reduce the federal budget deficit for programs under their jurisdictions by $1 billion for the period fy2009 to fy2014 . senate reserve funds . the joint budget resolution contained both senate and house budget neutral reserve funds . the senate provisions included two deficit - neutral funds that could affect medicaid and chip: ( 1 ) to transform and modernize america's health care system , and ( 2 ) to improve the well - being of children . house reserve funds . the house budget - neutral reserve fund provisions also included two proposals that could affect medicaid and chip: ( 1 ) a deficit - neutral fund for health care reform , and ( 2 ) a deficit - neutral fund to improve the well - being of children . for example , the labor , health and human services , and education appropriations bill regularly contains restrictions that limit circumstances when federal funds may be used to pay for abortions . it will be updated to reflect relevant legislative activity . congressional research service ( crs ) staff contact information by topic area is provided in table 2 at the end of the report . in january 2009 , there was grave concern among policymakers over the widening economic slowdown , bankruptcy in the real estate , automobile , and financial industries , and rapidly increasing unemployment .