congress subsequently approved p.l . 97-35 , the omnibus budget reconciliation act of 1981 , which consolidated 77 categorical grants and two earlier block grants into the following nine new block grants: elementary and secondary education ( 37 categorical grants ) , alcohol , drug abuse , and mental health services ( 10 categorical grants ) , maternal and child health services ( 9 categorical grants ) , preventive health and human services block grant ( merged 6 categorical grants with the health incentive grants for comprehensive health services block grant ) , primary care ( 2 categorical grants ) , community services ( 7 categorical grants ) , social services ( one categorical grant and the social services for low income and public assistance recipients block grant ) , low - income home energy assistance ( 1 categorical grant ) , and a revised community development block grant program ( adding an existing discretionary grant and 3 categorical grants ) . overall , funding for the categorical grants bundled into these block grants was reduced 12% , about $1 billion , from their combined funding level the previous year . president reagan argued that the funding reductions would not result in the loss of services for recipients because the reductions would be offset by administrative efficiencies . in addition , the reagan administration eliminated funding for 62 categorical grants in 1981 , mainly through authority provided under the omnibus budget reconciliation act of 1981 . some observers were convinced that the adoption of the omnibus budget reconciliation act of 1981 was proof of the coming devolution revolution . the number of federal grants to state and local governments was reduced and outlays for federal grants to state and local governments fell for the first time since world war ii , from $94.7 billion in fy1981 to $88.1 billion in fy1982 . however , in retrospect , federalism scholars now consider the 1981 block grants as more "historical accidents than carefully conceived restructurings of categorical programs" because they were contained in a lengthy bill that was primarily designed to reduce the budget deficit , not to reform federalism relationships . the bill was adopted under special parliamentary rules requiring a straight up or down vote without the possibility of amendment , and it was not considered and approved by authorizing committees of jurisdiction . nonetheless , largely due to the omnibus budget and reconciliation act of 1981 , in 1984 there were 12 block grants in operation ( compared to 392 categorical grants ) , accounting for about 15% of total grants - in - aid funding . during the remainder of his presidency , president ronald reagan submitted 26 block grant proposals to congress , with only one , the federal transit capital and operating assistance block grant , added in 1982 . beard was later to name the second american revolution . following the war , three constitutional amendments — the thirteenth adopted in 1865 , the fourteenth adopted in 1868 , and the fifteenth amendment adopted in 1870 — abolished slavery , prohibited states from denying due process or equal protection to any of their citizens , and banned racial restrictions on voting , respectively .