others have pointed to additional irregularities . karrubi expressed similar concerns . conservative candidate mohsen reza'i also filed formal complaints , which some have perceived as an indication that it is not just reformist candidates and supporters who are dissatisfied with the results . according to the official result totals he received 678,000 votes . he argues that he received between at least 5.3 and 7 million votes and that some estimates could be as high as 9 million . he says that his claim is based on his observers' reports from polling stations , information collected from 1,000 ballot boxes by his electoral headquarters , official opinion polls held in the country , and remarks addressed to him by voters and members of his electoral headquarters . taken together , doubts about the margin of victory and concerns over perceived fraud stemming from procedural violations fueled the largest protests since the iranian revolution and stoked international concerns about the legitimacy of the election results . initially , the candidates , the iranian people , and many who followed the election expressed doubts that the record 39 million votes cast could have been counted in such a short time , especially in light of reports that voting times were extended . while individual reports are difficult to verify , some reports suggest that , in some cases , ballot boxes were picked up by interior ministry officials before polling places closed which would mark a change in election procedures whereby ballots are typically counted by officials at the local level . khamenei urged the guardian council on june 15 to examine seriously the allegations of vote rigging , but urged the candidates to pursue their complaints through legal channels . he went on to state that the probe into vote - rigging allegations would be completed by june 25 . musavi has said that invalidating the election is the only way to regain the people's trust in the regime and rejected outright the guardian council's offer to recount some of the votes . these analysts also question the reliability of the polls prior to the election that indicated a close race . others say that ahmadinejad is often underestimated , as he was in 2005 , and that his message of piety and anti - corruption coupled with his hard line on national security issues are both popular among the majority of iranians . others have argued that election fraud on such a massive scale would have involved many levels of the government and would be difficult to perpetrate and conceal . other analysts assert that the allegations of fraud are likely true , and that the regime had motivation to interfere with the results . these analysts argue that the iranian government might have felt sufficiently threatened by the success of ahmadinejad's reformist opponents to mobilize a segment of the population that in large part boycotted the last elections . some analysts have speculated that khamenei engineered the election results in ahmadinejad's favor so drastically in an effort to avoid a close election that could have been contested .