population. following the hijacking of aircraft , that were then flown into the world trade center and the pentagon with devastating effects , a significant portion of homeland security resources in the united states were understandably devoted to aviation security — an amount proportionally larger than that of other transportation modes or critical infrastructure . the 2006 transatlantic airlines plot and the christmas day 2010 attempted bombing of northwest flight 253 , demonstrate that the threat to commercial aviation remains but that the tactics employed have evolved . since 9 / 11 , al - qa'ida and other terrorist groups with anti - western and anti - american ideologies have committed several other deadly terrorist attacks , including: bali , 2002 . bendle argues that this is not an "alarmist , eccentric , or "islamophobic" notion. his study documents that pyroterrorism involvement has been suspected or established in greece , israel , spain , and estonia . moreover , in the late 1990's , the earth liberation front set fire to various forests , commercial and industrial buildings in the united states including the u.s. forest service headquarters in oregon . pyroterrorism is just one example of many alternative hypotheses that homeland security risk managers may wish to consider in order to avoid what was famously described in the 9 / 11 commission report as "a failure of imagination. threat assessment is a critical component of the risk equation . risk , in turn , is an important element of the qhsr which will ultimately inform how the department proposes to allocate resources in the future based on the evolving threat environment . therefore , congress may wish to explore: how i&a will support the next step in the department's qhsr process , the top - to - bottom review that is intended to link strategy to program to budget . how intelligence analysis and assessments are used within the department to determine priorities for funding of new or existing homeland security programs . how intelligence analyses and assessments have led to increased or decreased funding for existing programs . the framework that dhs will establish for enhanced collaboration among risk and intelligence analysts . the islamist group jemaah islamiyah bombed nightclubs killing 202 . madrid , 2004 . a muslim , al - qa'ida - inspired terrorist cell bombed commuter trains killing 190 and injuring over 1,000 . london , 2005 . british islamist extremists bombed city buses killing 52 and injuring over 700 . mumbai , 2008 . a team from the militant group lashkar - e - taiba conducted a shooting and bombing rampage at two hotels , a railway station , hospital , jewish center , cafe , and cinema . 164 were killed . all of these attacks involved mass casualties . all resulted in visually dramatic destruction . but , none of them were committed against civil aviation . recognizing that some elements of the nation's critical infrastructure are defended in depth against attack , while others are not , a question of abiding interest is whether terrorists might adapt by choosing to attack softer targets in the homeland , such as nightclubs , commuter trains , buses , or other places where large numbers of americans congregate .