the first proposal , s.j.res . 39 , was amended and passed by a vote of 70-1 on june 4 , 1954 . some critics argue that those actions are insufficient . the critics argue that holding special elections to seat new representatives up to seven weeks after an announcement of extraordinary circumstances could deprive the nation of a functional , broadly representative legislative response at a time of great national challenge . others raise what they believe to be constitutional concerns related to provisional quorum rules . those who oppose current house practices regarding provisional quorum procedures argue that , contrary to longstanding house practice , quorum requirements are based on the number of seats in either chamber , and not on the number of members present to conduct business . article i , section 5 , clause 1 of the constitution states , in part , that " ... a majority of each [chamber] shall constitute a quorum to do business ... ," but does not specify whether the majority is based on members or the number of seats authorized for the chamber . observers raising constitutional concerns believe that if more than half of the 435 seats in the house , or the 100 seats in the senate , were vacant because the members who held them were killed , or those members were unable to serve because they were incapacitated or missing in the aftermath of an incident , any actions taken by fewer than a majority of the remaining members in either chamber could be seen as potentially illegitimate , and arguably unconstitutional . actions in the house have attempted to enable the chamber to withstand a range of interruptions that could kill or incapacitate large numbers of members , while supporting the principle that membership in the chamber is gained only through election by the people . in the senate , most vacant seats could be replenished in a relatively brief period through appointments ( assuming state - based authorities were available to make such appointments ) , but similar questions may arise if a sufficient number of senators survive but are incapacitated , or if their whereabouts are unknown , and the senate cannot meet with a quorum to do business . as a consequence , some observers argue that the policies adopted or enacted since 2001 may not provide adequate protection against a sudden loss of membership in either chamber , and may raise constitutional and implementation concerns . they believe that these concerns can only be remedied by amending the constitution to allow for the rapid replenishment of vacant seats in the event of a significant loss of membership in either chamber . several proposed constitutional amendments to address the consequences of catastrophic losses of congressional membership have been introduced since the 2001 attacks . during another period of uncertainty , 1946 to 1962 , similar measures were proposed . in current times , the perceived need for such measures is based on the possibility that terrorists could target congress itself , or the washington , dc , region .