for example , h.r . 496 ( rangel , introduced january 14 , 2009 ) seeks to express the sense of congress that , in light of "fatally flawed" wto appellate body decisions , that the department of commerce should revisit its february 22 , 2007 decision to modify its methodology in ad investigations "with respect to the calculation of the weighted - average dumping margin" to ensure that "100% of dumping is addressed under united states antidumping law and practice , while also ensuring that the united states complies with its wto obligations. 496 would also prohibit the department of commerce from implementing any further changes unless and until it consults with the appropriate congressional committees and the ustr , and provides an opportunity for public comment by publishing proposed modifications in the federal register . in addition , since the united states was found to be in violation of its wto obligations with regard to the cdsoa and the usage of zeroing when conducting initial investigations , some observers suggest that it might be advantageous for the united states to concede on these issues in dda negotiations , especially if by doing so u.s. negotiators can avoid other changes to the agreement that might adversely affect u.s. trade remedy laws . two issues unique to the wto subsidies debate are ( 1 ) special and differential treatment of developing countries relative to relaxing disciplines on subsidies that governments may provide to fledgling industries , and ( 2 ) the ongoing discussion on limiting subsidies to fisheries industries worldwide that could contribute to overcapacity and overfishing . u.s. negotiators have formally opposed any extension of the special and differential treatment on subsidies beyond that which was previously provided in article 27 of the ascm . the united states bases this position on economic research indicating that providing subsidies in the long term creates artificial advantages that can lead to distortion of market signals . in turn , the distortions created by subsidies can undermine efficient allocation and utilization of resources . if concessions were made in favor of extending or granting additional favorable subsidies treatment to developing country wto members , it would do little to weaken the effectiveness or the administration of u.s. trade remedy laws . however , it could lead to further injury to u.s. import - competing producers who , depending on the nature and duration of the special treatment provided , might not have recourse to subsidies action . on the issue of fisheries subsidies , the united states is one of the countries in favor of developing disciplines in the fisheries sector . u.s. negotiators have written that the united states especially favors a broad prohibition on any subsidies that contribute to overcapacity and overfishing . those who oppose this viewpoint include japan and korea , who believe that injurious fisheries subsidies can already be dealt with in the context of the ascm , and developing countries who believe that their small - scale and artisanal fisheries merit special and differential treatment . even if consensus is not reached on this issue in the context of the dda , limits on overcapacity and overfishing could possibly be addressed in a context other than international trade through other ongoing international discussions on fisheries conservation .