, they are exempt from taxation ) . in addition , premiums for ltci are allowed as itemized deductions to the extent they and other unreimbursed medical expenses exceed 10% of adjusted gross income ( agi ) for those under age 65 and 7.5% of agi for those 65 and older . health care and ltss are different . health care services typically treat specific acute and chronic medical conditions in a medical setting by a medical professional . ppa also allows individuals to use the cash surrender value of a life insurance policy as payment for a tax - qualified ltci policy and exclude these payments from taxable income . finally , ppa revised section 1035 of the irc to allow for tax - free exchanges of certain insurance contracts . under this provision , no gain or loss is recognized on the exchange of a life insurance contract , an endowment contract , an annuity contract for a qualified ltci contract or the exchange of one qualified ltci contract for another . expanding tax incentives for long - term care insurance may improve the affordability of policies by reducing the after - tax cost of policies and increasing the demand for ltci . to do this , ltci premiums could be included in one or more of the following options: an employer - sponsored cafeteria or flexible spending account plan , which would exclude them from gross income ; as an "above - the - line" tax deduction to arrive at agi ; or as a credit against tax liability ( "tax credit" ) . table 4 summarizes the advantages and disadvantages of each option . cafeteria plans are employer - established benefit plans under which employees may choose between receiving cash ( typically additional taxable take - home pay ) and certain non - taxable benefits . under this option , ltci would be an eligible benefit within the plan and the employee would not be taxed on the value of the benefit . this arrangement reduces both income and employment taxes ( i.e. , social security and medicare payroll taxes ) . under some of the current legislative proposals , ltci could also be an eligible expense in a flexible spending account ( fsa ) . fsas and cafeteria plans are closely related , but not all cafeteria plans have fsas and not all fsas are part of cafeteria plans . reimbursements through an fsa are also exempt from income and employment taxes . including ltci in a cafeteria plan or fsa would also reduce adjusted gross income for purposes of other tax provisions . cafeteria plans and fsas only benefit individuals whose employer has established such plans . specifically , one of the key premises of insurance is to spread risk across as large a population as possible . adverse selection occurs when individuals who expect to have a higher risk of needing ltss in the future ( eg , family history of alzheimer's ) are more likely to purchase a policy than those who do not . in a voluntary program , low participation may limit an insurer's ability to spread risk adequately resulting in adverse selection .