, impaired water supplies such as saline groundwater ) . most electricity siting and water planning , management , and allocation decisions are delegated to the states . crs developed a scenario , shown in table a - 1 , for how the 55 gw of csp capacity might be distributed across the five states that are identified for csp deployment in figure 2 . table a - 1 shows an illustrative scenario of water use in each state if wet cooling is used . csp water use would fall if more water - efficient cooling is employed and if not all the facilities under the 55 gw deployment projection have thermal storage . alternatively , water use could be higher if 12 hours of thermal storage are employed in some facilities . the scenario used in table a - 1 is based on the nrel projection in figure 2 ; as more current projections of how much and where csp may be deployed are released , any estimates of state water use impacts would change . for example , if updated projections show that new mexico , texas , and colorado have more csp deployment than shown in figure 2 , the csp water footprint may be greater in those states than shown in table a - 1 . table a - 2 illustrates that , in some counties ( eg , grant , nm , and mineral , nv ) , water use of csp under the nrel deployment projections may result in a notable change in county water use even if dry cooling is employed . the potential use of water by csp in moderately constrained counties ( eg , grant and luna , nm ) and in highly constrained counties ( eg , san bernardino , ca , and la paz and maricopa , az ) may lead to the adoption of or requirement for freshwater - efficient csp facilities . similarly , if deployment in arizona and california is less than shown in figure 2 , the csp water footprint in these states would be smaller . as indicated in the analysis herein , there remains significant uncertainty about where , how much , and what type of csp capacity may be installed . technological advances in csp , thermal storage , and cooling technologies also may change the water intensity of any csp that is deployed . the total water consumption varies from 483 ka - f / year for a capacity factor of 41% to 541 ka - f / year for a capacity factor of 46% ; these capacity factors were the upper and lower ends of the range used in nrel's 55 gw analysis . nrel varied the capacity factor to capture differences in energy production anticipated based on the solar resource at the different locations in the southwest . uncertainty about where csp facilities might be constructed , whether these facilities will perform at the capacity factors currently assumed , and which types of cooling technologies these facilities will use contribute to there being little known about the future water resource impacts of csp deployment .