five of these cases are discussed below . four of the five cases discussed , as do most cases involving federal securities laws , concern allegations of violations of the general antifraud provision of the securities exchange act , referred to as section 10 ( b ) , and the rule issued by the securities and exchange commission ( sec ) to implement the statute , referred to as rule 10b - 5 . because the issues concerning section 10 ( b ) and rule 10b - 5 in these four cases were very different , they are discussed separately . the fifth case concerned the fair fund provision of the sarbanes - oxley act . all of the five opinions appear to focus primarily upon the analysis of statutes and cases and display a methodical approach to statutory interpretation . as a group , judge sotomayor's opinions in the securities context appear to favor neither corporations nor investors . judge sotomayor has not written extensively in the area of taxation , and it is not possible to draw conclusions about her judicial philosophy from the tax cases in which she has been involved . one second circuit case in which she authored an opinion has received attention , primarily because the supreme court , while agreeing with the holding , expressly disagreed with her reasoning . in that case , william l. rudkin testamentary trust v. comm'r , the issue was whether investment - advice fees incurred by a trust were "costs which are paid or incurred in connection with the administration of the … trust and which would not have been incurred if the property were not held in such trust …. if so , the fees were fully deductible ; if not , they were only partially deductible as miscellaneous itemized deductions . at the time the second circuit heard the case , a split had developed among the other circuits . the sixth circuit had held the fees were fully deductible , while the fourth and federal circuits reached the opposite conclusion after finding the provision only applied to expenses that were not customarily incurred by individuals . writing for the court , judge sotomayor agreed with the holding of the fourth and federal circuits , but used a different analysis . looking at the statute's plain meaning , she found it only applied to those expenses that could be incurred by an individual . this was an objective inquiry and did not require a subjective determination of whether an individual would have incurred such expenses . the court disagreed with the interpretation by the fourth and federal circuits because it found "nothing in the statute [to] indicate[] that congress intended the [provision] to give rise to factual disputes about whether an individual asset owner is insufficiently financially savvy or the assets sufficiently large such that he or she unquestionably would have sought investment advice. the supreme court , in a unanimous decision written by chief justice roberts , affirmed the second circuit's holding , but rejected its reasoning .