( see " premiums ." in 2018 , the base monthly premium is $35.02 ; however , beneficiaries pay different premiums depending on the plan they selected ( and whether they are entitled to low - income premium subsidies ) . beneficiaries may have their premiums deducted from their social security or other federal benefit payments ; these are then forwarded to part d plans on their behalf . some previously barred drugs are now covered . since january 1, 2013 , part d plans have been required to include benzodiazepines in their formularies . barbiturates must be included in plan formularies for an indication of epilepsy , cancer , or chronic mental health disorders . effective in january 2014 , the aca removed smoking cessation agents , barbiturates and benzodiazepines from the list of drugs allowed to be excluded from medicaid coverage . the aca provisions meant that part d restrictions on barbiturate coverage ( i.e. , limiting the drugs to treatment of epilepsy , cancer , or chronic mental health disorders ) were ended . if a state covers excluded drugs for medicaid beneficiaries , it must also cover them for dual eligibles in cases where the drugs are determined to be medically necessary . dual eligibles may therefore receive coverage from medicaid for some drugs that are excluded from medicare . the aca included provisions to gradually eliminate the coverage gap . ( see " the coverage gap ." actual costs to part d beneficiaries vary from plan to plan depending on the benefit structure and coverage offered , the costs and amount of drugs they use , and the level of any additional assistance such as through a low - income subsidy . one unique feature of the medicare part d drug benefit is the coverage gap — the period in which part d enrollees are required to pay a larger share of total drug costs until they reach the catastrophic coverage level . congress included the coverage gap in the benefit structure when the mma was enacted in 2003 because the cost of continuous coverage would have exceeded goals for total spending . as originally enacted , part d provided a basic level of coverage for all beneficiaries , and extra protection for those with the highest drug costs ( above the catastrophic limit ) . part d enrollees who did not receive a low - income subsidy generally paid the full cost of drugs while in the coverage gap . ( see original part d in figure 4 . ) the aca , as amended , included provisions to gradually phase out the coverage gap by 2020 , at which point beneficiaries in standard plans would have a 25% cost share from the time they meet a standard plan deductible until they reached the catastrophic threshold , after which cost sharing is reduced . ( see " phaseout of the coverage gap ." congress included provisions in bba 2018 that phase out the part d coverage gap for brand - name drugs in 2019 , a year earlier than required by the aca .