finally , p.l . 112-96 in february 2012 to promote state adoption and implementation of stc programs ; however , stc remains a little - used program . currently , 27 states and the district of columbia have active stc programs . table a - 1 displays how stc is implemented in those states . the basic structure of each state's stc program is broadly similar: eligible individuals have had their workweeks reduced by at least 10% , and this reduction in work hours must be in lieu of temporary layoffs . the amount of unemployment compensation payable to an individual is a pro rata share of the unemployment compensation to which that individual would have been entitled if he or she had been totally unemployed . eligible employees are not required to meet the "able and available for work" requirement of regular unemployment compensation , but they must be available for their normal workweek . finally , eligible employees may participate in an employer - sponsored training program . within these broad outlines there is considerable variation among states . an employer's stc agreement cannot exceed a period of 6 months in 5 states but may span up to approximately 1 year in 20 states and the district of columbia . an individual may receive stc benefits for up to 18 weeks in colorado or for up to 52 weeks in 8 states . alternatively , california , michigan , washington , and wisconsin place no limits on the number of weeks a worker may receive stc benefits , although these states have caps on total benefits paid to an individual to the maximum potential total uc entitlement . the legislation died in committee . in 1978 , california became the first state to enact an stc law . california's action was in response to anticipated large - scale public sector layoffs arising from proposition 13 tax reductions that limited state spending . although the public sector layoffs never occurred , the private sector used the program . california was followed by arizona in 1981 . oregon enacted stc legislation in 1982 , with strong support from the motorola corporation . during this period of state innovation , u.s. dol did not challenge states' stc programs , although federal unemployment compensation law did not explicitly allow states to use their unemployment trust funds to pay stc . the federal government introduced a temporary , national stc program in 1982 with the tax equity and fiscal responsibility act ( tefra ; p.l . motorola and the committee for economic development both lobbied in washington for the legislation . the american federation of labor and congress of industrial organizations ( afl - cio ) , after some initial opposition , came to support stc provided that safeguards were incorporated to protect pension and health insurance benefits and to secure union certification for employers' work sharing plans . tefra , which expired in 1985 after three years , authorized states to use monies in their state accounts in the unemployment trust fund to pay stc benefits to eligible employees whose work hours had been reduced by at least 10% under a qualified employer work sharing plan .