the committees will establish the procedures for the discharge of this responsibility. senator huddleston's comments referred to section 501 ( c ) of title v of the national security act which stipulates that "the president and the congressional intelligence committees shall each establish such procedures as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of this title. second , they contend that gang of eight notifications have been "overused. third , they assert that , in certain instances , the executive branch did not provide an opportunity to gang of eight members to approve or disapprove of the program being briefed to them . and fourth , they contend that the "limited information provided congress was so overly restricted that it prevented members of congress from conducting meaningful oversight. notwithstanding the continuing debate over the merits of such notifications , what remains less clear is the historic record of compliance with gang of eight provisions set out in statute . questions include: have such notifications generally been limited to covert actions , ones that conform to congressional intent that such covert actions be highly sensitive and involve the risk to life ? when prior notification is limited to the gang of eight , has the executive branch provided an explanatory statement as to why it limited notification to the gang of eight ? if the gang of eight is not provided prior notice , has the executive branch then informed the intelligence committees at a later date and provided a reason why prior notification was not provided ? has the gang of eight , once notified , ever then made a determination to notify the intelligence committees , a prerogative envisioned by its congressional sponsors ? have the congressional intelligence committees , at any time since they were established , attempted to develop procedures to guide gang of eight notifications , as envisioned by the sponsors of the gang of eight provision ? striking the proper balance between effective oversight and security remains a challenge to congress and the executive . doing so in cases involving particularly sensitive covert actions presents a special challenge . success turns on a number of factors , not the least of which is the degree of comity and trust that defines the relationship between the legislative and executive branches . more trust can lead to greater flexibility in notification procedures . when trust in the relationship is lacking , however , the legislative branch may see a need to tighten and make more precise the notification architecture , so as to assure what it views as being an appropriate flow of information , thus enabling effective oversight . with regard to section 501 ( c ) , senate report language stated: the authority for procedures established by the select committees is based on the current practices of the committees in establishing their own rules . one or both committees may , for example , adopt procedures under which designated members are assigned responsibility on behalf of the committee to receive information in particular types of circumstances , such as when all members cannot attend a meeting or when certain highly sensitive information is involved .