i of the constitution. the court held that the alleged injury was abstract , speculative , and generalized , and therefore was not a litigable matter for the courts to decide . the government raised several arguments to support the claim that simultaneous service in congress and the reserves did not violate the incompatibility clause . first , according to the government , simultaneous service in the reserves was not the problem intended to be addressed by the incompatibility clause . the "intent was to avoid the possibility of improper influences upon and corruption of members of the legislative branch that could result from the power of the executive branch to appoint members to office. furthermore , the government argued that "the minor and infrequent contacts these reservists have with the military authorities as a result of their membership in the reserves pose none of the dangers of domination and corruption of the legislative branch by the executive branch that the framers sought to guard against. to support its position , the government also cited other court cases that considered the definition of offices and officers of the united states . for example , the u.s. supreme court has held that an employee whose "duties were continuing and permanent , not occasional or temporary" was an officer of the united states . according to the court , "the term [office] embraces the ideas of tenure , duration , emolument , and duties. this definition was used by the u.s. court of claims in a case challenging the status of a reservist . the court held that an inactive reservist was not also an officer of the united states . the court reasoned that "an officer of the reserve corps has no salary or emolument of office . he is not in time of peace , except perhaps while discharging some duty to which he may have been lawfully called ... , amenable to the army regulations or court - martial . he has no defined duties to discharge. the issue of the constitutionality of members of congress simultaneously serving as reservists was again raised in 2005 in a lawsuit involving senator lindsey graham , who was an officer in the u.s. air force standby reserve at the time . the judge advocate general of the air force assigned senator graham to act as an appellate judge on the air force court of criminal appeals . one of the cases assigned to senator graham was that of an airman convicted of a drug use violation . the airman challenged the legality of senator graham's service on a panel of the court of criminal appeals that reviewed the appeal . when the case came before the u.s. court of appeals for the armed forces ( caaf ) , the court limited its decision to the issue of "whether a criminal conviction and sentence , which by statute can be sustained only by an affirmative appellate decision , may be reviewed by an appellate judge who simultaneously serves as a member of congress. the caaf noted that the supreme court has held that "the term 'officers of the united states' includes 'all persons who can be said to hold an office under the government.'