the house agreed to the h.r . 4173 conference report on june 30 , 2010 by a vote of 237-192 . the senate agreed to the conference report on july 15 , 2010 by a vote of 60-39 . president obama signed the bill into law as p.l . 111-203 on july 21 , 2010 . it was referred to the house financial services committee . senator benjamin nelson introduced an identical bill , s. 1389 , in the senate on june 25 , 2009 . it was referred to the senate banking , housing , and urban affairs committee . neither committee has held hearing or markup on the legislation . 2733 / s. 1389 would amend the securities act of 1933 to specify that this act's exemption from the definition of a securities product would include "any insurance or endowment policy or annuity contract or optional annuity contract ( a ) the value of which does not vary according to the performance of a separate account , and ( b ) which satisfies standard nonforfeiture laws or similar requirements. the bill would also specifically annul rule 151a as promulgated by the sec . this bill would have the effect of returning the regulation of indexed annuities to the status quo before the sec's promulgation of rule 151a ; namely , indexed annuities would be exempted from sec regulation and solely subject to regulation by the state insurance regulators . many opponents of the rule , who would presumably support the legislation , see the extra sec regulatory layer as unnecessarily duplicative of the existing state insurance regulation . they may point out , for example , that the sec has had authority over variable annuity products for many years , yet consumer complaints regarding these products continue to be heard . the sec registration requirements that would be annulled by the legislation involve some cost . rather , they characterize rule 151a as providing necessary protection for consumers . the sec also argues that because indexed annuities expose consumers to investment risk , these annuities should be treated as securities products , and consumers should have the same protections when they purchase indexed annuities as when they purchase securities . they agree that this regulation has some costs , and argue the costs are offset by consumer benefits such as enhanced disclosure and standardization of selling practices . the continued existence of abuses in variable annuities , despite both sec and state regulation , may also be an argument for supporting additional oversight for indexed annuities , which share some similar characteristics . 4173 and s. 3217 are broad bills reforming the financial regulatory system in the united states . the requirements for this treatment include two conditions similar to h.r . 2733 / s. 1389 , namely that the value of the contract does not vary according to the performance of a separate account and that non - forfeiture standards are in place . in addition , section 989j requires that consumer protections meeting or exceeding the requirements of the naic's suitability in annuity transactions model regulation are in place either through state regulations or through implementation by the company itself .