in shi liang lin v. u.s. dept . of justice , the second circuit reviewed three orders issued by the board of immigration appeals ( bia ) that denied applications for asylum submitted by three unmarried partners of individuals who were forced to have abortions in china . the bia's denials were based on its conclusion that spouses of individuals who were forced to abort a pregnancy or submit to involuntary sterilization , but not the unmarried partners of such individuals , could automatically qualify for asylum as refugees under federal immigration law . in reviewing the bia's orders , the second circuit sought to determine whether section 601 ( a ) of the illegal immigration reform and immigrant responsibility act of 1996 , which amended the definition for the term "refugee" to include individuals who were forced to abort a pregnancy or submit to involuntary sterilization , was ambiguous , so that the bia's construction of the term was entitled to deference . the second circuit evaluated the bia's interpretation of section 601 ( a ) in accordance with the principles articulated by the supreme court in chevron u.s.a. v. nrdc . in chevron , the court established a two - part test for determining when an agency's interpretation of a statute that it administers is entitled to deference . first , a reviewing court will consider whether congress has spoken on the question at issue . if the intent of congress is clear , the court must "give effect to the unambiguously expressed intent of congress. if the statute is silent or ambiguous , however , a court will examine whether the agency's interpretation constitutes a permissible construction of the statute . the second circuit rejected the bia's interpretation of section 601 ( a ) , finding that congress has spoken unambiguously about who may be deemed a refugee for purposes of asylum eligibility . the court maintained that nothing in the definition for the term "refugee" permits a person to obtain asylum if he or she has not personally experienced persecution or a well - rounded fear of future persecution . the second circuit explained , we do not deny that an individual whose spouse undergoes , or is threatened with , a forced abortion or involuntary sterilization may suffer a profound emotional loss as a partner and a potential parent . but such a loss does not change the requirement that we must follow the "ordinary meaning" of the language chosen by congress , according to which an individual does not automatically qualify for "refugee" status on account of a coercive procedure performed on someone else . thus , the second circuit maintained that section 601 ( a ) seemed to deny asylum protection to the spouses of individuals forced to abort a pregnancy or submit to involuntary sterilization , as well as the unmarried partners of such individuals . in a concurring opinion , judge sotomayor criticized the majority opinion for its lack of judicial restraint .