since p.l . 110-53 required dhs to guarantee a minimum amount of shsgp funding to states , it could be argued that the law did not meet the 9 / 11 commission recommendation . on the other hand , some might contend that the statue requires funds to be allocated on the basis of risk but with a floor that provides a guaranteed minimum . while the 9 / 11 commission criticized the allocation of federal homeland security assistance and recommended that the distribution not "remain a program for general revenue sharing," commissioners acknowledged that "every state and city needs to have some minimum infrastructure for emergency response. the 9 / 11 commission also recommended that state and local homeland security assistance should "supplement state and local resources based on the risks or vulnerabilities that merit additional support. in a policy document published prior to his inauguration , president obama stated , in what arguably is in agreement with the 9 / 11 commission , that homeland security assistance should be based solely on risk . due to this criticism , congress may wish to consider conducting oversight hearings on how dhs allocates homeland security funding to jurisdictions . instead of guaranteed minimums , congress could require that dhs allocate funding based solely on risk . this option , however , might result in some jurisdictions receiving no or limited allocations . arguably , a risk assessment process used to allocate homeland security assistance would determine that every state and locality has some risk , whether terrorism or natural disaster related , and needs some amount of funding . such a process , however , would require dhs to evaluate state and local capabilities ( currently dhs relies primarily on grant recipient self evaluations ) , vulnerabilities , and risk in a manner that accurately reflects the nation's current homeland security environment . for fy2010 , the administration proposed $170 million for assistance to firefighter grants ( afg ) , a 70% decrease from the fy2009 level , and $420 million for safer ( staffing for adequate fire and emergency response firefighters ) , double the amount appropriated in fy2009 . the total amount requested for firefighter assistance ( afg and safer ) was $590 million , a 24% decrease from fy2009 . 110-53 in january 2007 . specifically , p.l . 110-53 required that shsgp and uasi allocations be based entirely on risk ; however , shsgp recipients were guaranteed a minimum amount annually through 2012 . this funding debate has been primarily focused on shsgp and uasi ; funding allocation methodologies for the majority of gpd and npd programs have not been discussed during this debate . some observers have criticized the guaranteed minimum allocation for shsgp and the continued use of population as a key variable for other grant program distribution methodologies ( for such grant programs as emergency management performance grants and citizen corps programs ) . for example , the national commission on terrorist attacks upon the united states ( 9 / 11 commission ) recommended that all homeland security assistance be allocated based only on risk . the fy2010 budget proposal stated that the firefighter assistance grant process will give priority to applications that enhance capabilities for terrorism response and other major incidents .