however , h.r . 2293 in the 111 th congress . 2293 in certain ways . both pieces of legislation include provisions for creating a public health advisory committee on trade . 3204 also would have required that each itac must have at least one representative of labor , consumer interest , and public health . this provision was not included in h.r . while many public health advocates applaud legislation to increase public health representation on advisory trade committees , some caution against creating a trade advisory committee that focuses solely on health issues as this may insulate trade policy discussions from public health concerns . for instance , critics express concern that the ustr may limit consultations with the proposed health committee to a narrow set of technical issues and not on the broader implications of trade policy for public health . among industry advocates , some may be critical of legislation that would dilute industry representation on the itacs . they may contend that the itacs were created as a vehicle for the ustr to consult specifically with industry . other channels for input on fta negotiations include the "ustr's formal public hearings and the federal register comments. while the public health input through these alternate mechanisms may be higher , some question the relative weight of such input compared to that received through the itacs . for some observers of the u.s. trade policy process , another area of concern is the ustr special 301 report . ustr identification of countries also involves gathering information and analysis based on the ustr's annual trade barriers report , as well as consultations with a wide variety of sources , including government agencies , industry groups , other private sector representatives , congressional leaders , and foreign governments . some observers express concern that u.s. industry interests , such as those of phrma , heavily influence ustr's country identifications and that there is limited input from public health advocates , generic drug manufacturers , and other groups . although the special 301 report is regarded by some as an effective form of u.s. political pressure on trading partners , others express concern that disproportionate representation of industry interests may limit the legitimacy of the special 301 trade policy tool . in 2002 , congress granted trade promotion authority ( tpa ) to then president bush . the tpa included a commitment to ensure that u.s international trade agreements respected public health . should congress decide to renew trade promotion authority ( tpa ) for president obama , members may choose to consider what , if any , public health mandate should the tpa include . another issue that congress may choose to consider is the extent to which the may 10 , 2007 bipartisan trade deal between then president bush and congressional leaders will serve as a template for the ipr provisions in future ftas . some also question whether or not this fta template will be used for all future ftas , or if will it be used according to the income status of a country . for instance , the template's scale - down in patent requirements was incorporated into the recently negotiated ftas with peru , panama , and colombia , which are considered low - income countries .