these statistics do not address either of those issues . marketing services expand in direct response to consumer demand for more marketing services , which , in turn , occurs for a variety of reasons . price is the primary mechanism by which various levels of the market system are linked . while farmers and consumers sometimes do meet directly in farmers' markets , in most cases the raw farm product is separated from the retail food product by a complex processing and distribution system . farm - to - retail price changes may originate from three potential sources: ( 1 ) changes in farm prices ; ( 2 ) changes in prices of marketing inputs along the farm - to - retail marketing chain ; or ( 3 ) changes in retail prices . this section will briefly discuss the various factors involved in understanding farm - to - retail price linkages — in particular , how they are measured and what influences them . during the 2006 to 2009 period , the news media reported on unusually wide variances between low farm and high retail prices , suggesting that perhaps some food retailers were profiting unfairly by engaging in price gouging . the retail grocery business is highly competitive , making it unlikely that such activity could occur either on a large scale or for a sustained period of time . sometimes consumers tend to focus on a single highly visible item that is purchased routinely ( such as milk ) to draw their conclusions about retail price responsiveness and market power , without fully understanding the time lag involved in a farm - to - retail price response for most commodities . another retail marketing consideration that may cloud retail price perceptions by consumers ( about whether asymmetric price transmission has occurred ) is the use of "loss leader" items , whereby a retail outlet sets the price for highly visible consumer items at below cost as a marketing strategy to attract consumers into the store . supplementary consumer purchases of other goods with normal retail markups would then offset the loss on the leader items . consumers may be easily confused when neighboring stores use different products as loss leaders , particularly in a period of volatile prices . this final section uses national average price data to examine the farm - to - retail price linkages for several major commodities since 2006 when volatile prices characterized many agricultural markets . this section is followed ( in appendix ) by a series of comparisons of actual price data for certain select retail food products and their corresponding agricultural commodities . price indexes for major food groups are presented in a series of graphs to allow for a visual comparison of farm , wholesale ( when available ) , and retail price movements for differences in magnitude , timing , and asymmetry in adjustment . national aggregate price indexes are presented in figure 12 and include: farm level represented by usda monthly average farm price ( mafp ) received for relevant food commodities , wholesale level represented by bls producer price index ( ppi ) for finished consumer foods , and retail level represented by bls consumer price index ( cpi ) for food - at - home purchases .