these concerns , and some of the proposals that address them , are explored further below . traditionally , the federal government has had a limited role in electric facility transmission siting , as siting decisions have in large part been made by state agencies . however , in recent years there has been a push to expand the federal role in transmission siting . the energy policy act of 2005 created a "backstop" siting authority for ferc in certain instances where grid congestion was a concern . recently there have been suggestions and legislative proposals that would further expand the federal role in electric facility transmission siting . legal precedent suggests that federal involvement with transmission siting would likely pass constitutional muster , assuming a connection to interstate commerce is shown . the location and permitting of facilities used to transmit electricity to residential and commercial customers have been the province of the states ( with limited exceptions ) for virtually the entire history of the electricity industry . state and local governments are well positioned to weigh the local factors that go into siting decisions , including environmental and scenery concerns , zoning issues , development plans , and safety concerns . because the grid formerly consisted of many localized transmission and distribution networks , federal interest in siting of the transmission system was limited . although the federal government has increasingly exercised its authority over transmission reliability , it has , for the most part , left transmission siting decisions to states . however , as concerns over grid congestion and its impact on reliability have grown , the federal government has carved out a role in transmission siting as a "backstop" siting authority in designated transmission corridors . although this new role has met some resistance from those who oppose expanding federal authority over siting , other policymakers and commentators have advocated an increased federal role in order to encourage development of renewable energy , which is often located in remote areas that are not easily connected with the interstate grid . the courts have also thwarted the federal government's efforts to create transmission corridors . in 2011 , the ninth circuit vacated the department of energy's congestion study underlying the designation of national interest electric transmission corridors , and as a result , there are presently no such corridors in effect . moreover , the fourth circuit reversed ferc's interpretation of its siting authority with respect to electric transmission facility applications that have been rejected by a state agency . the increased federal role in transmission siting decisions raises a number of legal and policy issues . foremost among these are the concerns over loss of local and regional input and control that often accompany an expansion of federal power into a process traditionally reserved for the states . indeed , the federal power act specifically reserves certain aspects of governance over the electricity industry to the states , and efforts to expand the federal role in the past have met with resistance from state public utility commissions and advocates of federalism .