law no . 409 , which required the president to conduct a census of unemployment . at least one of the 14-question unemployment report cards was delivered by postal carriers to each dwelling in the united states and additional cards were made available at local post offices to the "employable unemployed. but , the 1940 census of the population was the first statistical undertaking to include questions on the labor force defined as persons who are employed or without jobs but actively seeking work within a prescribed period of time . before then , the 1930 census of the population , the 1937 census of unemployment , and the occasional survey conducted in various states and cities utilized a very different concept — the "gainful worker" — that is , individuals who had at some time worked in an occupation in which they earned money or the equivalent , or in which they assisted in the production of marketable goods . different occupational classification systems also were utilized in the 1930 and 1940 population censuses . for these reasons , this section of the report relies greatly on the u.s. census bureau's adjustment of selected data from the 1930 census to make it as consistent as possible with the 1940 census . the appendix discusses the evolution of labor force data over time . it is intended to supplement information in the detailed table notes in the body of the report about the specific depression - era data presented in the tables . the following analysis compares the great depression with the eleventh recession of the post - world war ii period . it utilizes , when possible , seasonally adjusted monthly data for december 2007 ( the recession's start ) and the latest month in 2009 for which data are available . in those cases in which the u.s. bureau of labor statistics ( bls ) does not adjust monthly data for seasonal fluctuations , which prevents month - to - month comparisons , annual average data for 2008 are used . for the depression period , data from tables earlier in the report are supplemented with data from the 1940 decennial census when it provides statistical series more akin to those available today . from a labor market perspective , the eleventh recession in the post - world war ii period is reminiscent in several respects of the great depression . the similarities are not unique to the two economic downturns , however . they are shared with many of the recessions that occurred in the intervening years . analogously , the great depression differs from the latest and intervening recessions by having had a much worse effect on workers based on labor force measures ( eg , unemployment rate ) and on the lack of a pre - existing safety net of government programs . there are a number of similarities between the characteristics of the unemployed during the great depression and the recession that began in december 2007 . three similarities are intertwined: 1 . the cyclically sensitive goods - producing sector lays off workers during recessions in numbers that are out of proportion to the sector's share of total employment .