b . to increase high level attention and policy coherence , the next administration should appoint a deputy national security advisor for non - proliferation , with the authority and resources needed to coordinate and oversee implementation of u.s. non - proliferation policy . c. as part of its effort to build bipartisan and allied support for an integrated non - proliferation policy , the next administration should review at the highest level issues related to the test ban treaty . there should be a sustained interagency effort to address senators' questions and concerns on these issues of great importance to national security . d. the united states should continue its testing moratorium and take other concrete actions to demonstrate its commitment to a world without nuclear explosions , such as continuing leadership in building up the international monitoring system ( ims ) being established for the treaty . monitoring , verification , and foreign nuclear programs a . higher funding and intelligence collection priorities should be assigned to monitoring nuclear test activities and other aspects of nuclear weapon acquisition or development by other states . b . collaboration should be increased among u.s. government officials and other experts to ensure that national intelligence , the treaty's international verification regime , and other scientific stations are used as complementary components of an all - source approach to verification . c. the transition from research to operational use should be accelerated for new verification technologies and analytical techniques . d. the united states should continue working with other test ban treaty signatories to prepare for inspections and develop confidence - building measures . e. additional steps should be taken unilaterally or bilaterally to increase transparency regarding the nature and purpose of activities at known nuclear test sites . stewardship of the u.s. nuclear stockpile a . working with the department of defense , other executive branch agencies , and the congress , the administrator of the nnsa should complete as soon as possible his comprehensive review of the stockpile stewardship program . the review will clarify objectives and requirements , set priorities , assess progress , identify needs , and develop an overarching program plan with broad - based support . highest priority should be given to aspects of stockpile stewardship that are most urgently needed to assure the near - term reliability of the u.s. nuclear deterrent , i.e . surveillance , refurbishment , and infrastructure revitalization . enhanced surveillance and monitoring activities should receive full support and not be squeezed by higher profile aspects of the ssp . the nnsa should make a decision about the need for a large - scale plutonium pit remanufacturing facility as soon as possible after the next administration has determined the appropriate size and composition of the enduring stockpile , including reserves . a dedicated infrastructure revitalization fund should be established after the nnsa has completed a revitalization plan for its production facilities and laboratories . b . the nnsa , working with congress and the office of management and budget , should place the ssp on a multi - year budget cycle like the department of defense's future years defense program . some increase in funds for the ssp is likely to be necessary .