overall , the u.s. response was seen as relatively mild . many military and diplomatic officials , wary of some aspects of thaksin's leadership style and more familiar with the old establishment in bangkok , appeared to want to maintain strong relations with the elite despite the interruption of democratic practices . an interim military government struggled to rule until it staged elections in december 2007 . although thaksin's successor party won the most seats , two successive prime ministers were forced to resign because of controversial rulings by thailand's high court . both decisions raised concerns that thailand's judicial system was being used for political purposes . what is the outlook for stability in thailand and at what point does the uncertainty erode the partnership with the united states ? bangkok has been rocked by political turmoil since 2005 , and particularly since a military coup deposed popularly - elected prime minister thaksin shinawatra in september 2006 . as protesters filled the streets and eventually took over bangkok's international airport for several days , lawmakers realigned into a new ruling coalition and abhisit vejjajiva of the democrat party assumed the premier post . since then , protests have continued to disrupt the country , including the embarrassing cancelation of an east asian leaders' summit in april 2009 . despite armed clashes ( not to mention considerable economic impacts because of property damages and the loss of tourism revenue ) , only a few people have died , but over one hundred have been injured . the protestors are divided between two main groups: the people's alliance for democracy ( pad ) , known as the "yellow shirts" and the united front for democracy against dictatorship ( udd ) , known as the "red shirts. the pad , initially formed under the leadership of media baron sondhi limthongkul in early 2006 , led large - scale protests accusing thaksin of corruption and subversion of democratic practices , which some observers claim lay the groundwork for the military coup . the pad are ideologically in sync with the elite establishment of bangkok: a mix of the military , royalists , the bureaucracy , and largely urban and middle class citizens . the combination of thaksin's broad popularity and clampdown on opposition opinions in the media threatened many of those in the "old guard. the "red shirts" are thaksin loyalists who insist that the current government is illegitimate . thaksin's traditional power base is the rural , poorer population of thailand ; his attention to this constituency helped unleash a new populist movement that led to two overwhelming electoral victories and unprecedented consolidation of power from 2000 until his removal in 2006 . the pattern of protests and counter - protests indicates the weakness of thailand's political institutions , as the disaffected take to the streets . the pad and their allies felt that thaksin's rule was marred by his alleged dismantling of traditional watchdog groups and institutions that could constitute a check on his executive power . their frustration was compounded when thaksin's successor party was returned to office in the december 2007 elections , led by what they deemed to be puppet leaders operating at thaksin's command .