what is its purpose ? determine the level of interest the founding member ( s ) determines whether there is sufficient interest to warrant organizing the group . a number of methods may be used in making this determination . these include informal discussions with colleagues ; communications with constituents ( individuals and organizations ) ; and the member's personal judgment and interest . the extent to which an issue or interest is fragmented within the committee system may also be a factor . in an effort to bring the various aspects of an issue under one entity , a number of groups have been organized around issues that were widely dispersed among several committees and subcommittees . consult prospective "core" members sometimes , the organizing member ( s ) selects a few colleagues with an interest in the issue , consults with them about the group , and enlists their support in organizing it . in many instances , these members serve as the group's executive officers , coordinators , or sponsors , and are the activists who lay the group's foundation and shape its policy . this informal gathering of "core" members may occur before the group is actually established or shortly thereafter . consider internal institutional concerns in an effort to avoid the appearance of rivalry or duplication with party or committee positions and policy , group organizers may wish to consult with party and committee leadership , or inform them of the intent to form the organization . similar consideration may also be given to any existing groups that handle relevant aspects of the issue ( s ) or policy . organizers will likely want to give careful consideration to the group's name in order to avoid confusion with other existing entities ( whether formal or informal ) . identify likely membership cmo membership is voluntary . eligibility criteria for membership are determined by the group itself . membership may be open to all members who are willing to join , or it may be limited to invitees only . membership may be open to one party only or both parties ; the house only or both the house and the senate ; regions that share specific economic concerns ; districts or states ; members who share personal characteristics ; members whose constituents share personal or occupational characteristics ; or members who share issue interests . membership may also be based upon committee and subcommittee assignments . similarly , the membership lists of the committees and subcommittees with primary jurisdiction over the relevant issue ( s ) can be used to identify prospective cmo members . this procedure can provide an indication of whether , how , and by whom the issue is handled . it may also identify some members who would either support or oppose the group . seek necessary guidance and information the committee on house administration has issued specific regulations governing groups that register as cmos . the regulations appear in the members' congressional handbook , which is available online at http: / / cha.house.gov / handbooks / members - congressional - handbook#members - handbook - organizations .