resources . territories . title xv of h.r . 7 ( also h.r . 3864 ) would appropriate the net increase in federal revenues from offshore and onshore energy revenue from leasing and production based on enactment of title xvii of h.r . 7 ( subtitle b explained above ) to the highway trust fund . would this additional information on the ocs prior to lease sales generate more interest in those areas and possibly generate more revenue in higher bonus bids and high royalty rates ( 16.7% or 18.75% ) as part of the lease terms ? a related controversial legislative issue is whether coastal producing states should receive a greater share of those revenues . revenue sharing is discussed in more detail below . generally , proponents and opponents alike would argue that some sense of certainty is desirable . industry proponents , for example , want to know , if the industry invests in exploration and development and finds oil and natural gas , whether it could then move forward with production . and conversely , if certain areas are placed off limits or restricted , would those limitations remain in place for the long term ? the balance of this report provides information to inform this debate . there are numerous house and senate bills that would restructure the way the ocs is managed , improve safety standards , make permitting more efficient , prevent or enforce lease sales , and address oil spill and deepwater production issues . most recently , legislation introduced in the house — the energy security and transportation jobs act ( h.r . 3410 ) on november 14 , 2011 — combines some of the language from bills passed earlier by the house ( h.r . 1231 , discussed below ) and incorporates this proposal into h.r . 7 , the american energy and infrastructure jobs act of 2012 , as title xvii – subtitle b. subtitle b of this act would require boem to offer lease sales in the most prospective areas in each of the ocs planning areas for the 2012-2017 5-year leasing program specifically , areas that contain more than 2.5 billion barrels of oil or more than 7.5 trillion cubic feet of natural gas . increased production goals would be established at 3 million barrels per day ( mb / d ) of oil and 10 billion cubic feet ( bcf ) of natural gas per day by 2027 . the bill would also require boem to offer lease sales 216 , 220 , and 222 all within a year of enactment . the bill would require a lease sale in southern california under section 8 of outer continental shelf lands act ( ocsla ) , using onshore - based drilling technology by july 2014 and a lease sale in the north aleutian basin ( lease sale 214 , which was cancelled by the obama administration ) . there is a provision that would amend section 18 of ocsla allowing the secretary of the interior to hold lease sales in areas identified by the secretary to have the greatest potential for oil and gas .