what are the implications for future federal costs ? although the introductory sections of s. 590 and h.r . 2295 state that the legislation's purpose is to enhance communities' ability to recover from installation downsizing or to adjust the military population growth , the discussion above indicates that the potential impact of the proposed legislation could extend beyond the current brac round . as congress considers these bills , members may wish to weigh questions such as the following: if current law permanently authorizes dod to exchange property on closing or realigning military installations for non - dod property that could increase its supply of housing or ease encroachment pressure , to what extent does extending the authority to all excess dod property serve to satisfy the stated purpose of the legislation — assisting communities to recover from the effects of base resizing or closure ? what are the risks and benefits relative to the merits of authorizing the military departments to outsource base support , such as refuse removal , the operation of golf courses , libraries , and fitness centers , and public works functions , to county or local governments rather than provide for them through dod employees or private contractors ? are there advantages in broadening the secretary of defense's ability to reimburse agencies and organizations for military site cleanup activities to include expenses associated with "processing" of a conveyance of the property ? if there are disadvantages , what are they , and could they decrease the secretary's willingness to enter into reimbursement agreements ? an extension of indemnification to include removal of statutory and regulatory requirements for site cleanup of past military activity will effectively add to the cost of remediation borne by the federal government and correspondingly reduce the burden on the state or locality near the site or the new owners . current law requires the secretary of defense to "seek fair market value" for surplus 2005 brac property conveyed to redevelopment authorities for the purposes of job creation on the former military site . nevertheless , the secretary is permitted to execute such an economic development conveyance for no consideration ( at no cost ) under certain circumstances . existing statute requires that all "proceeds received from the lease , transfer , or disposal of any property at a military installation closed or realigned" be used only to defray the cost of implementing brac recommendations or remediating environmental degradation on brac - surplus property . if the secretary is required to convey surplus property at no cost , revenue could be lost that would have to be replaced by appropriated funds . what are the advantages and disadvantages of foregoing this potential revenue stream ? how much in toto will these proposed changes cost the federal treasury relative to the benefits gained by federal agencies , local governments , and private enterprise ? the final two sections of s. 590 / h.r . 2295 would further amend the dbcra to expand the indemnification ( holding harmless ) of persons who have taken title to property on closed military installations and to require the conveyance at no cost of surplus military property under certain conditions . the three senate and house bills have been referred to their respective committees on armed services .