appendix a . competition and technology policy telephone service was once considered a natural monopoly , and regulated accordingly . the presumption was that redundant telephone infrastructure was inefficient and not in the public interest . state and federal regulators favored granting operating rights to a single company , within a specific facilities territory , to benefit from economies of scale , facilitate interoperability , and maximize other benefits . in return for the monopoly position , the selected provider was expected to fulfill a number of requirements intended to benefit society . thus , for decades , the regulated monopoly was seen by most policy - makers as ( 1 ) ensuring that costly infrastructure was put in place and ( 2 ) meeting society's needs , as interpreted by regulations and the law . past policies to regulate a monopolistic market may have influenced current policies for promoting competition . the fcc's emphasis on efficiency for delivering services to a pre - determined market could be leading wireless competition toward monopoly ; new regulatory regimes might be a consequence of this trend , if it continues . with the introduction of auctions for spectrum licenses in 1994 , the united states began to shift away from assigning spectrum licenses based on regulatory decisions and toward competitive market mechanisms . one objective of the telecommunications act of 1996 was to open up the communications industry to greater competition among different sectors . one outcome of the growth of competition was the establishment of different regulatory regimes for information networks and for telecommunications . as a consequence of these and other legislative and regulatory changes , the wireless industry has areas of competition ( eg , for spectrum licenses ) within a regulatory shell , such as the rules governing the public switched telephone network ( pstn ) . as the bulk of wireless communications traffic moves from voice to data , companies will likely modify their business plans in order to remain competitive in the new environment . a shift in infrastructure technology and regulatory environment might open wireless competition to companies with business plans that are not modeled on pre - existing telecommunications industry formulae . future providers of wireless broadband might include any company with a robust network for carrying data and a business case for serving broadband consumers . potential new entrants , however , may lack access to radio frequency spectrum , the essential resource for wireless broadband . in formulating spectrum policy , mainstream viewpoints generally diverge on whether to give priority to market economics or social goals . regarding access to spectrum , economic policy looks to harness market forces to allocate spectrum efficiently , with spectrum license auctions as the driver . social policy favors ensuring wireless access to support a variety of social objectives where economic return is not easily quantified , such as improving education , health services , and public safety . both approaches can stimulate economic growth and job creation . in evaluating competition within an industry , economists and policy makers examine barriers to entry , among other factors . barriers might come from high costs for market entry such as investment in infrastructure or there might be legal and regulatory barriers to entry .