because of the nature of the agencies being considered in h.r . 885 , the president would only appear to retain more control over the appointment of the five dfe igs under the status quo if he also gained more control over the agency boards . the federal reserve , cftc , ncua , and the sec are independent agencies . these independent agencies are insulated from complete executive branch control as they are headed by multi - member boards . for example , the boards of the cftc , sec , and ncua are comprised of members of both political parties , but may have no more than a simple majority from one political party . in addition , the board membership at these agencies is determined according to staggered terms , so that not all of the members may be replaced at once . the federal reserve board of governors and the sec commissioners have for cause removal protection . gao called for dialogue among congress , the ig community , and the affected agencies regarding specific conversions of dfe igs . in 2003 , the comptroller general similarly testified regarding gao's determination that "if properly implemented , conversion ... and consolidation of ig offices could increase the overall independence , economy , efficiency , and effectiveness of igs. therefore , arguably , the president may have more control over the five igs if they are converted to pas positions and the president is able to appoint those igs himself . this would appear to be true even though the nominee would be approved through the advice and consent process . furthermore , dfe heads , who are politically aligned with the president , would likely prefer to maintain their influence on the selection process of the dfe's ig . such appointment power may enable the dfe head to exercise greater control over the agency , posing questions of intrusion on the ig's independence . dfes have been exempt from these requirements for establishment oigs since dfes were created . dfe igs must be appointed by the head of the agency "in accordance with the applicable laws and regulations governing appointments within" the agency . the dfe igs , in turn , must hire employees for their offices "subject to the applicable laws and regulation that govern such selections , appointments , and employment , and the obtaining of such services , within the [dfe]. another difference relates to the use of legal counsel by igs . the different relationships between establishment and dfe igs and their attorneys were delineated in the reform act . the act specified that an establishment ig must receive legal advice from an attorney who is hired under civil service laws and reports directly to the ig or to another ig . the reform act also provided three ways for a dfe to obtain counsel . first , a dfe ig could obtain counsel from an attorney appointed by the ig ( according to the dfe - specific laws and regulations governing appointments within the dfe ) who reports directly to the ig . second , dfe igs , on a reimbursable basis , could obtain services from a counsel who is appointed by and who reports to another ig .