, checkpoints ) ? perhaps more qualitative evaluations of pa security progress could take into account reciprocal moves taken by israel toward its roadmap obligations ( specifically , ceasing settlement activity ) or on other measures of progress on the political track ( such as progress on negotiations ) . yet , benchmarks have their limitations in a complex environment where multiple and unforeseen variables might impact outcomes . an alternative to setting benchmarks , while still allowing for a measure of heightened accountability , might be to require periodic reports and / or accountings of u.s. assistance and pa security activities from the executive branch similar to those that have been required in the past . inl coordinates its activities and funding decisions with the ussc . as discussed at various points above ( see " counterterrorism and consolidation: comprehensiveness of ussc role " and " criminal justice sector reform " ) , some maintain that the u.s. mandate in security assistance matters should be expanded to give the ussc more comprehensive reach over all pa security organizations ( including intelligence organizations ) , along with authority to help train and outfit these organizations more directly for counterterrorism operations , and perhaps also to give the state department's inl bureau an enhanced role in criminal justice sector reform . expanding the ussc / inl mandate could involve increases both in personnel and in funding . on the other hand , giving ussc / inl too many tasks could hinder rather than help the security assistance effort by , among other things , spreading the ussc's resources too thin and distracting its attention from its core objectives of helping train and outfit the national security forces , helping the ministry of interior with strategic planning , and facilitating israeli - palestinian security coordination . one option may be to encourage ussc / inl to increase its emphasis on ( and possibly to apportion greater resources toward ) strategic planning and consultation aimed at further consolidating accountable , defactionalized civilian control within the moi ( see " how u.s. efforts are coordinated " above ) . thus far , $13.5 million out of the initial $295 million appropriated through the incle account has been apportioned to these efforts ( see table 1 above ) . alternatively or concurrently , measures might be taken aiming to ensure that no other assistance programs to the pa security forces — u.s . or foreign — are obstructing the ability of ussc / inl ( and partner programs such as eupol copps ) to carry out its current mandate . some have protested the strict limitations on travel by american staff members of the ussc to and within the west bank . they assert that the ussc's effectiveness is likely to increase if its u.s. contingent is given greater freedom to travel to pa deployment areas , bases , and political offices and to regularly monitor the level of israeli - pa coordination and pa freedom and exclusivity of operation . others might say that this change might invite more risk than is advisable in light of the progress the mission has achieved under current operating standards .