here , too , approval may be conditional . accordingly , it does not appear that this requirement has been terminated . state department regulations requiring consultation with congress regarding significant international agreements may provide a means for congressional oversight as to the negotiation of security arrangements . one of the stated objectives of the circular 175 procedure is to ensure that "timely and appropriate consultation is had with congressional leaders and committees on treaties and other international agreements. to that end , state department regulations contemplate congressional consultation regarding the conduct of negotiations to secure significant international agreements . circular 175 procedures may also provide for congressional consultation concerning the form that a legally binding international agreement should take . section 1457 of the national defense authorization act for fy1991 ( p.l . 101-510 ) requires the president to submit an annual report to specified congressional committees regarding "united states security arrangements with , and commitments to , other nations. the report , produced in classified and unclassified form , is to be submitted by february 1 each year to the committee on armed services and the committee on foreign relations of the senate , and the committee on armed services and the committee on foreign affairs of the house of representatives . in addition to legally binding security arrangements or commitments ( eg , mutual defense treaties and pre - positioning agreements ) , the report must describe non - binding commitments , such as expressed u.s. policy formulated by the executive branch . it must also include , among other things , "[a]n assessment of the need to continue , modify , or discontinue each of those arrangements and commitments in view of the changing international security situation. although reports were submitted to the appropriate committees pursuant to this statutory requirement in 1991 and 1992 , it does not appear that any subsequent reports have been issued . the federal reports elimination and sunset act of 1995 ( sunset act , p.l . 104-66 ) terminated many reporting requirements existing prior to its enactment . the act eliminated or modified several specific reporting requirements , and also generally terminated any reporting requirement that had been listed in house doc . 103-7 , unless such a requirement was specifically exempted . however , the reporting requirement contained in section 1457 of the fy1991 national defense authorization act was neither specifically terminated by the sunset act nor listed in house doc . moreover , congress has twice amended section 1457 after the enactment of the sunset act , in 1996 and 1999 . when there is question as to whether an international agreement should be entered as a treaty or an executive agreement , the matter is first brought to the attention of the state department's legal adviser for treaty affairs . if the assistant legal adviser for treaty affairs believes the issue to be "a serious one that may warrant formal congressional consultation," consultations are to be held with appropriate congressional leaders and committees . state department regulations specify that "every practicable effort will be made to identify such questions at the earliest possible date so that consultations may be completed in sufficient time to avoid last minute consideration.