i don't think so. he asserted that there are other options for providing legal services to the poor , such as pro bono law firms and lawyers that work on contingent fees . the following section provides information on when the current restrictions were first enacted . ( see box on page 1 for a list of the current restrictions. ) generally speaking , democrats and other advocates of the lsc have consistently argued that the poor should receive the same range of legal assistance through the lsc that is available to those who could afford to hire private attorneys . and should we actually be taxing taxpayers to force them to subsidize their neighbors to turn around and sue them ? by contrast , republicans generally have asserted that lsc attorneys should deal with the day - to - day needs of the poor and should be barred from dealing with controversial political issues . the legislation authorizing the lsc was signed by president nixon in 1974 . during the ford administration , the lsc was reauthorized through fy1980 . during the 1980s there were several attempts by the reagan administration to abolish the lsc . although the george h.w . bush administration did not try to eliminate the lsc or drastically cut its funding , it supported more restrictions on the lsc . during the early years of the clinton administration the lsc reached its highest funding level of $400 million ; however , funding was reduced significantly in 1996 due to pressure from a majority republican congress to reduce lsc funding and impose more restrictions on the types of permissible lsc activities . according to many sources , imposing restrictions on lsc activities was the compromise that enabled the lsc to continue to exist . during the george w. bush administration funding for the lsc gradually increased and several more restrictions on lsc activities were imposed . the obama administration has proposed that funding for the lsc be increased to $435 million for fy2010 , and that lsc restrictions on class action suits and attorneys' fees be eliminated . 111-117 , the consolidated appropriations for 2010 ( enacted december 16 , 2009 ) , included a provision that appropriates $420 million for the lsc for fy2010 ( which exceeds the previous all - time high level of $400 million ) . 111-117 also continues existing limitations on the use of lsc funds ( and non - lsc funds ) except for the restriction on the ability of lsc - funded programs to claim and collect attorneys' fees . the lsc act and various annual appropriation laws contain restrictions on activities in which recipients of lsc funds may engage , and on types of cases in which lsc - funded legal services providers / programs may provide legal representation . although polls indicate majority support for the existence of , and federal funding for , the non - profit provision of legal assistance to the poor , determining the appropriate funding level of the lsc and agency / program parameters remains an issue . according to 21 state justice commissions , restrictions placed on programs receiving lsc funds adversely affected many low - income persons .