this has been the most common point of order raised against budget resolution amendments . in fact , this provision accounts for all sustained budget act points of order during budget resolution consideration in the past 10 years . for most other measures , a motion to proceed to their consideration is debatable . this report does not discuss the enforcement of those levels or committee allocations . this report will outline the most significant provisions contained within the budget act that affect the consideration and amending of budget resolutions in the senate . with only a few exceptions , these budget act provisions are enforced by points of order . because points of order are not self - enforcing ( not automatically triggered ) , enforcement requires that a senator raise a point of order against the consideration of the budget resolution or an amendment . in the event that no point of order is raised , the budget resolution or amendment is presumed to be within the limits prescribed by the budget act . after a senator raises a budget act point of order against an amendment , the senator offering the amendment may make a motion to waive the point of order . most budget act points of order may be waived by a vote of at least three - fifths of all senators duly chosen and sworn ( 60 votes if there are no vacancies ) . if three - fifths of senators vote to adopt the motion to waive the point of order , the senate can then hold a vote on the amendment itself . if three - fifths of senators do not vote in favor of the motion to waive the point of order , the point of order is sustained and the amendment falls . few budget act points of order are raised during the consideration of budget resolutions , and , of those , even fewer are waived . consideration of a budget resolution is privileged , meaning the motion for the senate to proceed to consideration of a budget resolution is nondebatable . section 301 ( a ) of the budget act prescribes the content required for this the budget resolution , and is discussed below . section 305 ( b ) ( 1 ) of the budget act limits total debate time in the senate on budget resolutions to 50 hours . it provides that the majority and minority leaders or their designees , normally the chair and ranking member of the budget committee , manage the time . it further specifies that the 50 hours of debate is equally divided and controlled so that both the majority and minority managers have 25 hours each , and they in turn can yield time to other senators . debate , debatable motions , appeals , and amendments are included in the 50 hours . time used for quorum calls is counted toward the 50 hours , but roll call votes are not . because the limit is specifically applied to debate , consideration may sometimes extend beyond the 50-hour limit .