as such , they do not fit into neat categories . grant recipients reported oti feedback and presence during the years of repression as more valuable in some cases than the material assistance oti provided . during this time , oti activities were fractured , operated out of five different locations ( including budapest , to where the staff evacuated during the nato bombings in 1999 ) , and poorly documented . nevertheless , many observers cite oti as a key player in the fall of the milosevic regime . a final evaluation of the program reports that oti spent $8.68 million in serbia and montenegro during this phase , through a total of 631 grants . much of the funding in 2000 supported a coordinated democratic opposition campaign and election - monitoring activities . seeing further assistance opportunities in post - milosevic serbia , oti expanded its activities from october 2000 through september 2002 . launching a democratic transition initiative ( dti ) to consolidate post - election democratic gains , oti supported a series of community improvement projects ( cips ) to show tangible and immediate benefits of peace and to emphasize the importance of civic participation and government accountability . within oti , some staff were concerned that the ongoing short - term employment programs were outside of oti's mandate and should have evolved to focus on grants to civil society organizations . cip projects rehabilitated schools and health clinics , repaired electric and water systems , and promoted widespread involvement in community priority - setting while emphasizing the legitimacy and capacity of democratically elected local officials . in response to a 2001 survey showing increasing political apathy within the serbian population , oti shifted focus towards an initiative called "pace of reform," which centered around a media campaign emphasizing the need for vigorous citizen participation in the political process . from october 2000 through september 2002 ( the post - milosevic period ) , oti provided $14.05 million though 633 grants , which was matched by $7.94 million in contributions from oti grantees . of the oti funding , 36.0% supported cips , while 32.8% focused on pace of reform , 12.2% on media , 12.6% on election processes , and 6.2% in support of civil society organizations . most of the local matching funds ( 66% ) were for cip projects . iraq oti's program in iraq , called the iraq transition initiative ( iti ) , is of special interest because it had the biggest budget of any oti program thus far , and because of the coordination with the u.s. military that security circumstances required . arriving in iraq in april 2003 as part of the usaid disaster assistance response team ( dart ) , which focused on filling humanitarian needs , oti staff were among the first civilian aid personnel on the ground following the u.s. invasion and quickly began initiating transition programs independent of the dart . oti activities in iraq were for the most part reported to be successfully linked to ongoing programs of the usaid mission , which has been attributed in part to weekly meetings between oti , usaid , and military commanders in the green zone starting in october 2004 .