barry concurred . there were a couple of others we decided to tell to the entire committee . according to this same account , there were other sensitive operations about which the committee and its chairman received no notification . gang of four members reportedly continue to keep the contents of sensitive briefings to themselves , although on certain occasions , the chairman and ranking member of the house intelligence committee reportedly have agreed to share the information with their respective party leaders . according to at least one gang of four member , the choice to do so is not always the lawmakers' to make . representative silvestre reyes , a former chairman of the house intelligence committee , reportedly said that , during the administration of president george w. bush , he was unable to have legal counsel or subject matter experts in attendance during such restricted briefings , leaving the committee unable to conduct oversight . "we were at a huge disadvantage , because [the administration and the intelligence community] called the shots," reyes reportedly stated . although senate intelligence committee chairman bayh appeared to accept the practice of restricted gang of four notifications , he reportedly was furious when he learned president carter had not informed him in advance of the 1980 covert efforts to rescue u.s. hostages held in iran because of concerns over operational security and the risk of disclosure . director of central intelligence stansfield turner briefed the full intelligence committees , but only after the operations had been conducted . bayh expressed his concern that the executive branch's action reflected a distrust of the intelligence committees . "it would have been so easy to tell us," he was quoted as saying . "any leaker of that information would be hung up by his thumbs . i expressed my anger to carter about not informing us . carter had a thing about not being able to trust the committee. other members of the committee , however , apparently were quite sympathetic to the administration's concerns and expressed their understanding of the demands of secrecy and the subsequent decision to withhold prior notification . one , a senior republican on the committee , was quoted as saying , "the more people you tell , the more danger there is of losing life . i say: 'to hell with the congress.' despite the overall sympathy shown for president carter's position by other members of the intelligence committees , senator bayh suggested that future administrations could address disclosure concerns by notifying a more limited number of members , a special subcommittee of five or seven , "so that at least somebody in the oversight mechanism would know... . if oversight is to function better , you first need it to function. this general sentiment appeared to prevail . later in 1980 , congress approved in statute the new gang of eight notification procedure . henceforth , the intelligence committees' leadership , the speaker and minority leader of the house , and senate majority and minority leaders , were to be provided prior notice of particularly sensitive covert action programs if the president determined that limited access to such programs was essential to meet extraordinary circumstances affecting vital u.s. interests .