claims. there is also the possibility that the court's decision will affect preemption jurisprudence . in reaching its decision , the court relied on the doctrine of "presumption against preemption," stating that "when the test of a pre - emption clause is susceptible of more than one plausible reading , courts ordinarily 'accept the reading that disfavors pre - emption.' however , as the dissent emphasized , the court's reliance on this doctrine has waned in recent preemption cases , citing decisions such as rowe v. new hampshire motor transp . , engine mfs . it then discusses the relevant lower court decisions and the split that arose between the circuit courts . this report examines the supreme court's decision in altria group , inc. v. good and the effect this decision could have on future tobacco litigation and preemption jurisprudence , in addition to the effect of h.r . 1256 , the family smoking prevention and tobacco control act . this section examines the development of the preemption provisions in the fclaa , the preemption doctrine , as well the two supreme court cases , cipollone and reilly , that have discussed the preemptive effect of the fclaa . the supreme court examined the preemptive scope of the fclaa once again in altria group , inc. v. good . prior to the supreme court granting certiorari , a split developed in the circuit courts regarding whether the fclaa preempted a claim for deceptive practices under a state statute . under the fclaa , the federal trade commission ( ftc ) has the power to regulate and proscribe unfair or deceptive acts or practices in the advertising of cigarettes . in 1966 , the ftc proposed a standardized method for measuring tar and nicotine levels . this became known as the ftc or cambridge method , in which a machine smokes each cigarette the same way to the same length and the particular matter is collected on a pad and measured for tar and nicotine content . second , the new general preemption provision and framework for approving modified tobacco risk products of h.r . 1256 might affect future cases where plaintiffs wish to assert a common law claim that low - tar or light descriptors fraudulently conveyed the message that such cigarettes deliver less tar and nicotine than do regular brands . although good established that such claims were not preempted under ยง5 ( b ) , future claims regarding light cigarettes may be preempted under this new general preemption provision because cigarettes that use such descriptors in their label , labeling , or advertising would be considered "modified tobacco risk products. 1256 's general preemption provision would prevent states from establishing or continuing any "requirement which is different from , or in addition to" the requirements in the statute relating to , among other things , modified risk tobacco products . as the court in riegel v. medtronic , inc. determined , "[a]bsent other indication , [statutory] reference to a state's 'requirements' includes its common law duties.