each of these is described below . 41 would provide for federal research , development , demonstration , and commercial application activities to enable the development of farms that are net producers of both food and energy , and for other purposes . it would direct the secretary of energy to enter into an arrangement with the national academy of sciences to evaluate the feasibility of a prize and best practices award programs as tools to promote self - powered farms and , if feasible , make recommendations for carrying out such programs . the voting integrity and verification act of 2009 ( s. 48 ) would require the director of the national institute of standards and technology ( nist ) to establish a program to award cash prizes competitively to eligible persons that advance the research , development , demonstration , and application of voting systems specifically designed to enhance accessibility and provide independence for persons with disabilities during the voting process . the new manhattan project for energy independence act ( h.r . 513 ) would award a prize for the development and manufacturing of energy technologies that meet a number of economic , technical , and societal criteria including a plug - in hybrid vehicle , alternative fuel vehicle , electric vehicle , hydrogen fuel cell vehicle , or other alternative technology vehicle ; an energy efficient residential or commercial building ; a large scale solar thermal power plant or solar photovoltaic power plant ; biofuels ; carbon capture and storage system for a large scale coal - burning power plant ; validated process for remediation of radioactive waste ; or sustainable nuclear fusion reaction . the doe would administer a prize program with monetary awards to advance the research , development , demonstration , and commercial application necessary to achieve these goals with a prize for each . other goals include broad participation by researchers , large and small businesses , institutions of higher education , and any other qualified applicants , including veterans . in developing the prize , doe is to consult with other federal agencies , including nsf ; and may consult with other experts such as private organizations , including professional societies , industry associations , and the national academy of sciences and the national academy of engineering . the nanotechnology innovation and prize competition act of 2009 ( s. 596 ) directs the secretary of commerce , through the nist director to establish a program to award prizes for achievement in the applications of nanotechnology for: ( 1 ) improvement of the environment , consistent with twelve principles of green chemistry of the environmental protection agency ( epa ) ; ( 2 ) development of alternative energy that has the potential to lessen the dependence of the united states on fossil fuels ; ( 3 ) improvement of human health , consistent with regulations promulgated by the food and drug administration ( fda ) ; and ( 4 ) development of consumer products . the bill would appoint a board to oversee the program and require it to submit an annual report to congress . it provides the board with the option of contracting with a private organization to administer the prize .