it does not address the effectiveness of their programs . for discussion of the afghan political , security , and economic situation , see crs report rl30588 , afghanistan: post - taliban governance , security , and u.s. policy , by [author name scrubbed] , and crs report rs21922 , afghanistan: politics , elections , and government performance , by [author name scrubbed] . for greater detail on security assistance provided by the department of defense , see crs report r40156 , war in afghanistan: strategy , operations , and issues for congress , by [author name scrubbed] . the u.s. program of assistance to afghanistan has multiple objectives implemented by a range of actors working in diverse sectors . the main purpose of the program is to stabilize and strengthen the afghan economic , social , political , and security environment so as to blunt popular support for extremist forces in the region . the bulk of u.s. assistance is in security - related activities . since 2001 , nearly two - thirds ( 63% ) of total u.s. assistance has gone to the afghan security forces fund ( asff ) , the account supporting the training and equipping of afghan security forces , and related military and security aid accounts . about 75% of u.s. assistance went to security programs in fy2012 . the second - largest portion of assistance has been aimed at economic , social , and political development efforts . the main provider of these programs is the agency for international development ( usaid ) , with the department of state playing a significant role in democracy and governance activities . these programs account for roughly 28% of total aid since 2001 . they accounted for 21% of aid in fy2012 . a third element of assistance , humanitarian aid , largely implemented through usaid and international organizations , represents about 3% of total aid since 2001 . in november 2010 , the u.s. embassy , u.s. military and unama formally launched an "afghan first" effort to actively solicit afghan suppliers for procurement needs , including local procurement of agriculture produce for u.s. and isaf military and civilian installations . between january 2008 and may 2011 , about $654 million in reconstruction funds were awarded by state , dod , and usaid directly to 214 afghan business firms . another key shift in assistance policy in 2009 and following years has been to move more funds to regions and sectors previously less well - supported . more money is going to the southern and eastern parts of the country , especially as the military goes in and secures an area . an estimated 70% - 80% of current u.s. assistance is going to these regions of high priority in the counterinsurgency effort . beginning in fy2009 , more funding was channeled to agriculture , a sector that had been relatively neglected , but is a way to reach rural areas that had been under the influence of the insurgents and is the most critical part of the afghan economy . below is a menu of the range of assistance programs the united states is now implementing in afghanistan .