postal service . eliminating a delivery day alone , however , would not solve usps's financial challenges and could reduce usps sales and revenue , lead to service delays , prompt job loss at usps , or affect vulnerable populations who rely on six - day delivery . members of the 112 th congress have introduced nine bills ( h.r . 3744 ; s. 1010 ; s. 1573 ; s. 1625 ; s. 1789 ; and s. 1853 ) and one resolution ( h.res . 137 ) regarding six - day mail delivery . a subsequent prc advisory opinion on the elimination of saturday delivery , released in march 2011 , found that usps's study on eliminating a delivery day overestimated net and gross savings and underestimated potential revenue losses . the advisory opinion estimated that usps could save $1.7 billion in annual net savings by eliminating saturday delivery . the government accountability office ( gao ) released a report in march 2011 stating that a move to five - day mail delivery could better align services "with reduced mail volume," but could also "reduce service," "put mail volumes and revenues at risk," and "eliminate jobs. the report also said that eliminating one delivery day would "by itself , be insufficient to solve usps's financial challenges. the report further stated: if congress decides 5-day delivery is necessary , then congress and usps could factor the savings into deliberations about what package of actions should be taken to restore usps's financial viability . conversely , if congress maintains the mandate for 6-day delivery , congress and usps would need to find other ways to achieve equivalent financial savings , so that the package is sufficient to restore usps's financial viability . this would likely entail difficult decisions with broad implications for usps's infrastructure , workforce , and service . as gao has reported , a package of actions by congress and usps is urgently needed to modernize usps's operations , networks , and workforce . other countries have varied mail delivery schedules . a sampling of various countries' mail delivery practices found that some countries deliver mail five days per week ( australia and sweden ) while others deliver mail six days per week ( france , germany , and the netherlands ) . royal mail , which delivers mail in the united kingdom ( uk ) six days per week , reportedly contemplated eliminating saturday delivery in 2008 because of economic concerns . canada post , which receives no national appropriation , offers letter - carrier services five days per week and does not deliver mail or parcels on most saturdays . new zealand post offers six - day mail delivery services to some customers , but not to customers living in rural areas . in addition , new zealand post customers who send mail that requires a saturday delivery must pay an additional fee , and parcels are not delivered on saturdays in new zealand . currently , all but 25,000 of usps's 135 million residential mail recipients receive six - day mail delivery . when usps began the practice is unclear .