502 ( f ) . this provision of federal law provides that "a member of the national guard may...without his consent , but with the pay and allowances provided by law...be ordered to perform training or other duty in addition to [inactive duty for training or annual training]. the advantage of using this authority is that the national guard personnel called will receive federal pay and benefits and are entitled to certain legal protections as though they were in federal service , but they remain under the control of their governor and are therefore not subject to the restrictions of the posse comitatus act . this is the provision of law which was used to provide federal pay and benefits to the national guard personnel who provided security at many of the nation's airports in the aftermath of the terrorist attacks of september 11 , 2001 . it has also been used to respond to major disasters such as hurricane katrina in 2005 . national guard personnel can also be activated in a purely federal status . the authorities used to do this include all of the title 10 authorities discussed in footnote 50 . when in this federal status , national guard personnel serve under the control of the president , receive federal pay and benefits , and are subject to the posse comitatus act in the same way that active duty military personnel are . national guard personnel can also be called into federal service under 10 usc 331-335 and 12406 . if called up under one of these authorities , national guard personnel would operate under the control of the president , receive federal pay and benefits , and could perform law enforcement duties . when considering the federal activation of the reserves and national guard , one important consideration is the impact this would have on state , local , or tribal response efforts that are already ongoing . for example , the activation of reserve and national guard medical personnel may pull them out of local hospitals where they are already engaged in the response effort , thereby undermining state and local response efforts . such activations are a particular concern with respect to national guard personnel , who often constitute a large portion of a state's emergency response force . another important factor to consider when federalizing national guard forces is the impact of the posse comitatus act . while they remain in a state status ( either state active duty or title 32 status ) , national guard personnel are not covered by the act and therefore are a valuable tool for state governors in maintaining public order . federalization of the national guard generally brings them under the restrictions of the act and thereby limits their utility for law enforcement purposes . a flu pandemic is a worldwide epidemic of an influenza virus . as such , the united states' response to a flu pandemic would have both international and domestic components . additionally , the domestic response effort would depend upon contributions from every governmental level ( local , state , tribal , and federal ) , non - governmental organizations , and the private sector .