rate provisions in p.l . 111-5 , however , are another significant attempt to lower rate barriers , although it will be at least a few years before congress will be able to gauge whether this statute will be more successful than the one passed in 1992 . so , in this case as well , congress has long recognized the significance of the rate barrier to building efficiency . it seems simply to have been harder to develop and enact consensus policies to address it . that utility rate reform has been complicated should come as no surprise due to the regulatory primacy of the states on utility retail rate matters and the often controversial economic implications of decoupled rates . congressional treatment of market risks seems to differ from its treatment of the other critical barriers . market risks , especially energy price risks , seem to have received relatively little policy attention from congress to date . one might argue that first cost incentives , like efficient equipment rebates , implicitly address energy price volatility by making up for the risk premium that volatility imposes on the financing of efficiency investments . but congress does not appear to have incorporated this perspective in its statutory provisions , so even though market risks and incentive levels could be linked in this way , important questions remain about the nature of this linkage and its importance in end - user investment decisions . given the importance commercial building owners and operators seem to place on this issue , congress may consider a more direct examination of market risk issues in the context of building efficiency investment and the policy options available in response . what these policy options may be is an open question , as few analysts have devoted significant attention to the issue . statutes promoting an alaska natural gas pipeline or synthetic fuel plants offer possible examples of energy market risk mitigation policies , but there may be other , potentially more appropriate ones . some analysts suggest that policies establishing federal energy efficiency resource standards , which would require utilities to achieve specified levels of energy efficiency in their service territories , could be an effective means of promoting efficiency investments in the face of the barriers discussed in this report . the save american energy act ( h.r . 889 ) and the american clean energy and security act of 2009 ( h.r . 2454 ยง 101 ) are prominent examples of such legislation currently under debate . in setting efficiency performance targets for utilities , however , such policies may not necessarily target specific efficiency barriers as identified in the lock - in report . utilities bearing more responsibility for efficiency improvements among their customers might , therefore , face the same barriers that the federal government does now , with no new mechanisms to overcome them . the utilities could choose to seek new rate structures to promote efficiency , but such actions would require the consent of state regulators , already required to consider such rates as a condition of receiving federal energy grants under p.l .