during the conduct of this search , the employees found no pills . , the court found that students are one group of individuals which has a "diminished expectation of privacy. in that case , the court held that , for searches conducted by school officials in the school setting , "a careful balancing of governmental and private interests suggests that the public interest is best served by a fourth amendment standard of reasonableness that stops short of probable cause. the court went on to apply a "reasonable suspicion" standard for such a search and stated "[a search] will be permissible in its scope when the measures adopted are reasonably related to the objectives of the search and not excessively intrusive in light of the age and sex of the student and the nature of the infraction. to determine if there is reasonable suspicion to warrant a school search , the courts generally look to three different factors: ( 1 ) "the degree to which known facts imply prohibited conduct" ; ( 2 ) "the specificity of the information received" ; and ( 3 ) "the reliability of its source. however , these factors "do not rigidly control," rather they are "fluid concepts that take their substantive content from the particular contexts in which they are being assessed. the court went on: perhaps the best that can be said generally about the required knowledge component of probable cause for a law enforcement officer's evidence search is that it raise a 'fair probability' or a 'substantial chance' of discovering evidence of criminal activity . the lesser standard for school searches could as readily be described as a moderate chance of finding evidence of wrongdoing . applying these standards , the court held that the school's search of redding's book bag and outer clothing was in accordance with the fourth amendment . the school had reasonable suspicion redding was involved in pill distribution as a result of gline's possession of banned pills ; gline's accusation of redding ; redding's acknowledged ownership of the day planner ; and circumstantial evidence that redding had been involved in alcohol consumption and cigarette smoking at a school dance a month or two before . additionally , the search of redding's book bag and outer clothing were conducted in "relative privacy ... and [were] not excessively intrusive.... " the search became constitutionally unreasonable when it went beyond redding's outerwear and ultimately led to redding being required to shake and pull out her bra and underwear . the fact that the two school employees present testified that they did not see redding's private areas was immaterial to the court . it stated: the very fact of [redding's] pulling her underwear away from her body in the presence of the two officials who were able to see her necessarily exposed her breasts and pelvic area to some degree , and both subjective and reasonable societal expectations of personal privacy support the treatment of such a search as categorically distinct , requiring distinct elements of justification on the part of the school authorities.... redding's subjective belief that the search was scary and humiliating was reasonable , as it was "consistent [with] the experiences of other young people similarly searched , whose adolescent vulnerability intensifies the patent intrusiveness of the exposure.