these provisions are not listed below . the remainder of this section summarizes provisions in the president's budget proposals . 1748 , and the enacted law , p.l . 111-21 , did not include the tax provision but did include additional funds . this proposal ( introduced as s. 569 in the 111 th congress ) would establish uniform requirements for states relating to the disclosure of beneficial owners of corporations and limited liability companies , including updating and maintenance of information after terminating , imposing additional requirements for those not u.s. citizens or permanent residents , providing penalties , and updating of such disclosures . it also authorizes a study of requirements of partnerships , trusts , and other legal entities . this bill is relevant , among other things , to issues raised about the use of states as international tax havens . a number of bills introduced in the 113 th congress would have made a variety of changes in the tax law affecting the treatment of foreign source income . 694 ( representative schakowsky ) and s. 250 ( senator sanders ) would have made fundamental changes similar in some respects to the wyden - coats bill: treat firms managed and controlled in the united states as domestic firms , repeal deferral , impose a per country foreign tax credit limit , and limit credits for dual capacity tax payers . 3793 ( representative maffei ) and s. 1844 ( senator shaheen ) would adopt the management and control provision . 1555 ( representative doggett ) also would adopt this provision , as well as repeal the look - through rule for royalties and certain intangible income and adopt the boot - within - gain provision discussed above . after the problem of firms inverting via merger became prominent , bills that incorporated the president's proposal to treat as domestic firms mergers with u.s. firms and other provisions included h.r . 4679 ( representative levin ) , s. 2360 ( senator levin ) , h.r . 4985 ( representative van hollen ) , and s. 2489 ( senator walsh ) . 5338 also included the management and control provision , and s. 2489 also included allocation of income provisions . s. 268 ( senator levin ) is a bill that includes many of the provisions of the various stop tax havens abuse legislation but not the fundamental law changes of the sanders bill ( s. 250 ) . its consequences for evasion have yet to be determined . corporate tax reductions arising from profit shifting also have been estimated . as discussed below , estimates of the revenue losses from corporate profit shifting vary substantially , ranging from about $10 billion to about $90 billion , or even higher . this activity appears to have increased substantially in recent years . in addition to differentiating between individual and corporate activities , and evasion and avoidance , there are also variations in the features used to characterize tax havens .