neither h.r . 4173 nor rafsa , however , would address possible conflicts of interest associated with the issuer - pays business model . joseph a. grundfest , a former sec commissioner and currently a professor of securities law at stanford university law school , is therefore dismissive of the ultimate benefits from the rating agency reforms in the dodd committee print and h.r . 4173 : "what you see in these bills are botox shots . for a little while , everyone is going to be frozen into a grin , and then the shots are going to wear off. responding to such concerns after the house financial services subcommittee on capital markets , insurance , and government sponsored enterprises marked up h.r . 3890 ( which is incorporated into h.r . 4173 ) , the bill's sponsor , congressman paul e. kanjorski , reportedly said: "people do tend to favor those people who pay them . i wanted to remove that conflict of interest . but quite frankly , having talked to some of the most informed people , the agencies probably could not have funded themselves . [and without cash from those they cover] we'd be creating an even larger void. earlier on , with respect to the rating agency elements of rafsa's legislative antecedents , which rafsa has essentially kept intact , senator jack reed , ( also see s. 1073 below ) , who has been active in crafting its provisions on rating agency reform , has reportedly observed: "we all understand the outrage , but our priority is to prevent this from happening again , rather than looking backwards and punishing. senator reed has reportedly also been concerned about the large numbers of professional investors — such as those who work for small towns — who lack the wherewithal to do bond research every time that the town is slated to acquire them . flawed models and assumptions . the agencies used inappropriate models for rating structured finance products . while some observers concede that the modeling exercises posed formidable inherent challenges , cra models for structured products were reportedly calibrated based on short spans of data over a benign period of economic moderation in financial markets and rising house prices . scenarios with economic turbulence or falling house prices were not used to gauge the models' reliability under such circumstances . a related issue , noted above , is that they may have failed to ( 1 ) correctly calculate underlying house loan defaults because they attached the wrong weights to the effect of falling house prices on loan default rates ; and ( 2 ) understand the interdependence among loan defaults , and the likelihood of falling house prices occurring . the content of the publications and the audience to which they are directed in this case reveal the specific limits of the exclusion .