appendix a . closing - out — liquidating an existing long or short futures or option position with an equal and opposite transaction . an example of futures trading an oil futures contract represents 1,000 barrels of oil , but neither party to the contract need ever possess the actual commodity . what public interest is served by the activity ? there are two recognized benefits to derivatives trading: hedging and price discovery . hedgers are traders who use the market to avoid price risk arising from their commercial dealings in the underlying commodity . a cattle producer , for example , can use the markets to lock in today's price for future sales of livestock , obtaining protection against the risk of falling prices . the producer may purchase futures contracts that gain value if the price of live cattle falls . if the price does in fact drop by the time the futures position expires , the producer will earn less money on physical sales , but the loss will be offset by futures contract profits . conversely , if prices rise , the producer will lose money on the futures contracts , but gain on physical sales . whichever way prices move , the net result is the same: the risk of unfavorable price movements over the term of the futures contracts has been eliminated , or hedged . credit default swaps — another type of derivative contract — can also be used to hedge risk , even if the trader does not own the underlying bond . for example , a company that supplies auto parts to general motors and depends on payments from gm might purchase a credit default swap on a gm bond to hedge against the risk of a gm default . the auto parts company would make a stream of payments to the seller of the credit default swap , and in case of a gm default , bankruptcy or other credit event , the cds seller would pay the parts company a lump sum . if gm defaulted , the loss of payments to the auto parts company would be partly offset by the lump - sum payment the parts supplier would receive from its credit default swap counterparty . the ability to manage various forms of risk with futures , swaps , and other derivatives enables firms to budget , invest , and produce more efficiently , and provides a buffer against adverse price shocks . who takes on the price risk that the hedger gets rid of ? it will probably be a speculator who never actually handles the physical commodity , but simply seeks to profit by forecasting future prices . most trading in derivatives is speculative ; the futures exchanges are associations of professional speculators . the advantage of a large volume of trading is that hedgers can quickly find someone to take the opposite side of their trade . for instance , a firm that is at risk if energy prices rise ( such as an airline or a power utility ) can instantly find a counterparty who is willing to bet that prices will fall , enabling the hedging firm to lock in the current price . price discovery is the second benefit .