1874 than was had in implementing its predecessor . in february 2010 , ambassador goldberg also took over as assistant secretary of the state department's bureau of intelligence and research ( inr ) . he will continue in his role as coordinator for implementation of unsc resolution 1874 on north korea . the obama administration faces several key decisions regarding the u.s. role in enforcing resolution 1874 and applying new u.s. sanctions against north korea . the administration faces a decision on how assertive to be in confronting north korean ship traffic to attempt searches . it also faces a decision on the u.s. role in enforcing the ban on wmd - related north korean financial transactions . u.s. officials have said that the obama administration is emphasizing the resolution's call on states to deny financial services to north korea , especially access to foreign banks by north korean trading companies . administration officials also have said that they are considering reinstating north korea on the u.s. list of state sponsors of terrorism ; the bush administration removed north korea from the list in october 2008 . finally , the administration may have to calculate the degree of pressure to apply to china if beijing does little to enforce the security council sanctions , as was the case following resolution 1718 . the hyundai economic research institute of south korea has estimated that if u.n. members enforce the sanctions in resolution 1874 against north korea , north korea could lose between $1.5 billion and $3.7 billion . other estimates place the loss close to $4 billion . however , resolution 1874 does not make enforcement of sanctions mandatory but instead "calls on" u.n. members to take enforcement steps . if sanctions are to have this kind of impact , several key countries will have act forcefully and will have to interpret the sanctions language of the resolution liberally . there appear to be four key areas of sanctions enforcement . unsc resolution 1874 tightens , expands , and adds to many of the existing restrictions that were included in unsc resolution 1718 , which the security council unanimously passed on october 14 , 2006 , five days after north korea's first nuclear test . as with resolution 1874 , resolution 1718 was passed in the hope that it would curb financial inflows that went to north korea's regime and its weapons programs , while imposing minimal humanitarian hardships on the broader north korean population . less than three weeks after the unsc passed resolution 1718 , north korea announced it would return to the six - party talks that it had been boycotting for nearly a year . the announcement came after secret meetings with u.s. and chinese officials . while it is possible that kim jong - il's government planned to quickly return to the talks after its nuclear test , it is also possible that the speedy passage and unanimous support of 1718 spurred the regime's decision . however , most analysts consider resolution 1718 ineffective in economically penalizing north korea .