these provisions were amended in 1997 . 105-17 amendments allowed the reduction of attorneys' fees if the attorney representing the parents did not provide the lea with timely and specific information about the child and the basis of the dispute , and specifically excluded the payment of attorneys' fees for most individualized education plan ( iep ) meetings . this requirement is referred to as child find . although this requirement has not been heavily litigated , the ninth circuit held in compton unified school district v. addison that a school district who failed to evaluate a ninth grader who failed all her classes , colored with crayons and played with dolls in class failed to meet idea's child find requirement and that such a failure could be the subject of a due process complaint . although the supreme court has not yet made a determination regarding whether the case will be heard , the court did ask the department of justice for its views on the issue . the issue as presented to the court is whether the parent of a child with a disability has a right to a due process hearing alleging negligence because of school officials' failure to arrange an educational program for the child , or if due process suits are only allowed when the school district makes an intentional decision . after a child has been identified as a child with a disability under idea , an individualized education team is formed to write an individualized education program for the child . idea contains detailed requirements for the iep . the iep must include a statement of the child's present levels of academic achievement and functional performance , a statement of measurable annual goals , a description of how these goals are to be met , a statement of the special education and related services to be provided , and an explanation of the extent to which the child is to be educated with children without disabilities . to support this argument , they pointed to the legislative history of the handicapped children's protection act , which stated that "[t]he conferees intend that the term 'attorneys' fees as part of the costs' include reasonable expenses and fees of expert witnesses. the supreme court , in a decision written by justice alito , held that idea does not authorize prevailing parents to recover fees they have paid to experts . the majority opinion first observed that the holding was "guided by the fact that congress enacted the idea pursuant to the spending clause. this was seen as significant because if congress attaches conditions to a state's acceptance of funds , the conditions must be unambiguous and provide clear notice . since the iep is the way fape is implemented , it is a key component of idea and has been the subject of numerous judicial decisions . generally , these cases have adopted a two - part inquiry: first , the court determines whether idea's procedures have been complied with ; second , the court ascertains whether the iep is reasonably calculated to provide the child with educational benefits .