all other departments and agencies had no violations . oira's efforts to control pra violations came in the wake of a series of critical reports by gao . for example , in 2004 , gao reported that pra violations had fallen from a high of 872 in fy1998 to 223 in fy2003 . while praising oira for taking action to address pra violations ( eg , using its pra database to identify information collections that have recently expired ) , gao said that oira could do more , including notifying budget examiners within omb that an agency is collecting information in violation of the pra , and allowing them to put pressure on the agency to come into compliance with the act . in its 2007 pra report , oira described its recent efforts to improve agency compliance ( eg , the enhancement of its database to enable agencies to prepare a "watchlist" of collections that will expire shortly ) . the pra of 1995 authorized $8 million in appropriations to oira in fiscal years 1996 through 2001 to carry out the purposes of the act "and for no other purpose. since 2001 , the pra and oira ( which , as noted previously , was created by the pra ) have operated without an appropriations authorization . oira does not have a specific line item in the annual budget , so its funding is part of omb's appropriation . similarly , oira's staffing levels are allocated from omb's totals . in the 108 th congress , a provision in h.r . 2432 as originally introduced would have required the omb director to "assign , at a minimum , the equivalent of at least 2 full time staffers to review the federal information collection burden on the public imposed by the internal revenue service. as noted previously , the irs accounts for about 80% of the estimated paperwork burden government - wide , but oira indicated that it devoted less than one full - time equivalent staff person to reviewing the agency's paperwork requests ( reportedly because much of the burden is mandated by statute or is outside of the agency's control ) . the george w. bush administration objected to this specific direction of oira staff , so the sponsors of the bill agreed to delete this requirement before the legislation was approved by the house of representatives in may 2004 . no similar proposed legislation has been introduced in the 111 th congress . one of the agency certifications that the pra requires to be submitted to oira is that the proposed information collection reduces the amount of paperwork burden to the extent practicable , "including with respect to small entities. the act goes on to describe techniques that can be used to accomplish this goal , including " ( i ) establishing differing compliance or reporting requirements or timetables that take into account the resources available to those who are to respond ; ( ii ) the clarification , consolidation , or simplification of compliance and reporting requirements ; or ( iii ) an exemption from coverage of the collection of information , or any part thereof. some studies indicate that paperwork requirements are more burdensome on small businesses than larger companies .