strengthened the committee of european banking supervisors . the committee is an advisory body without any regulatory authority that coordinates banking supervision . the eu directive of january 23 , 2009 , broadened the role of the committee to include supervision of financial conglomerates . strengthened the committee of european insurance and occupational pensions supervisors . the committee is an advisory body without any regulatory authority within the european commission in the areas of insurance , reinsurance , and occupational pensions fields . these procedures are co - decision , assent , and consultation . in general terms , parliament is considered to have adopted a measure if it fails to reject the proposed measure within three months after it has been adopted by the council . the january 23 , 2009 , directive authorizes the committee to coordinate policies among eu members and between the eu and national governments and other bodies . the european parliament and the european council approved on april 23 , 2009 new regulations on credit rating agencies that are expected to improve the quality and transparency of the ratings agencies . adopted measures to create a new european systemic risk board ( esrb ) and a european system of financial supervisors . the european central bank has been entrusted with providing analytical , statistical , administrative , and logistical support to the esrb . under the assent procedure , the council can adopt a measure proposed by the commission if it receives the assent of parliament . under the consultation procedure , the council , acting unanimously or as a qualified majority , can adopt legislation developed by the commission after it has consulted with parliament . since the start of the financial crisis , the european union has taken a number of steps to improve supervision of financial markets . these actions include: strengthened the committee of european securities regulators . the committee is an advisory body without any regulatory authority within the european commission . the directive of january 23 , 2009 , strengthened the committee's authority to mediate and coordinate securities regulations between eu members . approved direct funding by the european union to the international accounting standards committee foundation , the european financial reporting advisory group , and the public interest oversight body . the european commission proposed a set of measures to register hedge fund managers and managers of alternative investment funds and measures to regulate executive compensation . the euro area countries initially sketched out a broad response to the financial crisis . since then , their response to bank foreclosures and to subsequent issues has been characterized by some as somewhat disjointed . the financial crisis and economic downturn have exposed deep fissures within the eu and even within the euro area countries over the policy course to follow . as a first response to the financial crisis , eu governments and their central banks focused policy initiatives on reassuring credit markets that there was an availability of credit and liquidity , by reducing interest rates , and by providing foreign currency , primarily dollars , through currency arrangements .