appendix a . selected federal programs that provide or support home visitation as discussed in the section on " existing federal , state , and local funding streams for home visiting ," a number of federal programs are already being used to support early childhood home visitation efforts . federal statute for these programs may require some amount of home - based services ( eg , even start ) , explicitly permit home visiting as a possible activity ( eg , maternal and child health block grant ) , or allow home visiting under broad authorities or program goals ( eg , medicaid ) . selected programs , arranged alphabetically , are briefly described below . community - based grants for the prevention of child abuse and neglect ( cbcap ) title ii of the child abuse prevention and treatment act ( capta ) authorizes grants to support community - based services for the prevention of child abuse and neglect . cbcap grants are distributed by formula to a lead entity in all states ( which may be a public agency , a quasi - public entity , or a nonprofit private organization ) . the lead entity is charged with developing a continuum of community - based services for children and families that are designed to strengthen and support families to prevent child abuse and neglect . core family resource and support services to be provided by community - based programs include voluntary home visiting services , parent education , community and social services referrals , and respite care services , among others . in their fy2007 program summaries , the majority of state cbcap contacts indicated explicit support of home visiting services . for fy2010 , the cbcap program received funding of approximately $42 million ( p.l . cbcap is administered by the office of child abuse and neglect within the children's bureau of the administration for children and families at hhs . early head start early head start is a federally funded community - based program for low - income expectant parents and families with infants and toddlers that seeks to ( 1 ) promote healthy prenatal outcomes ; ( 2 ) enhance the development of infants and toddlers ; and ( 3 ) promote healthy family functioning . nationwide , there are more than 650 early head start programs providing child development and family support services , serving approximately 62,000 children under the age of three annually . grantees select an early head start service delivery option ( typically center - based , home - based , or a combination ) to meet the needs of the children and families in their communities . in 2006 , about half ( 51% ) of early head start slots were center - based , while 41% were in home - based programs . children and families enrolled in center - based programs receive comprehensive child development services in a center - based setting , supplemented with limited home visits by the child's teacher and other early head start staff ( a minimum of two home visits a year to each family ) . in home - based programs , children and their families are supported through weekly home visits of at least 90 minutes and bimonthly group socialization experiences .