many of these proposals represent the elimination of tax expenditures . table 1 identifies the proposed tax changes for the oil industry , and the white house's estimates of the revenues , or in its terms , deficit reduction , generated to 2014 , if enacted by congress . many of these measures have the effect of equalizing the treatment of the independent oil producers to that of the major oil companies . this equalization is accomplished through eliminating preferential tax treatment of the independent companies compared to that of the major oil companies . in some cases , for example , the expensing of intangible drilling expenses , the major oil companies have been excluded from the benefits of the tax provision while the benefit was still in effect for the independent oil producers . as shown in table 1 , none of the proposed revenue changes are estimated to have a significant effect in 2010 . almost 80% of the total proposed tax changes would come from only three of the proposals . these three proposals are likely to increase total taxes on the oil industry: an excise tax on gulf of mexico oil and natural gas production , the rescinding of the manufacturing tax deduction for the oil industry , and the repeal of percentage depletion . on the one hand , the deficit reduction proposed items in table 1 can be considered to be effective tax increases on the oil and natural gas industries that could have the effect of decreasing exploration , development , and production while increasing prices and increasing our foreign oil dependence . these same proposals , from an alternate point of view , can also be considered to be the elimination of tax preferences that have favored the oil and natural gas industries over other energy sources , and made oil and gas products artificially inexpensive , with consumer costs held below true cost of consumption , when the costs associated with climate change and energy dependence , among other effects , are included . whichever view is adopted , the real effects of these proposals on oil production , consumption , and imports are likely to be small relative to both the federal deficit and the revenues of the oil industry . these decisions represent economic investments which might no longer be viable if the relative price of gasoline and oil increase . for example , when the price of gasoline rose to more than $4 per gallon , based on oil prices that rose to over $145 per barrel , during the second half of 2008 , consumers shifted their spending away from sport utility vehicles and light trucks toward more fuel efficient vehicles , reducing the sales and profitability of the u.s. automobile industry , and accelerating the collapse of the industry . shifting the energy consumption pattern from oil to alternative fuels is unlikely to occur without adjustment costs to consumers and u.s. industry .