in 2010 , the district court ruled in favor of major witt . it is a promise of the constitution that there is a realm of personal liberty which the government cannot enter . the texas statute furthers no legitimate state interest which can justify its intrusion into the personal and private life of the individual . as noted above , earlier federal appellate courts , relying on bowers , uniformly ruled that the military ban on homosexual acts intruded upon no constitutionally protected right and was "rationally related" to legitimate military needs for "unit cohesion" and discipline . the military need not encourage debate or tolerate protest to the extent that such tolerance is required of the civilian state by the first amendment ; to accomplish its mission the military must foster instinctive obedience , unity , commitment , and esprit de corps . the essence of military service "is the subordination of the desires and interests of the individual to the needs of the service. because the air force argued that standardized uniforms were necessary to "encourage the subordination of personal preferences," the majority deferred to the "professional judgment" of the air force . the ramifications of the majority's "subrational - basis standard — absolute , uncritical deference" — drew vigorous objections from the dissenting justices: the court rejects captain goldman's claim without even the slightest attempt to weigh his asserted right to the free exercise of his religion against the interest of the air force in uniformity of dress within the military hospital . no test for free exercise claims in the military context is even articulated , much less applied . it is entirely sufficient for the court if the military perceives a need for uniformity . in rostker v. goldberg , the supreme court dealt specifically with an equal protection challenge to gender - based military classifications — namely , congress's decision to register men , but not women , for the military draft . in applying the "intermediate scrutiny" test of craig v. boren , the majority found the draft law did not reflect "unthinking" gender stereotypes , but was the product of extensive congressional deliberations on the role of women in combat and the necessities of military mobilization . a more skeptical judicial attitude emerged during the warren court era , which frequently questioned the scope and operation of military rules , particularly as applied to on - base civilians and non - duty - related conduct of service members . but the pendulum returned to what has been described as the "modern military deference doctrine" with a series of burger court decisions in the mid - 1970s . rather than abandoning all substantive review , the current judicial approach is to apply federal constitutional standards in a more lenient fashion which , with rare exception , favors military needs for obedience and discipline over the rights of the individual servicemen . "the fundamental necessity for obedience , and the consequent necessity for imposition of discipline , may render permissible within the military that which would be constitutionally impermissible outside it. among leading contemporary precedents are the supreme court rulings in goldman v. weinberger and rostker v. goldberg .