this report will evaluate sustainability issues . for an overview of projected deficits under current policy and options for addressing them , see crs report r41778 , reducing the budget deficit: policy issues , by [author name scrubbed] . some economists worry that if the public debt keeps rising , it will become unsustainable . by definition , the debt becomes unsustainable when private investors are no longer willing to hold it , at least at normal interest rates . private investors become unwilling to hold a nation's debt when they become convinced that the government will either default on ( in other words , renege on promises to repay ) or monetize the debt ( in other words , finance it through money creation ) in a way that would result in rapidly increasing price inflation that reduces the existing debt's relative value . although it is not possible to establish a threshold level at which a country's debt becomes unsustainable , the trend that causes unsustainability is well known: a country cannot continually increase its debt at a rate that exceeds the growth rate of the economy . when it does , it causes debt service to absorb more and more of national income . as private investors observe that the government is unable or unwilling to make policy changes to prevent the debt burden from increasing , they will decide to flee the country's debt before the point where the government is forced to default or monetize . the decision by some investors to flee the debt will make it more onerous for the government to finance the debt , because it will now have to offer higher yields to attract new buyers , and higher yields will result in a larger deficit and more borrowing . this phenomenon is sometimes referred to as a "debt spiral. thus , unsustainability tends to be triggered rapidly , as no investor wants to be the one still holding the debt when eventual default or hyperinflation occurs . the exact point when investors choose to flee depends on psychological factors that are hard to predict and likely to vary by country . because it is the upward trend in debt that leads to unsustainability , investors may accept very large deficits for a few years , as long as they are convinced that in the future the government will reduce the deficit to a sustainable level before it is too late . for example , governments are often able to finance large deficits in wartime — the largest deficits relative to gdp in u.s. history occurred as a result of the civil war , world war i , and world war ii — because investors expect a rapid decline in the deficit once peacetime leads to a rapid decline in military spending . at the end of third quarter of 2012 , commercial banks held over $300 billion of treasury securities , while insurance companies , gses , and broker / dealers held over $400 billion . as demonstrated during the 2008 financial crisis , leveraged financial firms can potentially respond to losses that reduce their capital base by contracting credit by a multiple of the amount of losses , a process known as deleveraging .