for instance , h.r . 2743 and s. 1304 provide that "[a]n automobile manufacturer in which the federal government has an ownership interest , or which receives loans from the federal government , may not deprive an automobile dealer of its economic rights and shall honor those rights as they existed [before commencement of bankruptcy for old chrysler and old gm]. as noted above , it is not clear that the language of these proposals would affect the new gm or the new chrysler . further , although media reports regarding these provisions have indicated that they would apply to old chrysler and old gm , this is not certain . the language of the provisions is prospective: a covered manufacturer "shall … require any new entity created in such case to enter into a new dealer agreement with the dealer whose agreement was not so assumed or assigned , and on the same terms as existed immediately before such date. several creditors and the sole stockholder of penn central , the largest railroad in reorganization , sued , claiming what they called an "erosion taking. by this , they meant an "erosion of the penn central estate beyond constitutional limits" owing to the "severe inhibitions" imposed by the congressional legislation upon the abandonment of unprofitable rail lines . the analogy to the unprofitable auto dealership agreements here is clear . the takings clause of the fifth amendment demands that when property is "taken" by the united states , just compensation be paid . the question here is whether bills requiring automakers such as new chrysler or new gm , created to purchase assets in bankruptcy proceedings , to accept assignment of or initiate dealer agreements that were in effect with the previous owners before bankruptcy , cause a "taking" of any interest recognized as "property. note , however — no takings issue arises in connection with voluntary actions by any firms — as , for example , if a firm accepts a requirement that dealership agreements be reinstated as a condition for receiving federal financial assistance in the future . on the facts as crs understands them , at least three types of interests may be involved that are recognized as property for takings clause purposes and could be the basis for takings claims: ( 1 ) any money paid out as a result of costs visited upon the post - bankruptcy firms by having to retain or take on dealerships ; ( 2 ) assets of such firms ; and ( 3 ) equity and creditor interests in such firms . first , any costs to the post - bankruptcy manufacturers from being forced to keep or take on unwanted dealership contracts may involve the outlay of money , a property interest . it is unlikely , however , that the forced divestment of such money would be deemed a taking . a majority of supreme court justices opined that a government requirement that a private entity pay money , where the source of funds is not specified , cannot effect a taking . the u.s. court of appeals for the federal circuit — the appeals court whose jurisprudence will govern any takings challenge against the united states based on the legislation here — has adopted the same rule .