stat . section 177 appears in title 28 of the revised statutes as section 2116 . thus , on its face , section 201 permits a qui tam action to recover the penalties accruing under section 177 . in harlan , however , the eighth circuit stated in dicta that "25 u.s.c . ยง177 appears to deal directly with cases where , as here , a person attempts to lease tribal lands without express approval of the federal government... . the statute makes violators subject to a fine of $1,000 , but has no provision entitling relators to bring actions under it . see james v. watt , 716 f.2d 71 ( 1 st cir . their concerns are three . first , the constitution grants the federal courts the judicial power over "cases and controversies. this is thought to require at least two parties with conflicting interests , presented in a context suitable for judicial resolution , i.e . , standing in a case or controversy . yet , relators come to court with no interest of their own , only a contingent personal interest . second , the constitution instructs the president to see that the laws are faithfully executed . yet , without his approval or unrestricted control , relators may initiate and prosecute litigation . third , the president is vested with the authority to appoint officers of the united states and , with the courts and heads of departments , to appoint inferior officers . yet , relators , who engage in activities otherwise reserved to officers and inferior officers of the united states , are appointed neither by the president , the courts , nor by the head of any department . standing requires ( 1 ) a concrete injury to the plaintiff's interest , ( 2 ) attributable to the defendant , ( 3 ) and amenable to judicial relief . when it put standing challenges to rest in vermont agency of natural resources v. united states ex rel . stevens , the supreme court observed that "[t]he long tradition of qui tam actions in england and the american colonies ... is particularly relevant to the constitutional standing inquiry since .. . article iii's restriction of the judicial power to "cases" and "controversies" is properly understood to mean "cases and controversies of the sort traditionally amenable to , and resolved by , the judicial process. on the more perplexing matter of the relator's injury , the stevens court found the injury to the united states sufficient to establish false claims act relator standing . with respect to the government's share of the fruits of successful litigation , the court found standing in the relator as an agent of the defrauded united states . with respect to the relator's share , it considered him the assignee of that portion of the interest of the united states . relator standing is in greater doubt in cases where tangible injury to the united states is less obvious . in the case of the false marking section of the patent act , at least one court has held that the relator must show either an injury to himself or an injury to the united states for which he might be the agent / assignee , i.e .