both figures identify each of the seven recessions identified by nber . in general , property crime rates increased fairly steadily from the early 1960s through the mid - 1980s and violent crime rates continued to increase through the early 1990s . both property crime and violent crime rates have generally been decreasing since the early 1990s . figure 1 and figure 2 show that , since 1960 , there has been no consistent relationship between periods of economic recession and the crime rates . while the violent crime and property crime rates did increase during some recessions ( generally in the 1970s ) , during others they either remained relatively stable or actually decreased . the unemployment rate is one of the most widely referenced economic indicators . in discussions of potential impacts of the economy on crime rates , many scholars and policy makers use the unemployment rate as a proxy for economic strength . at the official end of the recession in june 2009 , 4.30% of all home loans were in foreclosure . data indicate that this percentage continued to increase beyond the recession itself , as 4.43% of all home loans were in foreclosure at the end of september 2011 . foreclosures have since begun to decline , and at the end of september 2012 , 4.07% of all home loans were in foreclosure . given the still - elevated percentage of home foreclosures across the nation — relative to foreclosure rates before the most recent economic downturn — there has been interest concerning what kind of impact foreclosures , which can lead to houses sitting empty for some time , have on crime rates . although a number of newspaper articles have cited anecdotal evidence that crime rates increase in neighborhoods where many foreclosures have occurred , there is a dearth of scientific studies on the impact that home foreclosures have on crime rates . for example , one academic study addressing the link between foreclosures and crime examined this foreclosure - crime relationship in one particular locale rather than on a national level . while much research on the relationship between economic variables and crime rates has focused on macroeconomic variables such as unemployment and home foreclosures , some research suggests that other economic variables could fluctuate more strongly with crime rates and could thus serve as better proxies for evaluating the relationship between the economy and crime . as discussed earlier , no two recessions are identical , and thus some economic variables may be at greater flux during some recessions than during others . similarly , as illustrated in figure 1 and figure 2 , crime rates may fluctuate more during some recessions than during others . congress has voiced concern over this issue and deliberated funding for federal programs that provide support for state and local law enforcement agencies . advocates of increasing funding for state and local law enforcement assistance believe that additional funding is needed for a number of reasons , including that crime rates tend to increase during periods of economic uncertainty and that state law enforcement agencies facing budget cuts may be forced to stop hiring new officers or filling vacated positions .