appendix a . data and detailed methodology the crs analysis of data in this report is based primarily on the 2008 current population survey ( cps ) annual demographic survey , march supplement . the current population survey ( cps ) is a household survey conducted by the u.s. bureau of the census for the bureau of labor statistics ( bls ) of the u.s. department of labor . the monthly cps is the main source of labor force data for the nation , including estimates of the monthly unemployment rate . the cps collects a wide range of demographic , social , and labor market information . currently , approximately 57,000 households are interviewed each month . for the march supplement approximately 99,000 households are interviewed . the monthly cps sample is representative of the civilian non - institutional population ; it does not include persons on active military duty . each march , the cps asks additional questions about earnings and health insurance for the previous year . employment variables the bls defines the labor force as the sum of employed and unemployed persons . unemployed persons are individuals who are not working but who are available and looking for work . employed persons are individuals who are working for a private or public employer , are self - employed , or who work 15 hours or more a week as unpaid workers on a family farm or business . also counted as employed are persons who are temporarily absent from work because of illness , bad weather , vacation , job training , labor - management disputes , childcare problems , maternity or paternity leave , or other family or personal reasons . citizenship variable the cps uses five categories to define citizenship: ( 1 ) born in the united states , ( 2 ) born in puerto rico or another outlying area of the united states , ( 3 ) born abroad of u.s. citizen parents , ( 4 ) naturalized citizens , and ( 5 ) noncitizens . for the analysis in this report , the first three categories were combined and defined as "native - born citizens. information on place of birth is collected for every household member in the cps sample , and for the parents of every household member . individuals born in the united states or its outlying areas , or whose parents were born in the united states or its outlying areas , are not asked questions about citizenship . individuals born outside the united states or its outlying areas , and whose parents were born outside the united states or its outlying areas , are asked , "are you a citizen of the united states ? respondents who answer "yes" are coded as naturalized citizens , while respondents who answer "no" are categorized as noncitizens . in the cps , individuals for whom no birthplace is provided are assigned a citizenship status during the editing process . for example , the citizenship status of a child may be assigned based on the citizenship status of the child's mother . the cps does not attempt to verify the accuracy of responses to the questions about citizenship .