in the 2009 supplemental ( p.l . 111-32 ) , congress approved u.s. participation in a range of measures designed to increase the amount of financial assistance the imf may provide to its member states in the wake of the economic crisis . the afdb has also requested an increase in financing by the g - 20 . relevant legislation includes s. 955 , the african development fund replenishment act of 2009 . slumping exports and commodity prices have added to developing countries' woes . the international monetary fund ( imf ) estimated that the global economy would contract by 1.1% in 2009 , but that it could rebound to 3.1% growth in 2010 . developing economies may not have played a major role in the onset of the crisis , but they may have less resilient economic systems that can be highly affected by actions in global markets . most industrialized countries have been able to finance their own rescue packages by borrowing domestically and in international capital markets , but many emerging market and developing economies have insufficient sources of capital and have turned to help from regional development banks , the imf , the world bank , and traditional donors such as the group of eight ( g - 8 ) . many analysts were initially optimistic that the impact of the global financial crisis on sub - saharan africa ( henceforth , "africa" ) would be negligible . africa's apparent economic resilience can be explained by a variety of complex factors . a consideration of the impact of the crisis may affect bilateral and regional aid levels and programs , u.s. trade policy toward africa , and analyses of regional and country - level political trends , among other areas . the u.s. government has announced several new policies to aid developing countries affected by the crisis , though it has not , to date , formulated a policy specifically aimed at addressing the impact on africa . the supplemental appropriations act , 2009 ( p.l . 111-32 , passed into law on june 24 , 2009 ) , includes $255.6 million in economic support funds ( esf ) for "assistance for vulnerable populations in developing countries severely affected by the global financial crisis," with certain eligibility criteria . however , while an initial house report on the legislation provided that five african countries — ghana , liberia , mozambique , tanzania , and zambia — should "receive priority consideration," along with several other countries outside the region , the subsequent conference report did not include such specifications . in july 2009 , the obama administration noted the impact of the economic crisis on developing countries in announcing its commitment to double u.s. agricultural development assistance to more than $1 billion in 2010 , and to provide at least $3.5 billion over the next three years . the initiative is global , not uniquely focused on africa , though the administration cited the u.s. comprehensive africa agriculture development program ( caadp ) as a "model. u.s. responses to date have focused on support for multilateral lending and grant initiatives . moving forward , this may include increased financial support to the international financial institutions to which african countries are expected to apply for economic support during the crisis .