it will not be updated . the report does not examine other provisions in the act that could benefit many small firms . these provisions can be divided into two categories: ( 1 ) financial assistance in the form of federal loans , loan guarantees , and financing for equity investment in certain small firms ; and ( 2 ) federal spending for a variety of public purposes , including road and bridge construction and repair , upgrading the energy efficiency of low - income housing , and the extension of high - speed internet access to rural areas . notable examples of each category include an additional $630 million for loans and loan guarantees and an additional $6 million for direct loans administered by the small business administration ( sba ) in fy2009 ; an increase in funds available to sba - licensed small business investment companies ( sbics ) and a requirement that they invest a minimum of 25% of their funds in smaller companies ; $1.5 billion for the renovation and repair of community health centers ; and $27.5 billion for highway projects administered by the federal highway administration . an important and problematic issue in assessing how small firms are likely to be affected by the business tax provisions in arra is the definition of a small firm . one of the major findings of a 2001 study of the use of the credit done for the u.s. department of labor was that the credit played "little or no role" in the recruitment efforts of the 16 employers interviewed for the analysis . this finding suggested the employers would have hired the members of the targeted groups without the credit . it can be argued that the jct implicitly endorses the view that the expanded wotc is likely to have little or no impact on job creation among small firms in 2009 and 2010: it has estimated that the provision will lead to a revenue loss of $32 million in fy2009 and $222 million from fy2009 through fy2013 . in their view , these firms would be likely to repurchase their debt in a recession with or without the temporary deferral of doi income under arra ; so for them , it can be argued , the deferral constitutes a windfall gain . in general , when a debt owed by a business taxpayer is cancelled or discharged , the amount of the discharged debt is considered an addition to its gross income . so it comes as no surprise that current tax law requires a debtor ( or related party ) that buys back or exchanges its own debt for less than the amount owed to include the amount that is forgiven ( i.e. , the difference between the original price and the realized price of the discharged debt ) in gross income . for tax purposes , the amount of forgiven debt is known as discharge - of - indebtedness ( doi ) income . a simple example can illustrate the intended application of this general rule . suppose a c corporation borrowed $1 million three years ago by selling long - term bonds .