appendix a . efficient . avoiding waste , including waste of equipment , supplies , ideas , and energy . equitable . providing care that does not vary in quality because of personal characteristics . patient - centered . providing care that is responsive to and respectful of individual patient preferences . safe . avoiding injuries to patients from the care that is supposed to help them . timely . reducing waits and sometimes - harmful delays . most health care quality efforts aim to improve one or more of these six domains of quality of care , and quality care is often colloquially defined as simply delivering the right care to the right person at the right time . however basic it may appear , operationalizing these six domains , and thus improving health care quality , has proven difficult . the effort to improve health care quality is operationally embodied by a wide range of quality activities . one way to consider these activities is by grouping them into one or more of the following four areas: ( 1 ) research ( basic , translational , and health services ) ; ( 2 ) quality measurement ; ( 3 ) quality reporting ( encompassing both increased transparency and incentive alignment ) ; and ( 4 ) patient safety activities . reliable and sound quality information plays a fundamental role in all of these health care quality activities , which may both use and generate such information . for those activities that rely on quality information , such as quality reporting , their effectiveness is directly dependent upon the quality of the information available . there are various types of quality information , including evidence syntheses , health technology assessments , clinical comparative effectiveness data , clinical practice guidelines , quality measure data , and medical error / near miss reports . in many cases , these different types of information are interrelated . for example , evidence syntheses are utilized as the basis for the development of clinical practice guidelines , which in many cases in turn serve as the basis for developing quality measures . quality information may be broadly leveraged through the types of activities referenced above for a number of purposes , including to educate and inform providers about performance ; for public reporting to inform consumer decision making ; to create payment incentives ; to inform accreditation or maintenance of certification ; to inform internal quality assurance or improvement efforts ; for public health surveillance efforts and activities ; and to inform system - level changes to improve safety . quality information may be fed back to inform the modification of quality measures , incentive programs , quality assurance activities , health care provider education , or the processes of delivering health care with the goal of improving quality . this report focuses specifically on quality measurement , one subset of quality activities , and will focus on the processes used to develop , endorse , select , and implement quality measures . broadly , quality measurement focuses on assessing processes , structures , and outcomes of health care , and for this reason , quality measures are informally categorized as structural , process , or outcome measures .