sec . 1031 of the national defense authorization act for fy2010 ( "ndaa fy2010" ) , s. 1390 , 111 th cong , 1 st sess . ( 2009 ) , ( as passed by the senate ) , would replace chapter 47a of title 10 , u.s. code , as enacted by the mca 2006 . some key differences between § 1031 of s. 1390 and the mca 2006 include: military commissions would have jurisdiction over "alien unprivileged enemy belligerents," defined somewhat differently from "alien unlawful enemy combatants" in the current law . the definition eliminates references to al qaeda and the taliban . military commissions would have express authority to determine their own jurisdiction . while mca offenses remain substantially unchanged , the amendment requires that offenses occurred "in the context of and associated with armed conflict. crimes that occurred prior to enactment of the bill would be prosecutable only to the extent that they are codifications of crimes traditionally triable by military commissions . ( the mca currently declares all covered offenses to be codifications of existing crimes ) . confessions allegedly elicited through cruel , inhuman , or degrading treatment prohibited by section 1003 of the detainee treatment act of 2005 ( 42 u.s.c . § 2000dd ) would be inadmissible , regardless of when the statement was made . the mca bars the use of such confessions only if they were made after the enactment of section 1003 . ( this change codifies an amendment to the manual for military commission already made under the obama administration ) . in the case of hearsay evidence , the party offering the evidence would have the burden of demonstrating that it is reliable , whereas under current law , the opponent has the burden of proving that it is unreliable . ( this change also codifies an amendment to regulations already made under the obama administration ) . the court of appeals of the armed services ( caaf ) rather than the court of military commission review would serve as the exclusive appellate court . all trials that produce a guilty verdict would be referred automatically for review by the caaf , unless waived where permitted . the caaf's scope of review would include questions of fact as well as law , and the caaf would have the authority to order charges dismissed . the court of appeals for the d.c . circuit would have no appellate role . the supreme court would retain discretionary jurisdiction through writ of certiorari . the obligation to disclose exculpatory information would include mitigating evidence , and the obligation would extend to all information that is known or reasonably should be known to any government officials who participated in the investigation and prosecution of the case . this amendment essentially codifies the rules in the manual for military commissions applicable to discovery , which defines "exculpatory information" to include evidence that tends to reduce the degree of guilt of the accused of an offense charged or reduce the punishment . further , "evidence known to trial counsel," includes evidence that the prosecution would be required to disclose in a trial by general court - martial , which covers information under the control of the government .