appendix a . exemption denied for tellico dam , tennessee a dam on the little tennessee river was proposed by the tennessee valley authority ( tva ) , based on arguments that it would aid navigation , power generation , and economic development . opposition to the project arose early in the planning for the dam , because of concern over fishing , recreation , native american religious sites , and loss of agricultural land . after discovery of the snail darter , project opponents had to decide whether to abandon their old arguments and pin their hopes on a small fish . according to one observer , "opponents would have preferred a weapon like a bald eagle or a bear or a buffalo . but what they had was [a] fish. appendix b . exemption for grayrocks dam , wyoming and nebraska the platte river , in its lower reaches in nebraska , is a major stopover site in the migration of endangered whooping cranes between southern texas and north central canada . fws determined that the federal action agencies involved in permits for construction of the nonfederal grayrocks dam and reservoir in wyoming , along with existing projects in the platte river basin , would have jeopardized the downstream habitat of cranes . specifically , a reduction in instream flow as a consequence of the project as originally designed could have damaged the cranes' resting sites . ( the reduction in total flow would also have threatened nebraska irrigation interests , and caused the state to oppose wyoming's plans. ) the federal action agencies were the u.s. army corps of engineers , because the dam's developers needed to obtain a corps permit pursuant to the clean water act , and the rural electrification administration , which had guaranteed loans to the dam's developer . appendix c. exemption for blm timber sales , oregon throughout the 1980s and 1990s , controversy abounded in the pacific northwest over timber harvests from federal lands . the various players included hikers , large and small timber companies , commercial fishermen and recreational anglers , indian tribes , hunters , motorized recreation interests , water users , birders , and others . key federal laws included the national environmental policy act , the national forest management act , and the federal land policy and management act . and though the litigation history under these statutes regarding timber management in the northwest is rich and complex , not until the listing of the northern spotted owl as threatened on june 26 , 1990 , was the esa a major factor in the debate . the conflict arose because this species is heavily dependent in its entire life cycle on old growth forests of the type found in the cascades in southern british columbia , washington , oregon , and northern california . the same forest characteristics that make an area valuable to this species also make it valuable to the timber industry . the bureau of land management ( blm ) manages large tracts of old growth forest in oregon , where conflicts over resource management had arisen many times ; the presence of the threatened spotted owl was a new complication .