these themes are addressed in greater depth in the sections below . in a globalized economy , the motivations for migration are increasingly evident . information about economic opportunities , family connections , and the like contributes to a set of push / pull factors wherein individuals or households calculate the cost and benefit of potential migration . moreover , institutions put in place by policy makers mitigate these calculations by either constraining or facilitating the choices available for a potential migrant . the construction of such institutions is also relatively well understood , as policy makers can learn from both historical examples and changes implemented by other countries . because these basic migration mechanisms are solidly established , the immigration - related policy challenges that arise are sometimes less about functional concerns and are instead more rooted in political realities . decisions on how these policy challenges are addressed carry economic , cultural , and political consequences , depending on who migrates , how many people migrate , and when they are allowed to migrate . ultimately , the concerns about what these consequences will be lie at the heart of the tensions over immigration , and the polarized perceptions that international migration generates among constituent groups will likely continue in the long term . several of the themes partially mirror debates occurring in the united states . perhaps most prominent of these are integration efforts to peaceably adjust society to accommodate any new demographic dynamics . a final theme concerns how international migration may provide numerous benefits ( particularly of an economic nature ) that could be used to help alleviate labor shortages , address an aging society , and otherwise provide cultural diversity . a second recurring theme is the alleged burden placed by some immigrants on the state , including acts of violence , threats to security , crime , and supposed net non - contributions to the welfare state . policy makers must weigh these considerations and many others in determining who should be admitted and who should be restricted . with the exception of certain trafficking circumstances , all migration is based on a decision - making process by the individual migrant ( or in some cases by the migrant's household ) . even when migration is forced — as is the case with refugees — or takes place as a mass activity , some set of choices will generally occur . "if," "when," "where," and "how" questions of migration are commonly referred to as "push / pull" factors . essentially , while some factors appeal to potential migrants to "pull" them toward another country , other circumstances tend to "push" them away from their place of residence . these factors are generally distinguishable in that the push factors are normally domestic circumstances ( eg , home country unemployment , poverty , limited opportunity , cultural oppression ) , while the pull factors are circumstances occurring outside the domestic arena ( eg , employment opportunities , family resettlement abroad , educational pursuits , social opportunities ) . a "push / pull" framework is rooted in a basic economic model of international migration .