the next upper house elections are scheduled for july of 2010 . had the dpj won a supermajority on its own , it would have had the option of shedding its coalition partners . as it is , the dpj will maintain the coalition with the leftist social democratic party ( sdp ) and the anti - reform people's new party ( pnp ) in order to maintain control of the upper house of the diet . according to dpj sources and media reports , foreign policy and alliance relations with the united states will not be the immediate focus of the new government . in the run - up to the august 30 election , the dpj toned down some of its criticism of the bilateral alliance , indicating a potentially more pragmatic approach toward the united states . however , the party remains deeply divided on foreign policy issues and party leaders continue to send conflicting signals about the kind of relationship they seek to strike with the united states over the short and long term . the political changeover in tokyo following the august 30 elections represents something of a watershed moment for u.s. - japan relations . cooperation between washington and previous ldp - backed governments has been virtually unbroken for much of the postwar period . many experts believe that the high point of bilateral relations occurred earlier this decade , partly as a result of the close personal rapport between former president george w. bush and former ldp prime minister junichiro koizumi , which set the tone for close working - level coordination between their two governments . in the wake of the 9 / 11 terrorist attacks , the koizumi government stated its unequivocal support for the united states and took unprecedented steps to provide rear - area assistance for u.s. - led anti - terror operations in afghanistan . in 2003 , koizumi dispatched ground and air units of the jsdf to contribute to humanitarian reconstruction efforts in iraq . these measures were followed by major bilateral agreements in 2005 and 2006 to "transform" the u.s. - japan alliance in order to meet emerging security challenges . the dpj has often expressed skepticism , and at times outright opposition , to many of these bilateral security initiatives , giving rise to questions among many u.s. - based experts as to the potential impact a dpj government might have on the u.s. - japan alliance . these concerns are compounded by a relative lack of familiarity between dpj leaders and counterparts in the united states , although interaction between both sides has increased in the months leading up to this year's lower house elections . a review of stated dpj foreign policy positions indicates some areas of concern for u.s. interests , but does not rule out potential avenues for enhanced bilateral cooperation with the incoming dpj - led government . the resulting "twisted diet" was marked by legislative gridlock across a range of domestic and foreign policies .