federal courts have struggled to determine whether such trademark usage constitutes actionable trademark infringement . the purpose and benefits of trademark law have been described by the u.s. supreme court as follows: in principle , trademark law , by preventing others from copying a source - identifying mark , reduces the customer's costs of shopping and making purchasing decisions ... for it quickly and easily assures a potential customer that this item – the item with this mark – is made by the same producer as other similarly marked items that he or she liked ( or disliked ) in the past . at the same time , the law helps assure a producer that it ( and not an imitating competitor ) will reap the financial , reputation - related rewards associated with a desirable product . the law thereby encourages the production of quality products ... and simultaneously discourages those who hope to sell inferior products by capitalizing on a consumer's inability quickly to evaluate the quality of an item offered for sale . however , as discussed above , there is a lack of judicial consensus concerning the more important question of whether such trademark use causes likelihood of confusion . courts have also not yet fully examined the extent to which a defendant may assert affirmative defenses , nor have they explored what kind of remedies would be appropriate for such infringement . therefore , this issue will continue to occupy the federal courts and be a source of dispute between trademark owners and keyword buyers and sellers . internet search engines such as google , yahoo , or microsoft's bing generate significant revenue from the sale of keywords to trigger online advertisements that appear on search result pages . these advertisements typically relate to search terms entered by internet users and appear as "banner" advertisements on the top of the web page or "sponsored links" that are displayed on the right column of a web page or before relevant search results ; such web ads , if clicked on , direct the user to the website of the advertiser . for example , general electric ( ge ) could purchase the word "refrigerator" from google in order to have a "sponsored link" advertisement for ge's refrigerators appear next to relevant search results . for example , google or yahoo could choose to sell the trademark name "whirlpool" to ge , such that an advertisement for ge appliances would appear as a "sponsored link" on the computer screen of a person who searched for "whirlpool. in response , whirlpool may file a trademark infringement lawsuit against either the search engine ( as the seller of its trademark ) or ge ( as the purchaser ) , complaining that such unauthorized use of its trademark may create a likelihood of consumer confusion as to whether ge's advertisement is in some manner sponsored by , endorsed by , approved by , or affiliated with whirlpool . the prospects of whirlpool winning such a lawsuit to restrain the practice or obtain damages are unclear , however , due to a lack of case law that has specifically addressed the "likelihood of confusion" element of the trademark infringement claim .