under the provisions of h.res . 895 , as the oce completes second - phase reviews and determines that a further investigation is necessary , the oce board forwards a report and supporting documentation to the committee on ethics . the house could provide the oce with limited subpoena power to enable the oce board to conduct more thorough investigations prior to referral to the committee on ethics . providing subpoena power to the oce might reduce the workload and investigative burden of the committee on ethics and prevent duplicative efforts on behalf of the oce and committee staffs . chairman capuano , in the task force report , explained that consideration was given to empowering the oce with subpoena power . during the discussions , the task force sought the professional opinion of numerous experts ( including the house parliamentarian , house general counsel , and the congressional research service ) . 6 was agreed to . because the oce operates pursuant to a house resolution , a change in party control or a decision to exclude the oce from the rules package in a future congress might result in the elimination of the office . if the house wanted to ensure the oce's continuation , it could create a statutory ethics entity . a permanent statutory office would not require reauthorization each congress . if the house chose to create a statutory office , should the house desire to alter or terminate the program , subsequent legislation would be necessary to amend or terminate the program . creation of a statutory ethics office , even if only in the house , would require the concurrence of the senate and the president's signature . prior to the creation of the oce , the committee on ethics did not allow public complaints to be to made against members of congress . none of these were enacted . only the legislative proposals that prompted hearings are discussed below . proposals receiving no committee action are listed in table 1 and table 2 . on january 31 , 2007 , house speaker nancy pelosi and minority leader john boehner announced the creation of the special task force on ethics enforcement in the house of representatives . chaired by representative michael capuano , the task force was charged with considering "whether the house should create an outside enforcement entity , based on examples in state legislatures and private entities. during the next eight months , the task force met 29 times in executive session to discuss the investigative process and to hear from current and former members of congress , academic experts , and citizen advocacy groups . the executive sessions both preceded and followed a public hearing in april 2007 . establishment of the task force was part of speaker nancy pelosi's emphasis on ethics reform in the 110 th congress and followed several congressional scandals in the previous congresses . in january 2006 , congressional democrats from around the country joined in a washington , dc , press conference to pledge "honest leadership and open government.