usaid is implementing the program . in october 2008 , peru and the united states signed a debt - for - nature swap that reduces peru's debt to the united states by more than $25 million over the next seven years . in exchange , peru promises to use those funds to support grants to protect its tropical forests . a dominant theme of relations between the two countries is the effort to stem the flow of illegal drugs , mostly cocaine , from peru to the united states . garcía ran for president again in 2006 . after his comeback in 2001 , garcía softened his populist rhetoric , and pledged to maintain orthodox macro - economic policies . many observers cast him as "the lesser of two evils" compared to his opponent , ollanta humala , who espoused nationalist , anti - globalization policies and raised fears among middle - and upper - class peruvians of the expropriations and authoritarianism of an earlier era . humala is also an ally of venezuelan president hugo chavez . garcia narrowly defeated populist humala . on june 4 , 2006 , alan garcía was elected to a second , non - consecutive term as president . president garcía has maintained economic orthodoxy and governed as a moderate , rather than as the leftist he considered himself to be earlier in his career . much of the political opposition has supported garcía's economic policies to date . garcía's party , the peruvian aprista party ( partido aprista peruano , better known as apra ) , controls only 36 of the 120 legislative seats and depends on loose alliances with other parties such as the alliance for the future ( alianza por el futuro ) , headed by former president alberto fujimori's daughter , keiko fujimori , to pass legislation . the garcía administration has been shaken , first by a corruption scandal , then by deadly protests in the amazon . in october 2008 , garcía dismissed 7 of the 17 members of his cabinet in the wake of a bribery scandal . the corruption scandal involved alleged kickbacks in the awarding of contracts for oil exploration . wiretapped conversations implicated apra party officials in accepting bribes . garcía's prime minister and energy minister were among those who resigned . garcía appointed yehude simon as his new prime minister on october 14 . simon was imprisoned in the 1990s for alleged ties to the tupac amaru insurgency , but cleared of the charges eight years later . he was elected twice as governor of the province of lambayeque , where he established a reputation for governing effectively and fighting corruption . garcía hoped that simon would defuse social tensions and advance programs to reduce poverty . instead , widespread social unrest has increased as growing inflation combines with anger that social conditions for peru's poorest people have not improved with peru's remarkable economic growth over the past eight years . now , in the third year of his five - year term , president garcía is facing the worst crisis of his presidency to date .