others maintain this is not the case . economists have long recognized that border tax adjustments have no effect on a nation's competitiveness . in this application , a nation's competitiveness is defined by its balance - of - payments position . the conclusion on competitiveness follows from the premise that border tax adjustments afforded under vats reduce the relative price of u.s. imports compared to u.s. exports , resulting in a worsening of the u.s. balance of trade . economic theory , however , finds this conclusion in error . border tax adjustments cannot alter a country's balance of payments because the balance of trade is a function of international capital flows , not the flow of traded goods and services . border tax adjustments have been shown to mitigate the double taxation of cross - border transactions and to provide a level playing field for domestic and foreign goods and services . hence , in the absence of changes to the underlying macroeconomic variables affecting capital flows ( for example , interest rates ) , any changes in the product prices of traded goods and services brought about by border tax adjustments would be immediately offset by exchange - rate adjustments . this is not to say , however , that a nation's tax structure cannot influence patterns of trade or the composition of trade , through differences in the relative prices of high - and low - tax goods and services . this report explains these common economic findings on the effect of border tax adjustments on international competitiveness through a dual - channel approach — first through analogy to the retail sales tax and secondly using economic theory . as a prelude to these explanations , the report begins with a brief explanation of vats and border tax adjustments . a value - added tax ( vat ) is the most widespread general consumption tax in the world , having been implemented by over 140 countries , including most of the nation's major trading partners . in 2006 , the european oecd countries collected over 20% of their revenue from the vat — an amount equal to 7.6% of their gdp . while the u.s. does not have a vat , revenue from its most similar tax , the sales tax , accounted for 7.8% of revenue and 2.2% of gdp during 2006 . administratively , the vat is collected at each stage of production . each successive firm pays and remits to the government the vat on the valued added at their stage of production . the value added of a firm is the difference between a firm's sales and a firm's purchases from all other firms . in other words , a firm's value added is simply the amount of value that a firm contributes to a good or service by applying its factors of production ( land , labor , capital , and entrepreneurial ability ) . this method allows the vat paid by the final consumer to equal the sum of the vats collected at each stage of production . a common feature of vats is a border tax adjustment . as commonly applied to vats , under a border tax adjustment exports are exempt from the vat .