appendix a . previous legislative proposals to establish a national housing trust fund prior to the enactment of hera , legislation to establish a national affordable housing trust fund was introduced several times , beginning in the 106 th congress . this appendix provides a brief description of previous legislative proposals to establish a national housing trust fund . one major question surrounding the creation of an affordable housing trust fund was how such a program would be funded . early legislation proposed using a portion of receipts from the federal housing administration ( fha ) . however , because fha receipts are counted as offsets to appropriations , diverting fha receipts to a housing trust fund would have a cost . later legislation proposed using contributions from fannie mae and freddie mac as a potential funding source . fannie mae and freddie mac were chartered by congress to ensure liquidity in the mortgage market . their charters give them a special relationship with the federal government that includes both certain privileges and certain responsibilities . fannie mae and freddie mac purchase mortgages from private lenders , guarantee the principal and interest payments on the mortgages , and package them into mortgage - backed securities that they either hold on their balance sheets or sell to investors . they are overseen by an independent federal regulator . because of the gses' status as government - sponsored private entities , rather than federal agencies , contributions from fannie mae and freddie mac would not have counted as new government spending . however , there was some disagreement over whether it was appropriate for the government to require the gses to contribute to affordable housing funds . opponents of gse contributions argued that the gses should not be asked to balance public policy objectives against the interests of their shareholders . proponents pointed to the special privileges that the gses received , and statutory affordable housing goals that they already had , to justify their contributions to a national housing trust fund . in 2008 , hera created the housing trust fund and the capital magnet fund . both were to be funded by contributions from fannie mae and freddie mac . table a - 1 summarizes previous legislation that had been introduced to create a national housing trust fund , including proposed funding sources . appendix b . state htf allocations in 2016 hud announced the first state allocations from the housing trust fund in may 2016 . ( these allocations are from the funds that were set aside by fannie mae and freddie mac during calendar year 2015. ) table b - 1 shows each state's and insular area's formula allocation , organized from the largest allocation to the smallest . none of these bills were enacted . most states received the minimum allocation amount of $3 million . the minimum allocation applies to the 50 states and dc , but not to puerto rico and the insular areas . 110-289 ) was enacted . 2721 ) would also provide funding to the housing trust fund from savings generated by changes to the mortgage interest deduction . hera contained a wide variety of housing - related provisions .