no deadlocks occurred on rulemakings . nonetheless , substantial disagreement occurred on some issues . those that exist rely on older data . nonetheless , it is clear that deadlocked votes are sometimes controversial and are a regular topic of interest among those who monitor the commission . what is less clear , however , is whether deadlocks are common or whether deadlocks fall along party lines . both points are commonly cited ( although often without quantitative data ) in anecdotal accounts . this report addresses those questions by exploring deadlocks in rulemakings , enforcement matters , and aos during the current commission's first year in office — from july 2008 through june 2009 . in doing so , the report presents data on how many issues — and which ones — resulted in deadlocked votes . matters ( rulemakings , enforcement actions , or advisory opinions ( aos ) ) voted on by the commission are the unit of analysis . as such , the quantitative analysis that follows is based on the number of rulemakings , enforcement actions , and aos the commission considered during the period — not the number of individual votes that occurred on each issue . although this report examines deadlocks that can occur during rulemakings , enforcement matters , and aos , it is not intended to provide an exhaustive account of commission operations , procedures , or processes . as such , detailed discussion of commissioners' deliberations , the fec enforcement process , or other issues that might be relevant for the broader context in which some deadlocks arise is beyond the scope of this report . the following analysis is based on data provided by the fec and on other publicly available fec documentation . although certain matters remain outside the public record ( eg , votes on negotiations over civil - penalty amounts ) , the data presented here account for all publicly available deadlocks that occurred during the year under review . the analysis also provides an overview of the policy or legal issues considered in each of those deadlocks . the data show that although deadlocks occurred throughout the year , they occurred in a minority of the matters the commission considered . those issues on which deadlocks occurred , however , featured strong disagreement among commissioners and reflected apparently unsettled positions on some major policy questions , such as: political committee status , when particular activities triggered filing requirements or other regulation , and questions related to investigations and other enforcement matters . in addition , the deadlocks that did occur always fell along partisan lines . if congress chooses to examine fec deadlocked votes , a variety of perspectives and options could be relevant , as discussed at the end of this report . during the first year of the current commission , no substantive deadlocks occurred on rulemaking issues . during the period , the fec held votes on four rulemakings: reporting bundled campaign contributions , extension of the administrative fine program ( afp ) , repealing increased contribution limits following the supreme court's invalidation of the so - called millionaire's amendment , and adjusting certain penalties for inflation .