the accompanying report , s.rept . 111-39 , highlighted the increase related to food and medical product safety , which would allow additional inspections . the senate committee also mentioned laboratory capacity ; screening test development ; adverse event data collection and analysis ; research on bioequivalence standards of generic products ; enforcement against fraudulent products ; noninvasive techniques to better understand the risks of anesthetic use in children ; and information technology systems . the committee specifically encouraged fda to develop a program for increasing the inspection of imported shrimp for banned antibiotics ; to issue guidance regarding antibiotic development and to work with others to promote development and appropriate use of antibacterial drugs for humans ; and to continue its activities regarding antimicrobial resistance . the report also noted funding for congressionally directed spending items . in its report , the committee stated its intention to authorize fda to collect and spend tobacco product user fee revenue once the tobacco legislation was signed into law . the committee also encouraged fda to prioritize its review of products that would address neuroblastoma ; to issue a final rule on over - the - counter sunscreen testing and labeling ; to devise targeted communications strategies to allow consumers to use the findings of the upcoming dietary guidelines advisory committee report ; and to remind honey manufacturers about the law's misbranding and adulteration provisions and to respond to a pending citizen petition proposing a standard of identity for honey . the conference agreement would provide fda with a total program level of $3.279 billion . the two components of the total are $2.357 in direct appropriations ( budget authority ) and $922 million in user fees . the total , which includes $235 million in newly authorized user fees to support a new center for tobacco products ( and related activities of the agency - wide office of regulatory affairs ) , would be 22.9% higher than fy2009 appropriations for fda . excluding the new tobacco program , to provide a comparison of similar program responsibilities , fy2010 appropriations would be 14.1% higher than fy2009 appropriations . the conference agreement would increase the budget authority to the human drugs program by $7 million and specifies that at least $52 million be made available to the office of generic drugs . data column 6 of table 3 shows the committee - reported amounts . the committee recommended a $2 million increase ( approximately a 25% increase ) to the cosmetics program . it directed the agency to use $18 million for its critical path initiative , with one - third going to partnerships , and to use at least $2 million of the critical path partnership funding to support research in treatment or rapid diagnosis of tropical diseases . the committee directed fda to report quarterly on critical path spending .