sec . 399aa authorizes grants for the collection , analysis , and reporting of state epidemiological data on asd and other developmental disabilities , and directs the secretary to establish regional centers of excellence in asd epidemiology . sec . 399bb requires the secretary to establish and evaluate activities to increase public awareness of asd and other developmental disabilities , research and promote early screening , and support evidence - based interventions . the secretary is further directed to provide culturally competent information about asd and other developmental disabilities to meet the needs of individuals with these conditions and their families through federal health , education and welfare programs . sec . 399cc requires the secretary to establish an interagency autism coordinating committee to track asd - related research , monitor federal asd activities , make recommendations to the secretary , and submit an annual asd research plan to congress . sec . 399dd requires the secretary to submit to congress a progress report on activities related to asd and other developmental disabilities , as outlined in the combating autism act of 2006 , no later than four years after its enactment . sec . 399ee authorizes appropriations for the activities authorized under secs . this section would amend phsa title iii , part r by adding at the end a new sec . 399ff – national training initiative , requiring the secretary , in consultation with the interagency autism coordinating committee , to award national training supplemental grants to qualifying university centers for excellence in developmental disabilities or other qualified entities . these grants would expand and develop interdisciplinary training and continuing education initiatives for parents , health , allied health , vocational , educational , and other professionals , and develop model services and supports that demonstrate evidence - based practices . the secretary also would be required to reserve up to 2% of the appropriated funds to make a grant to a qualified national organization for training and technical assistance to university centers for excellence in developmental disabilities . this organization would assist in national dissemination of specific information from these centers ; compile and disseminate technical assistance materials ; assist in the coordination of grantees under this section ; and serve as a research - based resource for policymakers , among other activities . the section would authorize to be appropriated $17 million for fy2011 , to be equally divided among existing university centers of excellence for developmental disabilities , and ssan for fy2012 through fy2015 . if the appropriation in any fiscal year were less than $17 million , the secretary would be required to award competitive grants to individual centers of not less than $250,000 per grant . finally , the section would require the secretary to award up to four additional grants for university centers of excellence in developmental disabilities to expand the capacity of the existing national network and to enhance the number of training facilities serving minority institutions with a primary focus on asd and related developmental disabilities . it would authorize to be appropriated $2 million for each of fy2011 through fy2015 for these grants .