vietnam has signed over 50 bits . vietnam's clothing exports to the united states were among the greatest beneficiaries of the u.s. decision to grant vietnam conditional ntr status in december 2001 ( see figure 1 ) . the growth in trade has also created sources of trade friction . a rapid increase in vietnam's clothing exports to the united states led to a controversial monitoring program . the growth in vietnam's export of catfish has also generated tensions between the two nations . other economic issues have had an indirect effect on bilateral relations , such as claims of poor working conditions in factories in vietnam , vietnam's designation as a "non - market economy," allegations of inadequate intellectual property rights ( ipr ) protection in vietnam , and vietnam's exchange rate policy . the growth in bilateral trade has not been without its accompanying issues and problems . both nations are negotiating membership in the trans - pacific strategic economic partnership agreement ( tpp ) , a multilateral trade group . for its part , vietnam has indicated a desire to foster closer trade relations by applying for acceptance into the u.s. general system of preferences ( gsp ) program , and participating in negotiations of a bilateral investment treaty ( bit ) . this report will examine each of these trade issues , discussing their main elements and exploring their implications for the 111 th congress . this will be followed by an analysis of key trends in bilateral trade to discern any potential sources of trade friction in the future . the bush administration notified congress of its intention to enter into negotiations with the members of the trans - pacific strategic economic partnership agreement ( tpp ) on september 22 , 2008 . over the last 10 years , vietnam has risen from being the 62 nd - largest source for furniture and bedding imports for the united states to being the fourth - largest source — surpassing past leaders such as italy , malaysia , and taiwan . furniture and bedding provided over 11% of total u.s. imports from vietnam in 2009 , and it was the second - fastest growth category of imports from vietnam ( after electrical machinery ) since 1998 . while most of the focus has been on clothing imports from vietnam , footwear imports from vietnam were over 10% of total imports in 2009 . vietnam was the second - largest source of footwear imports for the united states in 2009 , exceeding italy , malaysia , and taiwan . vietnam's electrical machinery exports to the united states grew more than 1,000-fold over the last 10 years , reaching over $630 million in 2009 and over 5% of total u.s. imports from vietnam . according to interviews with foreign investors in vietnam , there is great potential for growth in this sector because of vietnam's inexpensive , skilled workers . there is also a discernable interplay between vietnam's top exports to the united states and the top u.s. exports to vietnam . vietnam imports substantial amounts of cotton from the united states , which is then used to manufacture clothing to be exported to the united states .