regulations . ( a ) in general - not later than 90 days after the date of the enactment of this act , the secretary of defense shall revise department of defense regulations , and shall issue such new regulations as may be necessary , to implement section 656 of title 10 , united states code , as added by section 4 ( a ) . the secretary of defense shall further direct the secretary of each military department to revise regulations of that military department in accordance with section 656 of title 10 , united states code , as added by section 4 ( a ) , not later than 180 days after the date of the enactment of this act . and not with the question of whether there should be a repeal ? , treating repeal as a foregone conclusion . others noted concerns with some statistical interpretations made in the report and leaked earlier to the media . for example , the crwg report states on page 3: when asked about how having a service member in their immediate unit who said he or she is gay would affect the unit's ability to "work together to get the job done," 70% of service members predicted it would have a positive , mixed , or no effect . what was leaked to the press suggested that service members would have "no problem" if the repeal occurred . that is not what was asked in the question nor is it exactly what was actually reported . when the raw data for the above question were displayed on page 64 of the report they were listed as follows . •    18.4 % positive •    32.1 % positive & negative •    19.9 % no effect •    29.6 % negative the report writers collapsed the first three categories , resulting in an aggregate 70.4% , suggesting a majority are "positive , no effect or mixed. this appears to suggest a positive outcome . the writers of the report could have collapsed the last three categories and interpreted the outcome as though 81.6 % are "negative , no effect or mixed" suggesting a larger negative outcome . collapsing the categories was also criticized by some as disingenuous since a "no effect" answer is categorically different than a "positive" effect response and categorically different from a "mixed" response . on december 9 , 2010 , senate majority leader reid moved to proceed with the senate version of the national defense authorization act ; a cloture vote was taken and the bill did not proceed . days later , s. 4022 , s. 4023 and h.r . 6520 were introduced . these bills , too , would repeal sec . 654 , title 10 united states code , in the same manner as was included in the national defense authorization act . on december 15 , 2010 , the house substituted the repeal language into h.r . 2965 , brought the measure to the floor , and passed it 250-175 , sending the bill to the senate for consideration . some questioned why the report was concerned with how to implement a repeal ? three days later , following another procedural vote , the senate passed the bill ( 65-31 ) .