there were no fatalities . srsg staffan de mistura , in his briefing to the security council on december 22 , 2010 , commented that luck , preparation , and support from afghan security forces and a private security company all helped minimize the impact of the attack . our assessment is that the situation may get worse before it gets better. de mistura also said that "on reconciliation and reintegration , everyone recognizes that there is no military solution ... even the taliban do so , even if they will not say so publicly. an agreement has been reached between unama and the government of kuwait to establish a unama support office to ensure backup of critical data and to ensure a secure environment for technical and administrative functions . it will also serve as a relocation office should emergency conditions develop in afghanistan . unama signed an agreement with the government of the netherlands to transfer the alpha compound in kabul to the united nations . the compound will serve as office space and residential accommodation in kabul for up to 70 international staff and provide workspace for 80 national staff . the 2011 budget provides for the construction of security - enhanced compounds in a number of provinces . unama also tracks progress on a major issue — the attempts of the u.s. - led coalition to limit afghan civilian deaths caused by coalition operations . unama reported that 1,013 civilian casualties occurred between january and june 2009 , mostly in the south and eastern parts of the country , an increase of 24% over the same time the year before . of these casualties , 59% were caused by anti - government elements and 30.5% were attributed to international and afghan forces ( 12% could not be attributed ) . in 2010 , civilian casualties , including deaths and injuries , increased by 20% in the first 10 months by comparison with the same period in 2009 , and 75% were linked to anti - government elements . most civilian casualties resulted from targeted attacks and assassinations by the taliban and terrorist groups . at the same time , extensive press coverage from bombing campaigns in afghanistan reveals that there have been a number of innocent victims of erroneous bombings . while the effort to combat taliban and other militants continues , the potential for mistaken targets remains a risk . claims of erroneous bombing targets have highlighted the difficulty of intelligence gathering and security problems on the ground . the issue is blurred by the recognition that the end result may not be a matter of simple human error , but rather a complex combination of factors for which it is more difficult to determine responsibility . collateral damage includes civilian losses , considered to be a by - product of war , despite efforts to minimize innocent loss of life . concerns about civilian casualties from air strikes , particularly in populated areas , have also focused on the degree to which this affects the afghan population's perception of the isaf and u.s. - led forces , and whether the international forces are doing enough to protect civilians . unama has been outspoken over its concerns regarding civilian casualties .