the house passed h.r . 111-171 ) as amended on june 23 , and the senate veterans affairs committee reported s. 423 on july 8 ( s.rept . s. 423 passed the senate on august 6 , 2009 , as a substitute amendment to h.r . on october 8 , the house agreed to the senate amendment pursuant to h.res . 804 , and the senate agreed to the house amendment to the senate amendment on october 13 . the veterans health care budget reform and transparency act of 2009 ( h.r . 1016 ) was signed into law ( p.l . 111-81 ) on october 22 . 111-81 beginning with fy2011 , advance appropriations is authorized for the medical services , medical support and compliance , and medical facilities , accounts of the vha . it also requires the va to provide additional detailed budget estimates in support of advance appropriations for these accounts in the president's annual budget request to congress . it also requires the va to submit a report to congress , no later than july 31 of each year , on the sufficiency of the department's resources for the provision of medical care for the upcoming fiscal year . furthermore , the act would require the comptroller general ( u.s. government accountability office ) to conduct a study of the adequacy and accuracy of projections for health care expenditures and submit reports to the appropriate committees of congress and to the secretary of veterans affairs , in 2011 , 2012 , and 2013 . these reports must state whether the amounts requested in the president's budget are consistent with anticipated expenditures for health care in such fiscal year as determined utilizing the enrollee health care projection model . the comptroller general is required to submit these reports not later than 120 days after the president has submitted his annual budget request to congress . since january 17 , 2003 , the va has not enrolled veterans in priority group 8 unless they had been previously enrolled in another priority group and no longer qualified for enrollment in that previous priority group ( see appendix a ) . since the suspension was promulgated , veterans advocates have urged congress to lift the suspension on priority group 8 veterans since they believe that all veterans must be able to receive care from the va because they have served their country . the veterans health care eligibility reform act of 1996 ( p.l . 104-262 ) included language that stipulated that medical care to veterans will be furnished to the extent appropriations were made available by congress on an annual basis . based on this statutory authority , the secretary of veterans affairs announced on january 17 , 2003 that va would temporarily suspend enrolling priority group 8 veterans . those who enrolled prior to january 17 , 2003 in va's health care system were not to be affected by this suspension . va claimed that , despite its funding increases , it could not provide all enrolled veterans with timely access to medical services because of the increase in the number of veterans seeking care from va . the consolidated security , disaster assistance , and continuing appropriations act , 2009 ( p.l .