gun trafficking statute . is the existing federal statutory scheme adequate to target and prosecute the ongoing gun trafficking that is occurring on the southwest border ? federal firearms laws are primarily enforced by the atf . in addition , the u.s. government is a signatory to an inter - american , anti - gun trafficking convention . according to doj , atf is the lead federal agency responsible for stopping the illegal flow of firearms , or gun trafficking , from the united states to mexico , given the bureau's statutory mission and authority . atf has developed a nationwide strategy to reduce firearms trafficking and violent crime by preventing convicted felons , drug traffickers , and juvenile gang members from acquiring firearms from gun traffickers . these criminals often acquire firearms from a person who otherwise is not prohibited to possess a firearms through straw purchases or by buying a firearm from a corrupt dealer who sells firearms off - the - books in an attempt to escape federal regulation . although there is no statutory definition for "gun trafficking" in the gca , it essentially entails the movement or diversion of firearms from legal to illegal markets . unlike other forms of contraband , almost all illegal firearms used criminally in the united states were diverted at some point from legal channels of commerce . the examples highlighted from the u.s. attorney's office illustrate that because there are no laws specifically devoted to targeting wider firearms trafficking schemes , investigators and prosecutors work with criminal provisions in the gca and nfa to charge gun traffickers with multiple violations . in many cases , gun traffickers are prosecuted under various provisions of these statutes ; such provisions include prohibitions against dealing firearms without a federal license , or federally licensed dealers dealing off the books . it is also unlawful for any person "to sell or otherwise dispose" of a firearm to another they "know or have reasonable cause to believe" is a person who is prohibited from possessing firearms under federal law . likewise , there are provisions that make it unlawful to make false statements on the forms necessary to complete a firearms transaction with an ffl . thus , persons who engage in straw purchases could be prosecuted if they are found to be lying on the atf form or transferring a firearm to a person whom they know or have reasonable cause to believe is prohibited from possessing a firearm under federal law . there is not , however , a provision that makes it specifically unlawful for a person , who , knowing they are a person prohibited from possessing firearms , to direct another person to buy a firearm for them , for example . in sum , the existing statutory scheme does not include firearm specific federal provisions that would cover the wider criminal conspiracies often involved in gun trafficking schemes that include multiple straw purchases and other federal violations . such provisions would arguably assist law enforcement by allowing them to cast a wider net to investigate and prosecute those who are engaged early on in gun trafficking schemes .