law. some cedaw supporters object to the inclusion of the proposed reservation , arguing that the united states should strive to adhere to the treaty's provisions regarding gender stereotypes . they contend that a private conduct reservation implies a "lack of political commitment" by the united states and indicates that it views cedaw as "applicable only in other countries. a significant issue in the cedaw ratification debate centers on whether the convention takes a position on abortion or is "abortion neutral. many who support u.s. ratification hold that the treaty is abortion neutral because the word "abortion" is never mentioned in the convention's text . this point of view was shared by the clinton administration , which declared the treaty abortion neutral in 1994 . supporters also emphasize that many countries where abortion is regulated or illegal , including burkina faso , colombia , and ireland , ratified the convention without associated reservations , understandings , or declarations ( ruds ) , and regularly report to the cedaw committee . many opponents of u.s. ratification argue that while cedaw does not include the word "abortion," parts of the convention text could be interpreted to undermine current u.s. abortion law . specifically , some have taken issue with article 12 ( 1 ) , which states that countries "shall take all appropriate measures to eliminate discrimination against women in the field of health care in order to ensure ... access to health care services , including those related to family planning. critics have also expressed concern regarding article 16 ( 1 ) ( e ) , which requires that states parties take all appropriate measures to ensure that women have the right to "decide freely and responsibly on the number and spacing of their children. opponents suggest that such language could lead to the abolishment of state parental notification laws , require federal funding for abortions , or obligate the u.s. government to promote and provide access to abortion . two states parties to the convention — malta and monaco — explicitly stated in their reservations to cedaw that they do not interpret article 16 ( 1 ) ( e ) as imposing or forcing the legalization of abortion in their respective countries . cedaw supporters counter such criticisms by emphasizing that articles 12 and 16 call on states parties to take all " appropriate measures" [emphasis added] , thereby leaving it up to states parties to determine what actions are appropriate based on their domestic laws and policies . to support this view , some have cited the negotiating history of cedaw , which appears to demonstrate the intent of some countries to keep the convention's text intentionally ambiguous so that the treaty could be ratified by countries with a wide range of domestic laws and policies . the cedaw committee's recommendations to states parties regarding abortion are a particularly controversial aspect of the u.s. ratification debate . many opponents of cedaw , particularly pro - life advocates , are strongly critical of the committee because , in their view , it calls on states parties to support and encourage abortion despite the fact that it is never mentioned in the cedaw text .