trust fund financial dat . s. 903 is a donor state bill . transferability is discussed further later in this section . staa also continues a significant number of discretionary programs , consolidates or eliminates some , and creates others . intermodalism , as the name of the legislation suggests , was a major focus of the intermodal surface transportation efficiency act of 1991 ( istea , p.l . that legislation suggested that surface transportation programs should be administered with improved intermodal connections in mind . to facilitate this process the law created a new office of intermodalism within dot that was supposed to give the concept a high profile in dot program decisionmaking . the office of intermodalism , however , never lived up to the high level of expectation that the author's of istea held for it . the office itself has moved around within dot over the years and has , by most accounts , had little direct influence on policymaking . the draft bill released by the house transportation and infrastructure committee ( t&i ) appears to make significant changes to the structure of the overall federal transit program , along with some major and minor changes to individual programs . these proposed changes are emphasized in summaries of the legislation published by t&i , but , as noted earlier , the draft bill does not provide details of how the funding will be distributed among the programs , making it impossible to fully assess the changes that are being proposed . the staa , according to the committee's documents , would authorize $50 billion over six years ( $8.3 billion per year ) for the development of intercity high - speed passenger rail corridors . the source of funds would be the general treasury , not the highway trust fund . this level of funding for high - speed rail is a substantial increase over the $100 million per year authorized in safetea ( section 9001 ) and the $300 million per year authorized in the passenger rail investment and improvement act ( p.l . 110-432 , section 501 ) enacted in october 2008 . it is more in keeping with the $8 billion appropriated in the american recovery and reinvestment act ( arra , p.l . 111-5 ) for high - speed rail . the bill defines "high - speed" as rail service that is reasonably expected to reach speeds of at least 110 miles per hour . the high - speed rail development program , as promulgated in section 6001 of the draft bill , would require a local match of 20% and allow the secretary of transportation to issue "letters of intent" regarding federal funding of specific projects in future years . states or amtrak may enter into a cooperative agreement with any public , private , or non - profit entity to implement a high - speed rail project . although the bill authorizes a substantial increase in funding for modernizing the nation's passenger rail network , without a dedicated funding source , which has benefitted the development of other modes of intercity travel , it is uncertain whether congress can sustain , over the long - term , the level of funding it recently appropriated to passenger rail in arra .