appendix a . contractor personnel in iraq by type of service provided appendix a . appendix b . contractor and troop level data the department of defense posts the results of its quarterly centcom census report at http: / / www.acq.osd.mil / log / ps / hot_topics.html . data is usually posted between six and eight weeks after the end of the quarter . because the website only posts the most recent two quarters , crs has provided the data from previous census reports in the tables below . appendix c. comparison of crs , cbo , and gao methodology for determining dod contract obligations in afghanistan and iraq in 2008 , cbo published a report that tracked the u.s. government's obligations in iraqi theater from fy2005-fy2007 using fpds - ng data . crs used the same methodology in determining the value of contract obligations in the afghanistan and iraq theaters , relying on the data in federal government's fpds database to conduct its analysis . differences in the data reported by cbo in its 2008 report can be attributed to fpds , which subsequent to the release of the cbo report , has continuously updated information and restated prior years . for the past three years , gao published annual reports on contracting in afghanistan and iraq . the gao reports included only information on contracts performed in iraq and afghanistan . however , in some cases , these contracts included performance in other countries as well . because of how dod reported the data to gao , gao could not isolate the portion of obligations that were specific to afghanistan or iraq . gao did not include in its analysis contracts performed wholly outside of afghanistan and iraq but still within the respective theaters of operations . gao's analysis did not rely exclusively on fpds data: gao also reviewed manually compiled lists of obligations and deobligations , and took other steps to refine the data . the data used by crs and cbo allocates place of performance based on the principal place of performance as indentified by fpds . because fpds only allows for one country to be listed as the place of performance , contracts listed as being performed in one country can also involve substantial performance in other countries . a number of these initiatives have been reflected in or were the result of legislation . for example , the joint contingency acquisition support office was established as a result of section 854 of the fy2007 john warner national defense authorization act ( ndaa ) requiring dod to create a team of contingency contracting experts that can be deployed to support military operations . in the fy2008 ndaa , congress mandated contingency contracting training for non - acquisition military personnel who will have relevant contracting responsibilities . a number of analysts and government officials believe that some of these efforts have improved dod's ability to manage and oversee contractors in afghanistan and iraq . for example , in iraq , dod established contractor operations cells to coordinate the movement of pscs and the armed contractor oversight directorate to manage pscs .