cafeteria plans can be established only by employers . they must always offer a choice of taxable and nontaxable benefits . the taxable benefit usually offered is cash , but it might include benefits normally purchased with after - tax dollars , such as group term life insurance . allowable nontaxable benefits include accident and health insurance , health care flexible spending accounts , accidental death and dismemberment insurance , dependent care assistance , adoption assistance , and others . certain nontaxable employer benefits may not be offered , such as scholarships , education assistance programs , and long - term care insurance or services . if congress were to require or encourage employers to adopt premium conversion , consideration may be given to enabling more small businesses to take advantage of it . legislation introduced in the 111 th congress by senator snowe ( s. 988 , the simple cafeteria plan act of 2009 ) would remove some of the barriers discussed above . if premium conversion were included in health care reform , consideration may also be given to modifying the statutory and regulatory nondiscrimination rules . the cash option may be wages . under salary reduction agreements , employees in effect agree to work for reduced wages in exchange for having their employer provide an equivalent amount of nontaxable benefits . premium conversion uses these agreements: employees are given the choice of receiving taxable wages or reducing their wages by their share of the health insurance premium ( $1,000 in the earlier example ) and having the employer use that sum to pay the premium . taxable wages are thus converted to an employer payment for a nontaxable benefit . premium conversion can apply both to health plans chosen by employers ( which is the usual case ) as well as insurance that individual workers obtain on their own . if employers allow the latter , they must ensure that payments they make in fact are used for health coverage . like all cafeteria plans , premium conversion plans must be in writing . they must be limited to employees , though former employees may be included provided the plan is not maintained predominantly for them . employee elections must be irrevocable for the plan year aside from changes due to changes in family status , in alternative coverage for family members , and other limited circumstances . employers must file a report each year with the department of labor ; separate irs reporting requirements were suspended in 2002 . all cafeteria plans must meet nondiscrimination tests . plans may not discriminate in favor of highly compensated employees with respect to eligibility to participate , nor as to employer contributions or actual use of benefits . in addition , the nontaxable benefits of key employees cannot exceed 25% of the aggregate nontaxable benefits provided all employees under the plan . finally , cafeteria plans must comply with the nondiscrimination requirements for the benefit in question . thus , coverage under employers' self - insured accident and health plans must meet the additional nondiscrimination standards in section 105 ( h ) .