division a of h.r . 3200 focuses on reducing the number of uninsured , restructuring the private health insurance market , setting minimum standards for health benefits , providing financial assistance to certain individuals , and , in some cases , small employers . in general , h.r . 3200 would include the following: individuals would be required to maintain health insurance , and employers would be required to either provide insurance or pay a payroll assessment , with some exceptions . several market reforms would be made , such as modified community rating and guaranteed issue and renewal . both the individual and employer mandates would be linked to acceptable health insurance coverage , which would meet required minimum standards and incorporate the market reforms included in the bill . acceptable coverage would include coverage under a qualified health benefits plan ( qhbp ) , which could be offered either through the newly created exchange or outside the exchange through new employer plans ; grandfathered employment based plans ; grandfathered nongroup plans ; and other coverage , such as medicare and medicaid . the exchange would be established under a new independent federal agency ( the health choices administration ) , headed by a commissioner . the exchange would offer private plans alongside a public option . certain individuals with incomes below 400% of the federal poverty level could qualify for subsidies toward their premium costs and cost - sharing ; these subsidies would be available only through the exchange . in the individual market ( the nongroup market ) , a plan could be grandfathered indefinitely , but only if no changes were made to the terms and conditions of the plan , including benefits and cost - sharing , and premiums were only increased as allowed by statute . this bill would not affect plans covering specific services , such as dental or vision care . most of these provisions would be effective beginning in 2013 . this report provides a short background describing key aspects of the private insurance market as it exists currently . this information is useful in setting the stage for understanding how and where h.r . 3200 would reform health insurance . primarily , however , the report summarizes provisions affecting private health insurance in division a ( or division 1 ) h.r . 3200 , as ordered reported by the house committees on education and labor , on ways and means , and on energy and commerce . where the house committees' versions of a provision are the same , they are discussed as applying generally under h.r . 3200 ; where the bills ordered reported differ , the differences are noted . although most of the provisions would be effective beginning in 2013 , the table in the appendix shows the timeline for implementing provisions effective prior to 2013 . although the description that follows segments the private health insurance provisions into various categories , these provisions are interrelated and interdependent . for example , h.r . 3200 includes a number of provisions to alter how current private health insurance markets function , primarily for individuals who purchase coverage directly from an insurer or through a small employer .