the committee on the u.s . commitment to global health at the institute of medicine ( iom ) , which is comprised of preeminent health experts , published a definition of global health in 2009 that seems to reflect how the concept of global health has evolved and how wide a range of factors it includes: [t]he goal of improving health for all people in all nations by promoting wellness and eliminating avoidable disease , disability , and death . it can be attained by combining population - based health promotion and disease prevention measures with individual - level clinical care . the u.s. global health enterprise involves many sectors ( both governmental and nongovernmental ) and disciplines ( within and beyond the health sciences ) , and is characterized by intersectoral , interdisciplinary , and international collaboration . similarly , there is not yet a universal definition of "health assistance," though many definitions seem to acknowledge the range of factors that impact health and can be used to improve it . while few advocacy groups , ngos , and think tanks formally define "global health assistance," their attention to certain issues suggests that some areas of consensus do exist in practice . for example , many of these organizations address hiv / aids , malaria , tuberculosis , neglected tropical diseases , maternal and child health , reproductive health and family planning , and hunger and malnutrition as part of their global health programs . a growing number of these groups highlight other global health issues , such as chronic disease , the impact of climate change and urbanization on health , the importance of international medical research on a range of diseases that impact both poor and rich countries , and equal access to medicine and health technology . while many groups are increasingly advocating for coordinated support of related development sectors ( such as education , infrastructure development , road construction , agriculture , and women's rights ) , most deem assistance in these areas to be complementary to rather than inclusive of global health assistance . however , it appears the water and sanitation sector is increasingly considered by some groups to be part of global health , due to its links to many diseases including diarrhea and cholera . in a 2009 report that examined the range of actors that contributed to u.s. health assistance , the kaiser family foundation , defined u.s. global health assistance as: u.s. policy ( legislation , regulations , executive orders , guidance , and other relevant policy statements ) , activities , initiatives , programs , and funding used to address health problems that transcend national boundaries with the goal of improving health by reducing avoidable disease , disabilities , and deaths . such activities operate primarily across the following broad and interrelated domains: health services and systems , disease detection and response , reproductive health and family planning , maternal and child health , nutrition , water , environmental health , and research and development . global health assistance , as specified by the administration in addition to those areas specified by congress as global health assistance , websites of implementing u.s. agencies and departments detail a more expansive view of global health aid .