one option is to purchase an annuity . a life annuity — also called an immediate annuity — is an insurance contract that provides regular income payments for life in return for an initial lump - sum premium . ( see table 1 . ) policies that would increase the number of small employers that offer retirement plans could expand access to these plans to include millions more workers . the tax incentives that congress has authorized for retirement savings accounts are designed to assure that the money workers have set aside for retirement remains in the account until they are near retirement age . in recognition of needs that may arise over the course of an individual's life , congress has allowed certain exceptions to the general restriction on access to these accounts before retirement . each exception , however justifiable on its own merits , increases the danger that workers will reduce their retirement savings before they have reached retirement . pre - retirement withdrawals from retirement accounts are sometimes described as "leakages" from the pool of retirement savings . congress has used a combination of regulation and taxation to limit and discourage pre - retirement access to money in retirement accounts , but it has not completely prohibited pre - retirement access to these accounts because this access is important to many plan participants . research has shown that workers are less likely to put money into a retirement account if they believe that the money will be inaccessible in the event of emergency . consequently , current law represents a compromise between limiting leakages from retirement accounts and allowing people to have access to their retirement funds in times of great need . one of the most important public policy challenges of the next several years will be to develop strategies that will help retirees manage their retirement savings wisely so that they can remain financially independent throughout retirement . some policy analysts have suggested that expanding access to payroll deduction iras could greatly increase the number of employees at small firms who have a retirement savings account . even among employers who offer a retirement plan , not all workers participate . at retirement , most dc plan participants either take periodic withdrawals or roll the account balance into an ira from which they take withdrawals . few people purchase life annuities for a number of reasons . social security provides benefits in the form of an inflation - adjusted annuity , and some retirees may consider this to be sufficient protection against the risk of spending all of their retirement assets before they die . in addition , about one - third of retirees receive income from defined benefit pensions , and they therefore have less need to purchase an annuity with their retirement savings . employee contributions can be increased slightly each year until reaching a target contribution rate , such as 10% of pay . as with automatic enrollment , employees must be permitted to opt out of the increase or to choose another contribution rate . in most dc plans , workers must decide not only whether to participate in the plan and how much to contribute , but also how to invest the contributions .