dic has been paid in some form to survivors since the revolutionary war . at that time , women and children survivors of officers received a seven - year pension amounting to half of the officer's entitled pay ( according to a 1780 act of the continental congress ) . during the civil war , survivor compensation was expanded to cover all servicemembers at a rate that would be payable to totally disabled veterans . child recipients received an average of $7,094 in annual compensation . several policy issues are associated with dic , including the dic offset of survivor benefit plan ( military retirement survivor ) payments , often referred to as the "widow's tax ; " adequacy of the payments for survivors compared with other retirement systems' payments to surviving spouses ; remarriage age of 57 ; length of time for a totally disabled rating for non - service - connected deaths to qualify for dic ; and maximum dic payment for parents based on income levels that have not been adjusted for inflation . the civil war also led to other changes to survivor compensation , especially for survivors of servicemembers with service - connected disabilities . they were covered under the act of july 14 , 1862 , which was referred to as general law and amended various times in the 19 th century . in 1917 , congress passed the war risk insurance act to eliminate the need for non - service pensions and highlighted that service - connected payments for death and disability were compensation payments . potentially eligible survivors included spouses , children , parents , and siblings . because legislation had been written in response to need , dependency and indemnity compensation was unorganized and administered by four different administrations by the mid - 1950s , and congressional and executive committees were formed to make the issuance of compensation more streamlined and manageable . death compensation was set up similar to the way it is now by the time the final report of the president's commission on veterans' pensions , veterans' benefits in the united states: report to the president by the president's commission of veterans pensions ( hereafter referred to as the bradley report ) was written in 1956 . death compensation was provided to survivors ( except for dependent parents ) regardless of income . the effective date of dic entitlement is the first day of the month that the death occurred for claims filed within one year of the death . this report outlines the eligibility requirements and benefit levels for dic and the policy issues associated with dic . the eligibility for dic by survivors is based on ( 1 ) the eligibility of the veteran , which is determined by the circumstances of the veteran's death and his or her disability compensation rating ; and ( 2 ) the survivor meeting certain criteria related to either relationship to the veteran , age , or income . to claim dic benefits , a survivor must complete and submit to the local va office va form 21-534a and department of defense ( dd ) form 1300 . after one year , the dic entitlement starts on the date the claim is received by the va .