the agricultural act of 2014 ( p.l . 113-79 , 2014 farm bill ) , contained several program consolidation measures , including the repeal of 12 active and inactive programs , the creation of two new programs , and the merging of two programs into existing ones . a number of conservation programs were repealed by the 2014 farm bill or have gone unfunded by congress in recent years . many of these spending reductions were at the request of the administration . the mix of programs and amount of reductions vary from year to year . some programs , such as the crp , have not been reduced by appropriators in recent years , while others , such as eqip , have been repeatedly reduced below authorized levels . authorized mandatory funding for conservation programs has been reduced by a total of more than $4 billion over the past 10 years . fy2018 marks the first time in 15 years that an appropriations act does not reduce mandatory conservation program funding . sequestration has also had an effect on conservation programs . sequestration is a process of automatic , largely across - the - board reductions that permanently cancel mandatory and / or discretionary budget authority to enforce statutory budget goals . discretionary accounts have avoided sequestration in recent years through adjustments to spending limits , although sequestration continues on mandatory accounts . most all mandatory conservation programs were subject to sequestration in fy2014 through fy2018 . even with sequestration and appropriations act reductions , total annual mandatory funding for conservation programs has grown from a total of $3.9 billion in fy2008 to over $5 billion in fy2018 . before the 1985 farm bill , few conservation programs existed , and only two would be considered large by today's standards . in contrast , leading up to the debate on the 2014 farm bill , there were over 20 distinct conservation programs with total annual spending greater than $5 billion . the differences and number of these programs created general confusion about the purpose , participation , and policies of the programs . discussion about simplifying or consolidating conservation programs to reduce overlap and duplication , and to generate savings , continued for a number of years . table 1 lists these programs and the most recent congressional action taken . the tabular presentation that follows provides basic information covering each of the usda agricultural conservation programs , including administering agency or agencies within usda ; brief program description ; major amendments to the program in the agricultural act of 2014 ( p.l . 113-79 ) , commonly referred to as the 2014 farm bill ; national scope and availability , including participation levels and acres enrolled ; states with the highest level of funds obligated or acres enrolled ; volume of application backlog or public interest in each program ; authorized funding levels , whether mandatory spending or discretionary appropriations , and any funding restrictions ; fy2018 funding level in the consolidated appropriations act of 2018 ( p.l .