both are discussed further below . legislative proposals spanning several congresses have attempted to address some of the issues involved in creating a national cadastre . most recently , the federal land asset inventory reform act of 2011 ( h.r . the nrc reported a widespread perception that many private firms are harvesting data collected by local governments for commercial gain , without any perceived benefits flowing back to the local government . other local political realities . the nrc acknowledged that local political leaders may struggle with approving budget requests for large technical projects , such as county participation in a national effort to create an integrated land parcel database , especially when the benefits to the local government are not clear . lastly , the nrc concluded that "with more than 3,000 counties , tribes , and other local government entities as potential producers of parcel data , the organizational issues are complex. some of these concerns have been echoed by the national states geographic information council ( nsgic ) ; however , nsgic also embraces the need for better coordination and for a national spatial data infrastructure , which would include a national land parcel component . the states are sensitive to being imposed upon by a federal program , however , and are more likely to work in partnership with the federal government . nsgic recommends its 50-states initiative to meet the needs of the states while also sharing land parcel data with the national program . the nrc also recommended that a national land parcel coordinator adopt the 50-states initiative . the western governors' association ( wga ) has also supported federal , state , tribal , and local coordination of gis activities and encouraged regional , state , and interstate data sharing . further , wga recognized that blm is working with state and local governments to develop current and standardized digital representations of the public land survey system and parcel data , and has referred to this collaboration as the cadastral national spatial data infrastructure ( cadastral nsdi ) . the western governors called on congress to provide the funding necessary for blm to complete , enhance , and maintain the cadastral nsdi in coordination and partnership with state , tribal , and local governments . one estimate of funding to implement the wga recommendation is $350 million over three years , followed by a smaller amount in each succeeding year to maintain and enhance a cadastral nsdi . 1620 ) , introduced on april 15 , 2011 , would require the secretary of the interior to develop a multipurpose cadastre of federal "real property. 1620 was referred to the subcommittee on energy and mineral resources of the house committee on natural resources , but there has been no action on the bill . similar bills were introduced in the 111 th , 110 th , and 109 th congresses but were not enacted . the 112 th congress faces the same issues regarding management and coordination of federal land parcel data as previous congresses . one legislative option is to enact h.r .