the lessons from chile bear out all these points . the existing prudential regulatory and oversight system has so far limited these types of mistakes from being repeated and is credited with helping maintain the health of the banking sector during the global financial crisis . macroeconomic policies have played an important role . the movement toward flexible exchange rates , in particular , is a major change from previous periods of crisis . this has allowed currency depreciations to do much of the adjustment work , freeing up monetary policy to fulfill , to varying degrees , a traditional countercyclical role ( reducing interest rates ) often not possible in previous crises . in addition , most latin american countries have taken steps to support banking systems by maintaining high levels of international reserves , directly increasing liquidity to the private sector , easing reserve requirements , and providing alternative financing to the corporate sector . undoubtedly , financial systems in latin america are , on average , more robust than in the past . as reported by the international monetary fund ( imf ) , the starting conditions of latin american banks , on average , were healthy as the current crisis unfolded . capital - asset ratios were sound ( 15% , nearly double the 8% standard defined in the basel ii accord ) , returns on equity high ( 20% ) , and liquidity ratios "adequate" for "non - crisis situations. bank balance sheets were healthy . the united states now faces a fundamental question: what should the approach to prudential regulation and supervision of the u.s. financial system look like in the future ? some may be tempted to suggest at this point that greater restriction on financial institutions at both the national and international levels is needed . evidence from many studies suggests , however , that the answer is likely to be more nuanced for three reasons . first , notwithstanding the positive effects of steps taken to address regulatory inconsistencies internationally through the basel accords , most financial crises arise from domestic market distortions , weak institutions , and inadequate national policies . second , countries with weak overall government and bureaucratic systems tend to default to policies that overly restrict financial institutions . third , although seemingly counterintuitive , some cross - country research suggests that countries with the most highly restrictive regulations encourage less diversified operations , which in turn can increase firm inefficiency and the risk of a financial crisis . therefore , with respect to regulation , more is not necessarily better . the group of thirty ( g - 30 ) released a comprehensive review of financial regulatory models in 2008 . it presents a useful typology of financial regulatory models ( approaches ) based on 17 major countries representing both developing and more advanced economies .