circuit were pending . , ancs , cdcs , nhos , and indian tribes ) . in particular , in its brief discussion , the court noted the following six factors: 1. alternative , race - neutral remedies had proved unsuccessful in addressing the discrimination targeted here ; 2. the 8 ( a ) program is "appropriately flexible" because it imposes no quotas and prescribes no consequences for failure to meet the aspirational goals as to the percentage of federal contract dollars awarded to small disadvantaged businesses ; 3. the program is neither under - nor over - inclusive , since it "does not provide that every member of a minority group is disadvantaged" ; 4. the program imposes temporal limits on individuals' participation in the program , and sba continuously monitors participants' eligibility ; 5. the aspirational goals for contracting with small disadvantaged businesses are "numerically proportionate" to the evidence regarding the availability of minority firms that are ready , able , and willing to perform government contracts ; and 6. various aspects of the 8 ( a ) program minimize the program's burden on non - minority firms ( eg , sba cannot accept a contract for award through the 8 ( a ) program if it determines that doing so would have an "adverse impact" on other small businesses ) . the decision in rothe has been appealed to the u.s. court of appeals for the district of columbia circuit . an appendix to this report compares the requirements applicable to individual owners of 8 ( a ) firms to those applicable to groups owning 8 ( a ) firms ( i.e. the 8 ( a ) program has periodically been challenged on the grounds that the presumption that members of certain racial and ethnic groups are disadvantaged violates the constitutional guarantee of equal protection . the outcomes in early challenges to the program varied , with some courts finding that the plaintiffs lacked standing to bring such challenges because they were not economically disadvantaged , or were otherwise ineligible for the program ; and other courts finding that the program was unconstitutional as applied in specific cases . more recently , in its 2012 decision in dynalantic corporation v. u.s. department of defense , the u.s. district court for the district of columbia found that the 8 ( a ) program was not unconstitutional on its face because ( 1 ) "breaking down barriers to minority business development created by discrimination and its lingering effects" constitutes a compelling government interest ; ( 2 ) the government had a strong basis in evidence for concluding that race - based action was necessary to further this interest ; and ( 3 ) the 8 ( a ) program is narrowly tailored to "minimize the burden on non - minority firms. however , the court found that the program was unconstitutional as applied in the military simulation and training industry because the department of defense ( dod ) conceded it had "no evidence of discrimination , either in the public or private sector , in the simulation and training industry.