, those activities that substantially affect interstate commerce . this report reviews the pseeca and discusses the possible impact of the legislation . the report also identifies existing state laws that recognize collective bargaining rights for public safety employees , and considers the constitutional concerns raised by the measure . under the pseeca , the federal labor relations authority ( flra ) would be required to determine whether a state substantially provides for specified labor - management rights within 180 days of the measures enactment . if the flra determines that a state does not substantially provide for such rights , the state would be subject to regulations and procedures prescribed by the flra . in united states v. lopez , a 1995 case involving the gun - free school zones act of 1990 and congresss authority under the commerce clause , the court identified three broad categories of activity that congress may regulate pursuant to its commerce power: first , congress may regulate the use of channels of interstate commerce.... second , congress is empowered to regulate and protect the instrumentalities of interstate commerce , or persons or things in interstate commerce , even though the threat may come only from intrastate activities... . finally , congress commerce authority includes the power to regulate those activities having a substantial relation to interstate commerce ... i.e . the lopez court concluded that the act , which prohibited any individual from possessing a firearm at a place the individual knew or had reasonable cause to believe was a school zone , exceeded congresss authority under the commerce clause because the possession of a gun in a local school zone did not have a substantial effect on interstate commerce . the court maintained that upholding the act would require the court to "pile inference upon inference in a manner that would bid fair to convert congressional authority under the commerce clause to a general police power of the sort retained by the states. similarly , in united states v. morrison , a 2000 case involving congresss commerce power and a section of the violence against women act , the court found that congress exceeded its authority because gender - motivated crimes of violence occurring within a state have no substantial effect on interstate commerce . the court maintained that its cases upholding federal regulation of intrastate activity all involve activity that reflects some form of economic endeavor . the court noted that the regulation and punishment of intrastate violence that is "not directed at the instrumentalities , channels , or goods involved in interstate commerce has [sic] always been the province of the states. most recently , in gonzales v. raich , the court upheld the controlled substances act ( csa ) as a valid exercise of congresss commerce authority . the csa was challenged by two users of medical marijuana that was locally grown and prescribed in accordance with california law . they argued that congress lacked the authority to prohibit the intrastate manufacture and possession of marijuana for medical purposes .