it also has significant hydroelectric and commercial agricultural potential . the economy relies heavily on mineral exports , notably joint - venture bauxite mining and alumina operations . extractive industries are estimated to account for over 30% of gross domestic product ( gdp ) . over three - quarters of the labor force , however , works in the largely subsistence - focused agricultural sector . economic hardship has contributed to periodic unrest , including general strikes in 2007 that turned into a national anti - government protest movement . economic growth has been buffeted by regional instability and swings in global mineral prices , and growth rates of 2% - 4% per year from 2010 to 2013 were insufficient to reduce poverty or improve living standards . hrw also reported that protesters engaged in criminal conduct . in response , the guinean government blamed these issues on a lack of training . the protests have also exhibited a new trend of civilian - on - civilian violence , often along ethnic lines . many guineans view the crux of national politics as a power - struggle between guinea's two largest ethno - regional communities , the peul and malinké , with other communities forced to choose sides or else face political irrelevance . given condé's past electoral success in malinké areas and diallo's in peul areas , the presidential contest is thus expected to be hard - fought in the melting pot of conakry and in potential "swing districts," such as the ethnic soussou - dominated coastal region and the ethnically diverse forest region in the southeast . perhaps as a result of ethno - regional calculations , in june 2015 , diallo's ufdg announced an electoral alliance with former military junta leader moussa dadis camara , a forestier , who is in exile in burkina faso . soon after , the guinean government — after years of delay — brought criminal charges against dadis camara for the massacre of protesters by security forces in 2009 , while he was president . whether dadis camara will return to guinea is a matter of intense speculation . legislative elections were held in september 2013 , following the aforementioned political agreement , which was brokered by the special representative of the u.n. secretary - general for west africa and backed by the european union ( eu ) . the elections were initially supposed to take place in 2011 but had been repeatedly delayed due to a dispute over electoral procedures . the elections were widely viewed as a key step in guinea's political transition , and the eu had conditioned the full resumption of its development aid on completing them . the lead - up to the vote was violent , however , and the opposition contested the results . condé's rpg won a plurality of seats ( 53 out of 114 ) , which , in coalition with smaller parties in the ruling rainbow alliance , allowed it to control a slim majority of 59 seats . political dynamics in 2015 have been dominated by entrenched disputes over the upcoming electoral cycle . these events left scars that continue to affect political dynamics .