both versions of h.r . 3288 and the final statute also included increased funding for hud's fair housing programs and increased funding for hiring staff , as requested by the president . the housing and economic recovery act of 2008 ( p.l . 110-289 ) established a housing trust fund that would provide a permanent , dedicated source of funding for affordable housing activities outside of the annual appropriations process . 110-289 identified contributions from fannie mae and freddie mac as the dedicated funding source . however , fannie mae's and freddie mac's contributions to the housing trust fund were indefinitely suspended in november 2008 by their conservator , the federal housing finance agency , due to fannie's and freddie's financial difficulties . the suspension of fannie's and freddie's contributions left the housing trust fund without a source of funding . 110-289 authorized funding other than the contributions from fannie mae and freddie mac to be appropriated or transferred to the housing trust fund , no funding has yet been directed to the housing trust fund . the president's budget proposed $1 billion in mandatory funding for the housing trust fund , but did not identify a source for those funds . neither the house - passed nor the senate - passed version of h.r . 3288 mentioned the housing trust fund . like the house and senate bills , p.l . 111-117 did not reference the trust fund . although no funding for the housing trust fund was in included in the regular fy2010 hud appropriations , proposals to fund the housing trust fund have been included in other legislation introduced in the 111 th congress . for details on these funding proposals , see crs report r40781 , the housing trust fund: background and issues , by [author name scrubbed] . the section 8 tenant - based rental assistance account funds the section 8 voucher program and is the largest account in the hud budget . the section 8 voucher program provides portable rental subsidies that low - income families use to reduce their housing costs in the private market . hud currently funds more than two million section 8 vouchers , which are administered at the local level by quasi - governmental public housing authorities ( phas ) . this account — the largest in hud's budget — funds the cost of those vouchers and the cost of administering the program . given its size , this account is often the focus of the most intense debate in the hud funding deliberations . table 3 provides a breakdown of funding for the account . it is followed by a discussion of key funding issues within the account . the funds are used in support of cdbg section 108 loan guarantees and may be used in collaboration with brownfield - related funding by the environmental protection agency . the administration proposed eliminating the separate appropriation for the program for fy2010 , but noted that program activities could continue to be funded under the larger cdbg program . the senate - passed version of h.r . 3288 included no funding for the program .