the house republican conference has no comparable rule . both democrats and republicans designate the budget committee as a nonexclusive committee . in general , this means that besides the house rule restricting any member from serving on more than two standing committees , few restrictions apply to budget committee members regarding their other committee assignments . although the budget act does not prohibit the creation of subcommittees , the budget committee has never had them . the committee , however , sometimes establishes ad hoc task forces to study specific issues . for example , there have been task forces on such subjects as entitlements , tax policy , economic policy , and budget reform . the jurisdiction of the house budget committee is derived from the budget act as well as house rule x . this jurisdiction is protected under the budget act , which states that no bill , resolution , amendment , motion , or conference report dealing with any matter within the jurisdiction of the budget committee shall be considered in the house unless it is a bill or resolution that has been reported by the budget committee or unless it is an amendment to a bill or resolution reported by the budget committee . house rule x , clause 1 ( d ) states that the budget committee will have jurisdiction over the concurrent resolution on the budget ; other matters required to be referred to it pursuant to the budget act ; establishment , extension , and enforcement of special controls over the federal budget ; and the budget process generally . over the years , the duties and responsibilities of the budget committee have been established in statute , as well as house rules . this report discusses the budget committee's responsibilities under the following categories: the budget resolution , reconciliation , budget process reform , oversight of the congressional budget office , revisions of allocations and adjustments , and scorekeeping . the budget committee chair is also authorized to make adjustments to the budget resolution levels under the "fungibility rule. the "fungibility rule" applies when a committee has been instructed through reconciliation directions to develop legislation that will change both revenue and direct spending laws to conform with policies established in the budget resolution . under this rule , the budget committee chair is then authorized to submit for printing in the congressional record appropriate changes in budget resolution levels , and committee spending allocations . the budget act also allows for further revisions to the budget resolution . for more information on revisions and adjustments related to the budget process , see crs report rl33122 , congressional budget resolutions: revisions and adjustments , by [author name scrubbed] . the budget committee is responsible for making summary budget scorekeeping reports available to the members of the house on at least a monthly basis . scorekeeping is the process of measuring the budgetary effects of pending and enacted legislation against the levels recommended in the budget resolution , in general to determine if proposed legislation would violate the levels set forth in the budget resolution .