what does this mean for oversight of the program ? are hiring grants a cost - effective way of combating crime ? is there programmatic overlap between the cops office of justice programs ( ojp ) grant programs ? should funding for the cops program be appropriated as currently authorized in statute ? the gao reported that between 1993 and 2000 , cops obligations contributed to a 1.3% decrease in the overall crime rate and a 2.5% decrease in the violent crime rate . the gao also reported that from 1994 to 2001 , the cops office obligated $4.7 billion in hiring grants . as congress considers the future of the cops program , it might want to evaluate whether funding additional law enforcement officer positions is a cost - effective means of reducing crime . two cost - benefits analyses suggest that the cost of the cops program exceeds the value of the benefits derived . did the cops office meet its goal of placing 100,000 new officers on the street ? one potential question facing congress as it considers legislation to reauthorize the cops program is whether the federal government should continue to provide grants to state and local law enforcement agencies to hire additional officers at a time of historically low crime rates . opponents of the program stress that state and local governments , not the federal government , should be responsible for providing funding for police forces . they also argue that the purported effect of cops hiring grants on crime rates in the 1990s is questionable . they maintain that it is not prudent to increase funding for the program at a time when crime is decreasing and the federal government is facing annual deficits . proponents of the cops program assert that cops hiring grants contributed to the decreasing crime rate in the 1990s . they contend that with the current economic downturn , crime rates might increase and law enforcement agencies might have to lay off officers ; hence it is important to ensure that local law enforcement agencies have the resources to maintain their forces and fight crime . proponents believe that the federal government has a role to play in supporting local law enforcement because it is the federal government's responsibility to provide for the security of u.s. citizens , which means protecting citizens from crime . they also maintain that the federal government should support local law enforcement because it has become more involved in homeland security and immigration enforcement . this section of the report analyzes the arguments made by both supporters and opponents of the cops program by evaluating recent trends in violent crime , the research on the ability of additional law enforcement officers to decrease crime , and the effects that cops grants had on crime rates in the 1990s . figure 1 shows data on violent crime rates from 1960 through 2012 ( the most recent year for which data are available ) . the data are from the uniform crime reports ( ucr ) , which is collected and compiled by the federal bureau of investigation ( fbi ) . the data show that , in general , violent crime rates increased from 1961 through 1991 ( see figure 1 ) .