111-322 ) into law . the act generally extends funding for federal agencies at the fy2010 enacted spending levels through march 4 , 2011 , under the authority and conditions provided for under fy2010 appropriations acts . accordingly , restrictions imposed by fy2010 appropriations measures on the use of funds for the transfer and release of guantanamo detainees remain in place . numerous legislative proposals introduced during the 111 th congress addressed the disposition or treatment of guantanamo detainees . early in the congress , several proposals were introduced that would have required the closure of the guantanamo detention facility within a specified period . however , more recent legislative proposals , including enacted legislation discussed earlier in this report , sought to restrict the transfer or release of guantanamo detainees into the united states , significantly impacting efforts by the obama administration to close the facility . other proposals introduced during the 111 th congress raised issues not addressed in the enacted or pending authorization and appropriations measures . it is possible that the proposals , though not enacted into law , might inform legislation in the 112 th congress . soon after taking office , president obama issued an executive order to effectuate the closure of the guantanamo detention facility within a year . the announced deadline for closing the facility has not been met , arguably in part because of a series of congressional enactments limiting executive discretion to transfer or release detainees into the united states . congress has passed numerous measures which suggest strong opposition to the possibility that a detainee might be released into the united states , even if he is found not to have been an enemy belligerent . until recently , congress had been less resistant to the possibility of transferring detainees into the united states for criminal prosecution , provided that the executive first provides congress with a risk assessment and other information relating to the proposed transfer . however , at the end of the 111 th congress , legislative activity involved measures to bar the transfer of detainees to the united states for any purpose , including criminal prosecution . these restrictions were ultimately enacted into law pursuant to the 2011 ndaa . by prohibiting military funds from being used to transfer or release detainees into the united states , or assist in the transfer or release of detainees into the country , the act seems to ensure that the guantanamo detention facility remains open and at least through the 2011 fiscal year , and perhaps for the foreseeable future . moreover , the measure appears to make military tribunals the only viable forum by which guantanamo detainees could be tried for criminal offenses , as no civilian court operates within guantanamo . other changes effected by legislation enacted in the 111 th congress , such as the establishment of new military commission procedures , may also significantly impact the treatment and disposition of guantanamo detainees . these and other proposals in the 111 th congress are likely to inform future legislative debates regarding the treatment and rights of detainees at guantanamo and elsewhere . 111-118 ) ; and the 2011 ndaa ( p.l . many of the restrictions applied only to funds appropriated during the 2010 fiscal year .