stat . section 177 appears in title 28 of the revised statutes as section 2116 . thus , on its face , §201 permits a qui tam action to recover the penalties accruing under §177 . in harlan , however , the eighth circuit stated in dicta that "25 u.s.c . §177 appears to deal directly with cases where , as here , a person attempts to lease tribal lands without express approval of the federal government . the statute makes violators subject to a fine of $1,000 , but has no provision entitling relators to bring actions under it . see james v. watt , 716 f.2d 71 ( 1 st cir . the issue in harlan was whether the qui tam provisions then found in 25 u.s.c . 81 , relating to contracts for services which required government approval , extended to sharecrop agreements . the court referred to section 177 "simply . to demonstrate that a broad and general policy to oversee all contracts by indians need not be accomplished through 25 u.s.c . §81 alone. the james case , which the court cites , held that an individual tribal member , suing as a victim of a violation of section 177 , may only do so as a representative of his tribe and not on his own behalf . it says nothing of whether he may do so on behalf of the united states qui tam . the application of section 201 to the penalties under §177 seems clear on its face , but the contrary statement in harlan seems equally clear . qui tam evokes constitutional issues of two classes . first , to what extent may qui tam defendants claim the constitutional protections available to defendants in criminal cases ? second , is qui tam compatible with the constitution's allocation of powers among the three branches of government ? at first glance , the first question seems the least troubling . the rights available in criminal proceedings exist precisely because the proceedings are criminal . the sixth amendment rights – the right to counsel ; to call and confront witnesses ; to informed of the nature of the charges against him ; to trial in the place where the offense occurred ; and to a speedy and public trial before an impartial jury – apply only to "the accused" in criminal proceedings . thus , they are inapplicable to federal qui tam proceedings which are civil in nature . rights found elsewhere in the constitution , however , often turn upon whether the government's action may be or must be considered punitive . here the answers are bit less clear . ( a ) liability for certain acts. – ( 1 ) in general.