more pointedly , who will or should farm ? should the united states government let family farmers fail financially , or should the federal government support them in a way that slows the transition to farms that may be more economically efficient ? the transition was most apparent in the 1950s . farm numbers dropped sharply as mechanization continued to reduce the need for farm labor , efficiency gains from large farm size increased dramatically , and off - farm employment became more available and relatively more attractive . as policymakers developed farm programs to support the farm sector , technological gains over time have resulted in farm production in excess of market demand , leading to a farm price - cost squeeze and a decline in farm numbers . some would say the price - cost squeeze is essentially due to keeping the same amount of land in production , but with yield - enhancing technology boosting production . economics would dictate that resources ( eg , people ) need to exit the sector if supply is out of balance . the evidence would suggest that this has occurred . while overall u.s. farm numbers have stabilized since the late 1980s , there has been a shift away from the medium - sized farms considered to be modest family operations ( sales between $10,000 and $99,999 ) ( figure 12 ) . just five years earlier , in 2002 , 144,000 farms accounted for 75% of farm sales . in 1992 , more than 232,000 farms accounted for 75% of farm sales ( table 1 ) . since the great depression , federal farm policy has attempted to help farmers weather financial difficulties inherent in the industry . more than 75 years ago , when the federal government started addressing low returns in farming , the political thrust was to enact legislation that would offset some of the volatility of agricultural markets and prop up income for a rural population that was highly dependent on the farm economy . in general , the goal has been to help farmers survive market downturns . all the while , farmers have adopted technology that has resulted in a sector - wide transition from a large number of producers , some being high - cost , to a smaller number of lower - cost producers . most public support for agricultural subsidies stems from the public's desire to help "family farmers. historically , public support for farm programs has benefited from the country's agrarian roots and generally favorable perception of farmers as being hard workers , honest , and subject to market forces and weather that are beyond their control . offsetting this decline is growth in the numbers of larger farms ( sales at least $100,000 ) , which can push their costs even lower from gains in economies of scale , and small operations with sales less than $10,000 — referred to as "hobby" or "lifestyle" farms — that are not as dependent on farm income because ample off - farm income supports their farm lifestyle . today , relatively large , economically efficient farms provide the bulk of u.s. production .