appendix a . foreign assistance disbursements by agency , fy2001-fy2007 appendix b. overlapping agency foreign assistance activitie . the language on coordination in h.r . 2139 is mirrored in provisions of h.r . 2410 addressing key elements required of the qrdd . the idea of a quadrennial review has gained some momentum , and secretary of state hillary clinton announced on july 10 , 2009 , that the state department will conduct a quadrennial diplomacy and development review ( qddr ) for the first time . among other reasons clinton cited for the review was "to coordinate our work and to accelerate transitions from old ideas and outmoded programs. s. 1524 , the foreign assistance revitalization and accountability act of 2009 , was introduced by senate foreign relations committee chairman john kerry and ranking member richard lugar on july 28 , 2009 . among other things , the legislation would establish an independent evaluation and research innovation group for foreign assistance tasked with "research and analysis aimed at identifying ways of improving coordination of foreign assistance programs carried out by federal agencies , including ways of coordinating research and development conducted by such agencies. the united states accounts for about 18.5% of that total . while the united states is the largest single donor in terms of value , many nations contribute a higher percentage of their gross domestic income to foreign aid , and most face similar public and political pressures as do american policymakers . in the decades since the foreign assistance act of 1961 became law , congress , various administrations , and a number of commissions have reviewed the foreign aid programs and proposed ways to improve the coordination of u.s. foreign assistance , usually by consolidating or otherwise restructuring various agencies . the following options to improve the coherency and coordination of u.s. foreign aid have been at the center of recent discussions on foreign aid reform . the problem of multiplicity occurs even within single sectors . pepfar , just one of three big u.s. presidential initiatives in mozambique , is itself implemented by five u.s. agencies: the cdc , usaid , the defense department , the state department , and the peace corps . insiders recognize the faulty communication while outsiders don't know whom to consult. on the other hand , many observers believe that foreign aid programs operate most effectively when administered by agencies and staff with expertise related to the type of foreign assistance provided . the diversity of u.s. foreign assistance leads some to question whether overarching coordination is necessary , or even desirable — why , for example , should programs to train law enforcement officers be coordinated with programs to support endangered species research ? to centralize authority over these activities , some argue , would take authority away from those who best understand them . some experts maintain that aid effectiveness has not yet been sufficiently studied to determine whether administering aid through multiple domestic agencies with sector - specific expertise is more or less effective than through a consolidated aid agency . following is a discussion of the general types of foreign assistance that each agency provides , as well as how they relate to each other .