after holding that the mandatory nature of the u.s . sentencing guidelines for criminal offenses was unconstitutional , the court conducted a severability analysis , and , in a 5-4 decision , severed two sections of the sentencing reform act of 1984 , which had the effect of replacing the mandatory guidelines with those operating in a discretionary manner . the court indicated that it sought to determine "what 'congress would have intended' in light of the court's constitutional holding. the court acknowledged that the remedy chosen by the majority of the court , i.e. , discretionary sentencing guidelines , as well as the different remedy proposed by the minority , would "significantly alter the system that congress designed. however , it explained that because of the constitutional holding , congress's desire to have mandatory sentencing guidelines was no longer possible . accordingly , the court stated its role was to decide which remedy "would deviate less radically from congress's system…. the court also noted its responsibility to retain those portions of the act that were " ( 1 ) constitutionally valid , ( 2 ) capable of 'functioning independently,' and ( 3 ) consistent with congress' objectives in enacting the statute. by severing the two provisions the court concluded that the remainder of the act met the three constitutional requirements . additionally , the court has noted that while the answer to a severability inquiry can sometimes be "elusive," the inquiry may be clarified by the presence of a severability clause . the inclusion of a severability clause reinforces the presumption that congress preferred for the valid portion of a statute in question to remain standing . however , the court has expressed multiple times that the lack of a severability clause does not create a presumption against severability . both the state and private petitioners in the florida case argue that aca should be struck down in its entirety . however , the administration advocates for partial severability , arguing that certain health insurance provisions , i.e. , the "community rating" and "guaranteed issue" provisions , are inseverable from the individual mandate , but that the rest of the act should remain valid . in general , the guaranteed issue requirements compel health insurers to accept everyone that applies and prevent an insurer from denying health insurance coverage based factors such as health status . the community rating provisions prohibit health insurers from charging higher premiums based on health factors . the administration submits that congress intended that these insurance provisions work together , because without the individual mandate , individuals would simply wait to purchase health insurance until they needed care , which would make the market dysfunctional . in light of the fact that the administration and the state and private petitioners in florida agree to at least partial severability , the court appointed an amicus to argue in support of the judgment of the eleventh circuit: that the individual mandate alone should be severed from the remainder of the aca . in florida , the district court reached the opposite conclusion , striking down the aca , and generally finding that while many provisions in aca could function independently of the individual mandate , they could not function "in a manner consistent with the intent of congress.