the technologies are summarized in table 1 . the bill would allow government and cooperative power agencies to issue clean renewable energy bonds for storage projects . the storage act was introduced on may 20 , 2009 , and referred to the finance committee . as of late august 2009 no further action had been taken on the bill . aces is a climate change and energy policy act passed by the house on june 26 , 2009 , and referred to the senate . many of the objectives of the bill , including increased use of renewable power , peak demand reductions , and reductions in carbon emissions , might be facilitated by cost - effective eps . with respect to transmission planning , the bill would establish a national transmission planning policy that takes: into account all significant demand - side and supply - side options , including energy efficiency , distributed generation , renewable energy and zero - carbon electricity generation technologies , smart - grid technologies and practices , demand response , electricity storage , voltage regulation technologies , high capacity conductors … superconductor technologies , underground transmission technologies , and new conventional electric transmission capacity and corridors . the bill's peak demand reduction section also specifies eps as one of the technologies that can be used to meet reduction goals . acela is an energy bill that was introduced on july 16 , 2009 , when it was reported out of the senate energy committee . the bill includes a peak reduction and load shifting goal that would be met through the "widespread implementation" of several demand response technologies , including dynamic pricing , smart grid technology , distributed generation , and electricity storage . the bill would also establish a multi - faceted national transmission policy . the first principle listed is "support for the development of new renewable energy generation capacity," but there are numerous other objectives , including cost savings , reliability enhancement , reduced power plant emissions , and maximizing "the contribution of demand side management ( including energy efficiency and demand response ) , energy storage , distributed generation resources , and smart grid investments. transmission planning would be required to reflect these policy objectives . both aces and acela therefore anticipate transmission planning processes that would take the integrated approach discussed earlier in this report . both bills also include electricity storage among the demand response technologies that can be used to meet goals for reducing peak demand . if either bill becomes law , congress may want to monitor whether storage and other non - traditional approaches actually receive appropriate attention from industry , regulators , and executive agencies . the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 ( arra ; p.l . 111-5 ) added or expanded funding and incentives for electricity storage . however , many of the programs seem to be focused primarily on one application , battery technology for pure electric and plug - in hybrid electric vehicles . arra provides $6.0 billion that is expected to leverage more than $60 billion in federal loan guarantees for transmission grid construction that supports renewable energy projects . these guarantees can presumably be used to support applicable eps projects .