rept . 111-35 notes that the senate armed services committee is aware that "the cost of the defense health program will be a focus of the 2010 quadrennial defense review and believes that such focus is appropriate. of greater concern to the committee , however , is that: ...satisfaction with tricare is declining . too much attention has been paid to increasing out - of - pocket payments by retirees , and not enough to repairing persistent operational problems that prevent beneficiaries from getting the care that they need , such as the lack of availability of tricare providers and cumbersome requirements for preauthorization and referral to specialty care . moreover , the fundamental goal of tricare to maximize use of military hospitals and clinics is not being achieved , as more and more care is being purchased in the private sector . problems with access to care in both military facilities and from civilian providers needlessly compound the difficulties that military families face during extended periods of deployment . dod reports customer satisfaction trends in its annual evaluations of the tricare program . discussion: the enacted provision requires the secretary of defense to submit a report on the health care needs of military family members and to undertake actions to enhance the capability of the military health system and improve the tricare program , to include addressing access issues for national guard and other reserve members and their families and those beneficiaries living in rural areas . section 721 also requires the secretary to submit reports on the progress made and future plans for improvement of the military health system , including the submission of a report together with budget materials submitted to congress in support of the dod budget for fy2012 . reference ( s ) : none . crs point of contact ( poc ) : don jansen , x[phone number scrubbed] . 2990 to the end of h.r . 2647 where it appears as division d. discussion: the house version of this proposed expansion of concurrent receipt would have been effective on january 1 , 2010 , but was only funded for the first year . many supporters of expanding concurrent receipt expressed concern with the house version due to its scope and implementation . reference: crs report r40589 , concurrent receipt: background and issues for congress , by [author name scrubbed] . crs point of contact ( poc ) : charles henning , x[phone number scrubbed] . background : prior to enactment of p.l . 1086 ( b ) ( 3 ) required a copayment rate of 25% of the cost of inpatient care for retirees , "except that in no case may the charges for inpatient care for a patient exceed $535 per day during the period beginning on april 1 , 2006 , and ending on september 30 , 2009. . when the exception expired on september 30 , 2009 , dod announced that the per diem rate would again increase to a rate equal to 25% of the cost of inpatient care . this would have increased the inpatient cost share for retirees younger than 65 and their family members to $645 a day , or 25% of total hospital charges , whichever was less .