other motivations could be political . mexico may be seeking to demonstrate good governance by locking in political and economic reforms through trading partnerships . from the 1930s through part of the 1980s , mexico maintained a strong protectionist trade policy in an effort to be independent of any foreign power and as a means to promote domestic - led industrialization . mexico established a policy of import substitution in the 1930s , consisting of a broad , general protection of the entire industrial sector through tight restrictions on foreign investment and by controlling the exchange rate to encourage domestic industrial growth . mexico also nationalized the oil industry at this time . these protectionist economic policies remained in effect until the country began to experience a series of economic challenges several decades later . this report will be updated as events warrant . economic motivations are generally the major driving force for the formation of free trade agreements among countries , but there are other reasons countries enter into ftas , including political and security factors . mexico's primary motivation for the unilateral trade liberalization efforts of the late 1980s and early 1990s was to improve economic conditions in the country , which policymakers hoped would lead to greater investor confidence and attract more foreign investment . this motivation was a major factor in negotiating nafta with the united states and canada . the permanent lowering of trade and investment barriers and predictable trade rules provided by ftas can improve investor confidence in a country , which helps attract foreign direct investment ( fdi ) . multinational firms invest in countries to gain access to markets , but they also do it to lower production costs . mexico has other motivations for continuing trade liberalization with other countries , such as expanding market access for its exports and decreasing its reliance on the united states as an export market . by entering into trade agreements with other countries , mexico is seeking to achieve economies of scale in certain sectors of the economy and to expand its export market . ftas provide partners with broader market access for their goods and services . countries can benefit from trade agreements , because producers are able to lower their unit costs by producing larger volumes for regional markets in addition to their own domestic markets . when more units of a good or a service can be produced on a larger scale , companies are able to decrease cost of production . mexico's high dependence on the united states as an export market is a likely motivation for seeking ftas and other regional trade arrangements with other countries . the slow progress in multilateral negotiations in the wto may be another likely factor . some countries see smaller trade arrangements as "building blocks" for multilateral agreements . in the mid - 1980s , mexico's economy was on the verge of collapse as a result of the 1982 debt crisis in which the mexican government was unable to meet its foreign debt obligations . much of the government's efforts in addressing these economic challenges were placed on privatizing state industries and moving toward trade liberalization . mexico had few options but to open its economy through trade liberalization .