the modernization also induced policymakers to improve institutional practices . as a result , treasury was able to raise large amounts of money with a minimal impact on the financial markets . these policies also extended the average maturity of the national debt and produced a better defined yield curve . the treasury secretary manages revenue , works to improve public credit , and provides for on - time revenue collection and payment of debts . if federal government finances are not well managed , financial stability and economic growth could be at risk . throughout the year , the balance held by treasury can fluctuate significantly as a result of higher or lower revenue collections or issuance of more or less debt during certain periods . as a result , treasury must ensure that adequate funds are available , either via revenue streams or borrowing , to finance obligations . in order to finance the government's obligations while minimizing borrowing costs , treasury must accurately project what cash requirements will be needed on a daily basis to cover government payments especially given these variations . the total amount of debt issued over the fiscal year depends in large part on the decisions made by congress and the priorities it chooses in its annual budget and appropriations process . recently , treasury has issued increasing amounts of debt as a result of the government response to the most recent economic downturn , along with other budgetary initiatives . over the longer term , these priorities could change as the economy recovers and decisions on how to finance the promises to retirees for healthcare and other benefits may increase the demands on treasury's debt issuance . treasury's financing needs generally follow a predictable seasonal pattern in response to changes in the level of public debt . growth in public debt is typically lowest in april , due to the filing of personal income tax returns paid during that month , and highest in september , as a result of the need to meet obligations due at the end of the fiscal year . in addition to funding the needs of the government , treasury manages the accounts of government agencies through the bureau of the fiscal service . loans are provided to departments or agencies in order to meet obligations , such as payments owed to eligible beneficiaries of social service programs . fms disburses payments to individuals and businesses , collects federal revenue , and issues government - wide financial reports . investors examine several key factors when deciding whether they should purchase treasury securities . as with all types of investments , price , expected return , and risk play a role in this process . treasury securities provide a known stream of income and offer greater liquidity than other types of fixed - income securities . prices are determined by investors who place a value on treasury securities based on the characteristics of safety and liquidity afforded by this investment option . because they are also backed by the full faith and credit of the united states , they are often seen as one of the safest investments available , though investors are not totally immune from losses .