this participation was actively encouraged by the legislature . in fact , one of the fundamental goals of the act was to have the udc attract private investors and developers . when the udc accomplishes its goal in a protected manner , and the participation of private third parties was reasonably contemplated by the legislature , allowing successful tangential attacks on the udc 's activities through suits against the third parties would effectively block the efforts of the udc . more than a decade later , another federal appeals court emphasized the same point: [r]ecognizing that the state action doctrine protects state action , not state actors , these courts reason that to allow suits against private parties for actions immunized as to municipalities would allow plaintiffs to circumvent the state action doctrine and challenge protected municipal decisions through artful pleading . it seems difficult to imagine that the rationale for those cases could result in tolerance at the state level for activities that would be prohibited at the federal level . thus , although there appears to be little likelihood that either an organization deemed "an agency or establishment of the united states government" or a private entity operating with the specific approval or authorization of the federal government would be found liable for violating the antitrust laws , there can be no ironclad assurance of a contrary judicial result . to the extent the legislative intent is to assure the antitrust immunization of either , it would seem prudent to correctly characterize and / or specifically immunize the entities deemed integral to the operation of a health care system . the dividing line is neither sharply drawn nor easily perceived . with respect to instances where it has been determined that an entity acting at the behest of , if not in actual concert or partnership with , the federal government is , in fact , a private actor , analogy to the "state action" doctrine would seem to suggest that the private entity will benefit from the government's antitrust immunity . the analog to a "clearly articulated" state policy might be congressional ( although not necessarily statutory ) recognition of the beneficial aspects of certain activity . short of legislation granting antitrust immunity to private entities , however , there could not be any categorical assurance that no court would ever find such an activity carried out by a private participant to be an antitrust violation , but there are opinions addressing challenges to state - level activities that would seem to make such an outcome unlikely . in a case in which a federal district court refused to decide in favor of an antitrust challenge to the participation of certain new york city theaters in an urban - renewal project carried out under the direction of the new york state urban development corporation ( udc ) , the "state action" doctrine was key to the court's reasoning .