health insurance is intertwined with the whole health care system . profitability data for those years may therefore be atypical . insurers typically participate in multiple segments of the health insurance market ( large group , small group , individual , public insurance programs ) , but each segment differs in important ways . departures from these conditions can hinder markets and lead to inefficient outcomes . reforms are most likely to be effective , according to some economists , when they are tied to underlying structural causes of poor market performance . the lack of symmetric information plays a particularly important role in the health insurance market ; most consumers rely heavily on the specialized knowledge and expertise of intermediaries such as insurers , employers , labor unions , physicians , and others . the health insurance market , according to many researchers , is highly concentrated in much of the united states . if large health insurers in highly concentrated markets exercised market power when selling insurance , prices would be distorted and an inefficiently low level of health insurance coverage would be provided . in simple economic models , firms with market power in product markets raise prices above and reduce output below competitive levels . firms that exercise market power when buying from suppliers ( i.e. , hiring labor and buying inputs ) can lower payments and reduce output below competitive levels . firms' profitability depends on market interactions with both consumers and suppliers . for instance , a firm with a market position relative to its suppliers may be forced to pass along savings by strong competitive forces in the consumer market . a buyer that exercises market power to lower supplier prices below competitive levels , however , reduces economic efficiency , whether or not gains are retained by the firm or passed onto consumers . many have expressed concern about the rapid growth of health insurance premiums during the past half century . rising premiums are linked to the growth of medical and other health care costs , which now make up about four - fifths of health insurance premium income . many economists believe the extent of health insurance coverage has encouraged providers to increase the quantity of health care services , and over the longer term has led to higher prices for health care . the portion of premiums not paid out as claims , often called the loading costs , includes administrative costs , taxes , and profits . administrative costs include employee salaries , business overhead , marketing expenses , and other expenditures necessary to running an insurance firm . the rest of this section discusses trends in health insurance companies' profitability . evaluating the profitability of health insurers is complicated because insurers earn part of their profits from the difference between total premiums and total claims paid , and another part of their profits from the "float," that is , the lag between the payment of premiums and the payment of claims . some insured people will become sick or injured and incur significant medical expenses . most people , however , will remain relatively healthy , thus incurring little or no medical expenses .