id . more specifically , the report found that: a "significant number of nsl - related possible violations were not being identified or reported" as required ; the only fbi data collection system produced "inaccurate" results ; the fbi issued over 700 exigent letters acquiring information in a manner that "circumvented the ecpa nsl statute and violated the attorney general's guidelines ... and internal fbi policy ; " the fbi's counterterrorism division initiated over 300 nsls in a manner that precluded effective review prior to approval ; 60% of the individual files examined showed violations of fbi internal control policies ; the fbi did not retain signed copies of the nsls it issued ; the fbi had not provided clear guidance on the application of the attorney general's least - intrusive - feasible - investigative - technique standard in the case of nsls ; the precise interpretation of toll billing information as it appears in the ecpa nsl statute is unclear ; sac supervision of the attorneys responsible for review of the legal adequacy of proposed nsls made some of the attorneys reluctant to question the adequacy of the underlying investigation previously approved by the sac ; there was no indication that the fbi's misuse of nsl authority constituted criminal conduct ; personnel both at fbi headquarters and in the field considered nsl use indispensable ; and information generated by nsls was fed into a number of fbi systems . ig report i at 121-24 . prior to enactment of the electronic communications privacy act ( ecpa ) , the supreme court held that customers had no fourth amendment protected privacy rights in the records the telephone company maintained relating to their telephone use . where a recognized expectation of privacy exists for fourth amendment purposes , the amendment's usual demands such as those of probable cause , particularity , and a warrant may be eased in the face of exigent circumstances . for example , the fourth amendment requirement that officers must knock and announce their purpose before forcibly entering a building to execute a warrant can be eased in the presence of certain exigent circumstances such as the threat of the destruction of evidence or danger to the officers . satisfying fourth amendment requirements , however , does not necessarily satisfy statutory prohibitions . the ecpa prohibits communications service providers from supplying information concerning customer records unless one of the statutory exceptions applies . there are specific exceptions for disclosure upon receipt of a grand jury subpoena or an nsl . a service provider who knowingly or intentionally violates the prohibition is subject to civil liability , but there are no criminal penalties for the breach . the inspector general found that contrary to assertions that "the fbi would obtain telephone records only after it served nsls or grand jury subpoenas , the fbi obtained telephone bill records and subscriber information prior to serving nsls or grand jury subpoenas" by using "exigent letters. the fbi responded that it had barred the use of exigent letters , but emphasized that the term "exigent letter" does not include emergency disclosures under the exception now found in 18 u.s.c . 2702 ( c ) ( 4 ) .