dds agencies process nearly all initial disability determinations and most cdrs . any furloughs or other personnel actions that would limit the total number of cases that could be processed by the dds would likely have a negative impact on the ssdi and ssi programs . this potential reduced capacity of the dds to process initial disability applications comes at a time of significant growth in the number of ssdi and ssi applications . the ssa projects that 2.85 million ssdi and ssi applications will need to be processed in fy2010 , an 8.1% increase from the number of applications processed in fy2009 and a 12.7% increase since fy2007 . a reduced capacity to process initial disability determinations because of a furlough or other personnel action would increase the time claimants would have to wait for an initial decision on their benefit applications , and for applicants ultimately determined to be disabled , would result in benefits being delayed . although benefits would ultimately be paid on a retroactive basis to the established date of program eligibility , ssi recipients could be forced to wait up to a year beyond the date of their eligibility decisions to receive all of their retroactive benefits . this reimbursement includes itemized costs as well as non - itemized and administrative expenses . state governments do not contribute in any way to the cost of the dds and see no financial savings if dds operations are curtailed . in fy2008 , dds agencies were reimbursed for more than $1.8 billion in expenses . information on dds expenses for each state is provided in table a - 1 in the appendix . each state enters into an agreement with the department of the treasury for the reimbursement of its dds expenses . these intergovernmental agreements are governed by the provisions of the cash management improvement act of 1990 , applicable federal regulations , and office of management and budget circular a - 87 . the states receive funds from ssa , either in advance or by reimbursement , for the cost of their dds expenditures , and they may not "incur or make expenditures for items of cost not approved by ... [ssa] or in excess of the amount ... [made] available" to them . as state employees , dds disability examiners and other workers may be subject to several types of personnel actions generally intended to reduce costs . a state may furlough some or all of its employees by requiring them to take time off without pay , or may implement a reduction in force ( rif ) in which certain employees are terminated or in which certain positions are eliminated . states may also subject their agencies to hiring freezes or other personnel actions such as pay and overtime reductions . states generally claim that it would be unfair to exempt one specific group of workers , such as dds employees , from statewide furloughs or personnel actions . in addition , because some state positions are funded partially through external sources , identifying which employees should or should not be furloughed could present administrative difficulties and costs .