sec . 601 of this title would direct the u.s. geological survey to conduct a national assessment of helium resources , which are important for a variety of industrial and medical applications , with information on other gases associated with the helium . sec . 602 calls for an assessment and report on known and undiscovered potash deposits in the united states , and would include provisions for a drilling program and an evaluation of assessment methodologies . potash is a general term applied to potassium oxide , potassium carbonate , and a variety of related potassium salts that go into fertilizer and the manufacture of glass . sec . 603 would amend the department of energy organization act ( 42 u.s.c . 7321 ) with the aim of improving national energy planning and strategies . the improved planning process would include input from relevant federal agencies and would examine federal policies that affect energy production , energy efficiency , reduction of air pollution , and the reduction , avoidance , or sequestration of greenhouse gases . this provision would require the national academy of sciences to participate in the planning process and would provide authorization of funding for such studies . sec . 604 acknowledges that international climate change strategies will depend in part on the actions of china and india , and that improved understanding of their actions will benefit strategies undertaken by the united states to help reduce global emissions of greenhouse gases . this section would establish an interagency task force to investigate and analyze national or subnational policies , programs , laws , regulations , incentive mechanisms , and other measures that might reduce energy use and greenhouse gas emissions in china and india . the report would include the current status of , and opportunities and recommendations for , research cooperation and technology deployment and trade , and would be submitted to congress within six months of passage . under sec . 605 , carbon leakage is defined as a substantial increase in greenhouse gas emissions by a manufacturing facility located in a country without a greenhouse gas emission regulation commensurate to a cap - and - trade program , or an increase in emissions caused by an increase in the incremental cost of production in the united states as a result of a domestic cap - and - trade program . this section would require doe , in consultation with other relevant federal agencies , to conduct a study that characterizes the relative risk of such carbon leakage and changes in output and investment in u.s. industrial sectors resulting from the implementation of a cap - and - trade program in the unites states . the study is to include an assessment of price and trade elasticity of u.s. industries , as well as other economic indicators . doe would also be directed to conduct a study evaluating the impact of potential measures that might be implemented to mitigate carbon leakage , including an analysis of measures used by other jurisdictions to reduce carbon leakage , the risk of carbon leakage from u.s. industries under potential prices of greenhouse gas emissions , and scenarios for international climate policy . sec .