in addition to environmental contamination , impacts on humans have been observed . electronics manufacturers are currently driven by various forces to make their products more easily recyclable and with fewer hazardous constituents . any future changes to electronic devices have no impact , however , on the hundreds of millions of devices currently in use or obsolete devices currently in storage . eventually those devices will make their way to the disposal or recycling markets . the high cost of domestic recycling , high demand for exports , and a lack of barriers to export will continue to drive reuse and recycling markets abroad . as stated previously , the current regulatory structure involves no or very limited prohibition on exports and limited options for reuse or recycling ( although , those options will likely increase as e - waste collection increases ) . as long as there are legitimate reuse markets and recycling operations in developing countries , an outright prohibition on exports would be problematic , particularly when limited opportunities for recycling exist in the united states . this presents policy - makers with multiple challenges: principal among them are how to address the obstacles that limit domestic recycling , and how one might establish export controls that facilitate reuse and recycling but prohibit delivery of e - waste to operations that do not protect workers or their environment . multiple studies have documented environmental and health effects of uncontrolled waste processing activities . environmental impacts include contamination of all local environmental media — soil , air , surface water , and ground water . those concerns center largely around the waste's increasing volume and the hazardous constituents , such as lead and mercury , it likely contains ( particularly in older electronic devices ) . increased awareness has encouraged state waste management and water resources agencies to consider the potential impacts to human health and the environment associated with e - waste and has led to increased efforts to divert e - waste from landfill disposal . broadly speaking , discarded e - waste has two potential fates — it may be disposed of ( most likely in a landfill ) or it may be recycled . once the device is in the hands of the recycler , it may be resold and reused "as is" or it may undergo some degree of refurbishing . products that cannot be reused or refurbished are either dismantled or shredded , with the resulting material separated into secondary material streams and at least partially recovered . the resale of electronic devices for reuse or material recovery may occur domestically or abroad . regardless of whether an electronic device is disposed of or recycled , there are virtually no federal environmental regulatory requirements applicable to its management . factors specific to e - waste that affect the lack of regulation are useful in understanding the challenges associated with addressing e - waste management issues . since e - waste recycling is largely unregulated , accurate data regarding the end markets , both domestic and abroad , are not publicly available . therefore , it is difficult to know how much e - waste that is collected for recycling is actually exported for processing .