below are several different options for defining the role of pscs . proponents of this approach argue that in combat zones , the mechanisms for oversight and accountability of contractors are likely to deteriorate and that , therefore , the use of deadly force should be restricted only to the military . the military possesses a more robust chain of command and is focused on achieving the mission , without consideration for profit motives or contractual requirements . opponents of this approach argue that dod simply does not have the forces to accomplish its mission in afghanistan and iraq , and that restricting the use of armed security contractors deprives the military of the flexibility to hire and dismiss defensive security contractors that can be tailored for specific situations in a highly fluid environment . such an approach would permit dod to use armed security contractors in and around the perimeter of a static location and would bar contractors from performing convoy and some personal security . contractors would also be barred from serving as quick reaction forces that move to the site of an engagement to extract or protect an individual or convoy . proponents of this approach argue that most of the high - profile incidents involving armed contractors shooting at local nationals have occurred during convoy or personal security movements outside of the perimeter of a secure location . accordingly , this approach specifically restricts the use of armed contractors only in those situations where there is likely to be a shooting incident that involves civilians . opponents of this approach argue that such a restriction leaves dod with insufficient forces to accomplish its mission in afghanistan and iraq . they also argue that this approach limits the flexibility that allows dod to mobilize and demobilize defensive security forces that can be tailored for specific situations in a highly fluid environment . allowing local national contractors to participate in convoy and personal security would minimize the impact of such a restriction on military forces . proponents argue that reserving an exception for local nationals gives the military more flexibility in using pscs without adding significant risk . as discussed above , using local national contractors is an important element in dod's counterinsurgency strategy . local nationals understand the language and are subject to local jurisdiction . few of the high - profile incidents between pscs and local citizens involved local national security contractors who were working for the u.s. government . opponents of this approach will still argue that such a restriction leaves dod with insufficient forces to accomplish its mission in afghanistan and iraq , and that it limits the flexibility that allows dod to mobilize and demobilize defensive security forces that can be tailored for specific situations in a highly fluid environment . such a restriction could also hamper dod in future military operations , particularly in the early days of a conflict when events are particularly fluid and the need to rapidly deploy security personnel could be acute . to address this last issue , congress could empower a combatant commander to waive this restriction in initial phases of an operation , for a period not to exceed one year .