benefits . financing . waste , fraud , and abuse . payments to territories . demonstrations and pilot programs . miscellaneous . each topic contains a brief summary of existing medicaid law and related background to provide context for the discussion of changes proposed by h.r . medicaid is a means - tested entitlement program operated by states within broad federal guidelines . to qualify , an individual must meet both categorical ( i.e. , must be a member of a covered group such as children , pregnant women , families with dependent children , the elderly , or the disabled ) and financial eligibility requirements . medicaid's financial requirements place limits on the maximum amount of assets and income individuals may possess to participate in medicaid . additional guidelines specify how states should calculate these amounts . the specific asset and income limitations that apply to each eligibility group are set through a combination of federal parameters and state definitions . consequently , these standards vary across states , and different standards apply to different population groups within states . among the provisions that would impact eligibility , the bill would add two new mandatory eligibility groups , and add two new optional eligibility groups . in addition , it would make several modifications to existing eligibility groups , and add provisions to facilitate outreach and enrollment in medicaid , chip , and the health insurance exchange . medicaid benefits are identified in federal statute and regulations and include a wide range of medical care and services . some benefits are specific items , such as eyeglasses and prosthetic devices . other benefits are defined in terms of specific types of providers ( eg , physicians , hospitals ) . still other benefits define specific types of services ( eg , family planning services and supplies , pregnancy - related services ) that may be delivered by any qualified medical provider that participates in medicaid . finally , additional benefits include premium payments for coverage provided through managed care arrangements and medicare premium and cost - sharing support for persons dually eligible for both medicare and medicaid . medicaid's basic benefit rules require all states to provide certain "mandatory" services ( eg , inpatient hospital care , physician services , lab / x - ray services ) . the statute lists additional services that are considered optional ( eg , other licensed practitioners , rehabilitative services , nursing facility services for individuals under age 21 ) - that is , federal matching payments are available for optional services if states choose to include them in their medicaid plans . states define the specific features of each mandatory and optional service to be provided under that plan within broad federal guidelines . 3200 would make a number of changes to benefits under the medicaid program . for example , this bill would add a new mandatory benefit for coverage of certain preventive services . the bill would also add some optional medicaid benefits ( eg , nurse home visitation services ) and clarify the availability of certain existing optional services under current law ( eg , therapeutic foster care services , adult day health care ) .