sec . 399aa authorizes grants for the collection , analysis , and reporting of state epidemiological data on asd and other developmental disabilities , and directs the secretary to establish regional centers of excellence in asd epidemiology . sec . 399bb requires the secretary to establish and evaluate activities to increase public awareness of asd and other developmental disabilities , research and promote early screening , and support evidence - based interventions . the secretary is further directed to provide culturally competent information about asd and other developmental disabilities to meet the needs of individuals with these conditions and their families through federal health , education and welfare programs . sec . 399cc requires the secretary to establish an interagency autism coordinating committee to track asd - related research , monitor federal asd activities , make recommendations to the secretary , and submit an annual asd research plan to congress . sec . 399dd requires the secretary to submit to congress a progress report on activities related to asd and other developmental disabilities , as outlined in the combating autism act of 2006 , no later than four years after its enactment . sec . 399ee authorizes appropriations for the activities authorized under secs . this section would amend title i of the developmental disabilities assistance and bill of rights act by adding at the end a new subtitle f , national training initiative on autism spectrum disorders . within that subtitle , a new sec . 171 would require the secretary , in consultation with the interagency autism coordinating committee , to award training grants to qualifying university centers for excellence in developmental disabilities education , research , and service , or other comparable entities . these grants would be used to ( 1 ) expand and develop interdisciplinary training and continuing education initiatives for parents , health , allied health , vocational , educational , and other professionals for the purpose of improving services provided to children and adults with asd ; and ( 2 ) develop model services and supports that demonstrate evidence - based practices , among other activities . the secretary also would be required to reserve up to 2% of the appropriated funds to make a grant to a qualified national organization for providing training and technical assistance to the university centers for excellence . this organization would assist in the national dissemination of evidence - based best practices from the interdisciplinary training programs ; compile and disseminate technical assistance materials ; assist in the coordination of grantees under this section ; and serve as a research - based resource for policymakers , among other activities . there would be authorized to be appropriated $17 million for fy2011 , and ssan for each of fy2012 through fy2015 to carry out the training grant program . in addition , the section would require the secretary to award grants to establish up to four new university centers for excellence in developmental disabilities education , research , and service . if the house approves h.r . 3590 , it will be sent to the president to be signed into law . the reconciliation measure , if approved by the house , would then be taken up by the senate .