privacy act . section 740 , which prohibits use of funds in contravention of the privacy act and implementing regulations . employee training . section 715 , which prohibits federal training not directly related to the performance of official duties . the house - passed and senate - reported bills , and the law continue the provision at section 715 . non - disclosure agreements . section 716 , which prohibits the expenditure of funds for implementation of agreements in non - disclosure policies unless certain provisions are included . the house - passed and senate - reported bills , and the law continue the provision at section 716 . publicity or propaganda . section 717 , which prohibits other than for normal and recognized executive - legislative relationships , propaganda , publicity and lobbying by executive agency personnel in support or defeat of legislative initiatives . the house - passed and senate - reported bills , and the law continue the provision at section 717 . section 720 , which prohibits the use of funds for propaganda and publicity purposes not authorized by congress . the house - passed and senate - reported bills , and the law continue the provision at section 720 . release of non - public information . section 719 , which prohibits funds to be used to provide non - public information such as mailing or telephone lists to any person or organization outside the government without the approval of the house and senate committees on appropriations . the house - passed and senate - reported bills , and the law continue the provision at section 719 . e - government . section 733 , which concerns transfers or reimbursements for e - government initiatives . the house - passed bill and the law continue the provision at section 733 . the senate - reported bill does not include the provision . midway atoll airfield . section 734 , which provides funds for the midway atoll airfield . the house - passed bill does not include the provision . the senate - reported bill would continue the provision at section 733 . the law continues the provision at section 734 . the house - passed and the senate - reported bills would continue the provision at section 736 and section 738 , respectively . the law continues the provision at section 737 . great lakes restoration . section 742 , which requires omb to submit a report on budget information relating to great lakes restoration activities . the house - passed bill would continue the provision at section 738 . the senate - reported bill does not include the provision . the law continues the provision at section 739 . regulatory policy . section 746 , which prohibits funds from being used to implement the provisions on regulatory policy officers in executive order 13422 . on january 30 , 2009 , president barack obama issued executive order 13497 to revoke executive order 13422 . energy and water efficiency .