tax . this tax proposal failed to gain support in congress , and , as an alternative , an increase in the gasoline tax to 18.4 cents per gallon was passed by congress and signed by president clinton , and took effect in december 1993 . the revenue from the tax increase , 4.3 cents per gallon , was restricted to be allocated to deficit reduction . the latter part of the 1990s was characterized by declining federal deficits as tax revenues rose , as well as low gasoline prices , taking increases in the gasoline tax off the policy agenda . president george w. bush's administration did not propose any increase in the gasoline tax . however , there were calls for a temporary reduction in the tax to help american drivers who paid record high prices for gasoline in the summer of 2008 . the obama administration has opposed an increase in the gasoline tax during the recession . none of these proposals were successfully passed into law by congress . in 1982 , the reagan administration proposed an increase in the federal gasoline tax for the purpose of improving and repairing the nation's highways , based on the user - fee nature of the tax . within the administration , the fact that the tax was likely to create jobs was also considered as a reason for the tax increase , although president reagan did not support government - funded jobs programs , or tax increases . the reagan gasoline tax increase passed in both the house and the senate and was signed into law on january 5 , 1983 . it raised the federal tax from 4 cents per gallon to 9 cents per gallon . a further increase in the gasoline tax was included in the omnibus budget reconciliation act of 1990 , but the rationale for the tax increase was deficit reduction . president george h. w. bush initially opposed the tax increase , but then reversed himself and supported it , and signed the omnibus budget reconciliation act of 1990 into law on november 5 , 1990 , raising the federal gasoline tax to 14.1 cents per gallon . president bill clinton initially supported a broad - based energy tax rather than a gasoline tax . the administration decided to propose a tax on the energy content of fuels , a british thermal unit ( b.t.u. ) however , it has advocated a number of policy objectives — greenhouse gas reduction , energy security , economic stimulus , more fuel efficiency , and moving toward alternative energy sources — that have been discussed in the past as justifications for gasoline tax increases . a number of tax provisions related to highway trust fund financing are scheduled to expire on september 30 , 2011 .