sec . none of the funds appropriated by this act may be used to plan for , begin , continue , finish , process , or approve a public - private competition under the office of management and budget circular a 76 or any successor administrative regulation , directive , or policy for work performed by employees of the bureau of prisons or of federal prison industries , incorporated . these reports are listed in table 1 below . how would the omb circular a - 76 process be any different today if the moratorium were lifted ? in the house armed services committee report on h.r . 4310 , an amendment was offered to remove the moratorium preventing dod from using omb circular a - 76 to conduct public - private competitions . the amendment failed in a roll call vote , 25-36 . 4310 , was introduced on may 17 , 2012 . the amendment would have reintroduced competition by ending the current moratorium on the conduct of circular a - 76 competitions , as described here . the amendment failed in a recorded vote , 209-211 . my amendment will strike the law that prevents the secretary of defense from utilizing private sector competition to provide new products or services . it replaces those restrictions with the ability to competitively bid out for new commercial products or services and select the most cost - effective option . further , it removes criteria that compel the pentagon to insource competitive contracts currently being performed . 5326 , the commerce , justice , science , and related agencies appropriations act for fy2013 , was introduced on may 8 , 2012 , and sought to strike a provision ( section 212 ) which would prohibit the conduct of future circular a - 76 competitions for work performed by employees of the bureau of prisons or of federal prison industries , as described below . the amendment failed to pass , 199-211 . to what degree have the problems that led to the moratorium been resolved ? the moratorium on the conduct of a - 76 competitions cannot be lifted until all of these reports have been completed . some others in congress view the current moratorium as an unnecessary restraint on achieving further efficiencies and cost - savings . while the issue of continuing or suspending the moratorium is in debate , questions will likely continue to be raised as to whether the federal government should continue to invest time and resources in conducting future a - 76 competitions . some potential oversight issues may include the following: the dod moratorium was imposed , in part , because of gao and dod inspector general reports which concluded that dod components were unable to demonstrate that a - 76 competitions consistently resulted in savings to the government . some reports questioned whether there was complete and reliable cost data related to the conduct of a - 76 competitions that make it possible to determine the overall savings to dod . some reports stated that if savings could not be satisfactorily demonstrated , perhaps a - 76 competitions should not resume .