appendix a . classes of noncitizens and their eligibility to obtain social security numbers , to qualify as a resident alien , and to receive medicaid appendix b. deeming and sponsorship for lprs ( but not refugees and asylees ) , the law links the income of the person who sponsored the alien to immigrate to the united states with the immigrant's income calculations when determining eligibility for most federal benefits . the basis of this policy is that the immigration and nationality act excludes immigrants who appear "likely at any time to become a public charge. this exclusion is implemented by provisions on deeming sponsors' income and binding affidavits of support . how is immigration and citizenship status verified ? this report builds on a set of crs reports that analyze the tax obligations of noncitizens , noncitizen eligibility for federal benefits , trends in noncitizen poverty levels , and noncitizen health insurance coverage and use of select safety net providers . among other features , the major health care reform bills have elements based upon employer - provided health insurance , federal means - tested health care , individually obtained health coverage , and premium subsidies or cost sharing credits for low - and moderate - income people . how is immigration and citizenship status verified ? this section of the report addresses these questions in light of the policy implications of the proposals and summarizes the germane legislative provisions . addressing the policy questions of coverage , eligibility , and verification that arise directly from the nexus of immigration policy and health care reform is both complicated and controversial . in addition to these first - order policy questions , second - order questions come to mind . for example , if unauthorized aliens are exempted from the mandate to purchase health insurance , will they be potentially able to underbid their u.s. counterparts in the labor market , particularly among private contractors and the self - employed ? will health care providers be less likely to provide medical treatment to uninsured people whom they presume are likely to be unauthorized aliens ? will citizen children in mixed - status families be negatively affected in the premium subsidy calculations if their unauthorized parent is ineligible ? should the "five - year bar" on federal means - tested benefits include the premium subsidies for low - and moderate - income lprs who would be otherwise eligible during their first five years in the united states ? should u.s. residents who sponsor immigrants to the united states be required to assume some financial responsibility for the health insurance coverage of newly arriving lprs ? these are among the vexing questions that might arise in subsequent debates . not all prospective lprs are required to have affidavits of support to demonstrate that they will not become a public charge , and most exceptions are statutory ( eg , refugees or employment - based lprs ) . the affidavit of support is a legally binding contract that requires the sponsor to ensure that the new immigrant will not become a public charge and to make the sponsor financially responsible for the new immigrant , as codified in ยง213a of the immigration and nationality act ( ina ) .