this was born out in practice in the 111 th congress . ; the concurrent resolution ( h.con.res . ; and the simple resolution ( h.res . generally speaking , bills and joint resolutions can become law , but simple and concurrent resolutions cannot ; they are used instead for internal organizational or procedural matters , or to express the sentiment of one or both chambers . in the 111 th congress , 1,946 pieces of legislation received floor action in the house of representatives . of these , 885 were bills or joint resolutions and 1,061 were simple or concurrent resolutions , a breakdown between lawmaking and non - lawmaking legislative forms of approximately 45% to 55% , respectively . of the 1,946 measures receiving house floor action in the 111 th congress , 1,796 originated in the house and 150 originated in the senate . it is generally accepted that the house considers more legislation sponsored by majority party members than measures introduced by minority party members . as is reflected in table 1 , 76% of all measures receiving initial house floor action in the last congress were sponsored by members of the democratic party , which had a majority of seats in the house . when only lawmaking forms of legislation are considered , 81% of measures receiving house floor action in the 111 th congress were sponsored by democrats , 19% by republicans , and 1% by political independents . the ratio of majority to minority party sponsorship of measures receiving initial house floor action in the 111 th congress varied widely based on the parliamentary procedure used to raise the legislation on the house floor . as is noted in table 2 , 73% of the measures considered under the suspension of the rules procedure were sponsored by democrats , 27% by republicans , and less than 1% by political independents . that measures introduced by members of both parties were considered under suspension is unsurprising in that ( as is discussed below ) suspension of the rules is the parliamentary procedure which the house generally uses to process non - controversial measures for which there is wide bipartisan support . additionally , passage of a measure under the suspension of the rules procedure requires the votes of at least some minority party members . the ratio of party sponsorship on measures initially brought to the floor under a terms of a special rule reported by the house committee on rules and adopted by the house was far wider . of the 103 measures crs identified as being initially brought to the floor under the terms of a special rule in the 111 th congress , all were sponsored by majority party members . a special rule is a simple resolution that regulates the house's consideration of legislation identified in the resolution . the breakdown in party sponsorship on measures initially raised on the house floor by unanimous consent was uneven , with majority party members sponsoring three - quarters of the measures brought up in this manner . in the 111 th congress , no measures were brought to the floor via the call of the private calendar .