state wibs coordinate workforce services for a state . as part of their oversight of these services , the state wib creates a five - year state plan that addresses several items related to employment and training needs and activities , as well as performance and accountability . state wibs distribute youth activities funds to local wibs , which oversee workforce services in a particular area of a state . among other activities , each local board must establish what is known as a "youth council," comprised of representatives that assist the wib in awarding grants or contracts to providers that carry out youth workforce activities . the work readiness indicator measures the number of work readiness skills goals attained by youth divided by the number of work readiness skills goals set overall . this next section of the report discusses dol guidance for implementing the summer youth employment component , as funded by arra . this discussion is followed by an overview of efforts to monitor the implementation and performance of the program by both dol and the government accountability office ( gao ) . wia is silent on the types of entities that may be contracted to provide services for youth . however , local wibs tend to award grants or contracts to a number of entities , including secondary schools , colleges or universities , and community organizations to carry out a local youth program for each local area overseen by a wib . workforce programs carried out by local wibs must provide 10 activities or "elements" to youth . the elements pertain to summer employment , educational achievement , employment services , leadership development activities , additional support for youth services , and follow - up services for 12 months . third , policymakers may consider , as part of any efforts to reauthorize wia , whether the law should place greater emphasis on summer employment . 111-16 ) stated the conferees are particularly interested in [wia youth] funds being used to create summer employment opportunities for youth and language applying the work readiness performance indicator to such summer jobs is included as an appropriate measure for those activities . the 10 program elements are summarized in table a - 2 of appendix a . local wibs have the option of also providing "other elements and strategies as appropriate to the needs and goals of the participants. separately , a one - stop system is established by a local wib to coordinate employment and training services for adult job seekers , dislocated workers , and youth . approximately 20 federal programs must provide services through the one - stop system , either by co - location , electronic linkages , or referrals . the local youth program is a required partner , and must use a portion of its funds to create and maintain the one - stop delivery system . the local program enters into a memorandum of understanding with the local wib relating to the operation of the one - stop , among other requirements . congress encouraged that funds appropriated under arra be made available specifically for summer youth employment opportunities , as well as year - round activities for older youth .