in its analysis of h.r . 2454 , epa presents four pages of bullets identifying various limitations on its modeling exercise and four pages of additional "qualitative" considerations . this is a good indicator of the modeling complexity in attempting to estimate the impact of a greenhouse gas reduction bill . these modeling limitations reflect the inherent complexity of such strategies that cannot be quantified or predicted . because of the economic and regulatory complexities and interactions noted above , analysts have generally chosen to focus on estimating the macro - economic effects of proposals , such as gdp impacts . they are presented below in no particular order . e nvironmental p rotection a gency : a comprehensive analysis has been conducted by the u.s. environmental protection agency ( epa ) . the report is entitled: epa analysis of the american clean e nergy and security act of 2009: h.r . 2454 in the 111 th congress ( june 23 , 2009 ) . beyond a "core" analysis of h.r . 2454 , the report employs a suite of models and reference cases , along with some useful sensitivity analyses . this report will focus on cases from three of the models . the first model is adage: a computable general equilibrium ( cge ) model developed by rti international . the "core" analysis case employing the adage model is designated epa / adage . the second model is igem: a cge model developed by dale jorgenson associates . the "core" analysis case employing the igem model is designated epa / igem . the third model is ipm: a dynamic , deterministic linear programming model of the u.s. electric power sector developed by icf resources . the case employing the ipm model is designated epa / ipm in this report . e nergy i nformation a dministration : a second comprehensive analysis has been conducted by the energy information administration ( eia ) . the report is entitled energy market and economic impacts of h.r . 2454 , the american clean energy and security act of 2009 ( august 4 , 2009 ) . the analysis employs eia's nems model: a macroeconomic forecasting model with extensive energy technology detail . in addition to conducting a "basic case" analysis of h.r . 2454 using its updated 200 9 annual energy outlook ( aeo ) reference , eia also conducts some useful sensitivity analyses that focus on the upside risk of decreased offset supply ( and thus , increased allowance prices ) under h.r . the basic case h.r . 2454 analysis is designated eia / nems in this report . n ational b lack c hamber of c ommerce : a third analysis has been conducted for the national black chamber of commerce by charles river associates ( cra ) international . the report is entitled impact on the economy of the american clean energy and security act of 2009 ( h.r . 2454 ) ( may 2009 ) . the analysis employs cra's mrn - neem macroeconomic model with extensive electric power sector detail . cra conducted three scenarios: reference , high , and low . the "reference" scenario analysis is designated nbcc / cra .