sec . 799 ( f ) requires each applicant for a health professions education grant under title vii ( except any scholarship or loan program ) to submit to a peer review group for an evaluation of the merits of the proposals made in the application . the senate help bill includes the following four sections that would address pain research , education , and awareness for the purposes of recognizing pain as a national public health problem . section 411 ( c ) ( 4 ) of the black lung benefits act provides for a rebuttable presumption of eligibility for black lung benefits for a miner and his or her survivors in the case of a miner who had worked in underground coal mines for at least 15 years , had a negative chest roentgenogram , and had other evidence of a totally disabling respiratory or pulmonary impairment . section 422 ( l ) of the black lung benefits act provides that the survivors of a miner who was eligible for part c black lung benefits at the time of his or her death are not required to submit a new claim in order to receive survivors benefits . neither of these provisions applies to claims filed on or after january 1 , 1982 . sec . 174 of the bill would apply these provisions to claims under part b or c of the black lung benefits act filed after january 1 , 2005 and that are pending on or after the date of enactment of the proposed law . this section would require the secretary to publish , on the hhs website , a list of all the authorities provided to the secretary under the proposed law no later than 30 days after enactment . this section would prohibit any provisions in the proposed law ( or an amendment made by this proposed law ) from being carried out in a manner that threatens the solvency of either the medicare or social security programs . this section would prohibit the federal government , and any state or local government or health care provider that receives federal financial assistance under this proposed law ( or under an amendment made by this proposed law ) or any health plan created under this proposed law ( or under an amendment made by this proposed law ) , from subjecting an individual or institutional health care entity to discrimination on the basis that the entity does not provide any health care item or service furnished for the purpose of causing , or assisting in causing , the death of any individuals , such as by assisted suicide , euthanasia , or mercy killing .