appendix a . chronology of nais's development early u.s. history use of animal id in the united states dates back at least to the 1800s , when hot iron brands were used throughout the u.s. west to identify ownership and prevent thievery . 1940s during the 1940s , the aphis predecessor at usda initiated an extensive program to identify cattle vaccinated for brucellosis . the official brucellosis vaccination tag and ear tattoo provided usda with a highly successful animal id program for cattle for decades . however , since brucellosis has neared eradication in the united states , the system of tagging and id has been phased out . 1950s - 1980s individuals associated with animal industries recognized that finding potentially sick or exposed animals early in a disease outbreak was essential to containing the disease quickly . usda slowly began piecing together plans for a national animal identification system . 1986-1988 bovine spongiform encephalopathy ( bse ) or "mad cow disease" — a fatal neurological disease — is first identified in the united kingdom's cattle and dairy herds . bse is believed to be transmitted mainly by feeding infected cattle parts back to cattle ( a practice widespread in the uk at the time ) . subsequent testing found bse to be widespread in the uk's cattle population and resulted in the slaughter of 3.7 million cattle . 1997 an outbreak of foot and mouth disease ( fmd ) in swine in taiwan cost $6.9 billion in losses and eradication costs , including the slaughter of 3.8 million pigs , and decimated its previously strong pork export market . similarly , a major outbreak of classical swine fever in the netherlands resulted in the destruction of 12 million hogs and direct economic losses totaling $2.3 billion . 2001 an outbreak of fmd in cattle in the united kingdom ultimately led to the forced slaughter of over 10 million sheep and cattle and cost an estimated $7.9 billion in losses and eradication costs . 2002 aphis officials working with the national institute for animal agriculture , the u.s . animal health association , and other organizations helped to draft an early version of an animal id plan . 2003 the preliminary work plan was expanded by a group of approximately 100 state , federal , and industry representatives — the national identification development team — which produced an initial draft of the u.s . animal identification plan ( usaip ) . december 2003 a draft "u.s . animal identification plan ( usaip ) " is published calling for recording the movement of individual animals or animal groups in a central database . aphis's role was to design an id numbering system , then allocate numbers to premises ( eg , farms , feedlots , auction barns , processing plants ) and to animals or groups of animals . finally , aphis was to coordinate the data collection . the work plan envisioned by the usaip had first called for all states to have an animal premises id system by july 2004 , with farm animals of all major species identified by july 2006 .