other options also exist . the house committee on rules , as the panel with jurisdiction over chamber rules , might examine whether resolutions of inquiry , as a mechanism rooted in the earliest days of congress , should continue to enjoy privileged parliamentary status considering advances in information technology , including the development of oversight tools available to members in recent decades . the house oversight and government reform committee , which has special duties under house rule x to report committee oversight plans to the house along with any recommendations to promote "more effective and coordinated oversight," might also consider examining the use of such resolutions as oversight tools . whether policymakers ultimately determine that changes in the use of resolutions of inquiry are warranted or not , such an examination might arguably give all members of the house a better understanding of the resolution's use in the ongoing oversight relationship between the legislative and executive branches of government . lawmakers might do so in a number of ways . committees , for example , might direct the agencies they oversee to formally catalogue and submit to them what response , if any , they have made to recently introduced resolutions of inquiry . committees might be encouraged to report this information to the house in the activities report they are already required to submit to the house each congress under clause 1 ( d ) ( 1 ) of rule xi , or by some other mechanism . executive branch communications to the house in response to a resolution of inquiry might be designated as such in the congressional record , or noted in a special category when received by the clerk of the house , so that the cause and effect ( or lack thereof ) of such resolutions might become clearer . policymakers might also consider standardizing the procedures house committees use to handle resolutions of inquiry , for example , by requiring them to transmit the resolution to the executive branch within a stated time frame with a letter from the chairman formally requesting executive comment on the resolution . such resolutions may not seek opinions or require an investigation and are traditionally framed as "requesting" the president or "directing" the head of a cabinet - level agency to respond . as is the case with other types of privileged business , committee reports accompanying resolutions of inquiry are presented from the floor , rather than submitted through the hopper . if the house chooses to consider a resolution of inquiry , it is considered under the one - hour rule . when raised , such resolutions may be agreed to , rejected , or tabled by majority vote . in prior eras it was common for the majority party member managing a resolution of inquiry on the house floor to quickly move to table it , either because he or she opposes its provisions , or because the request has been rendered moot by the executive branch having provided some or all of the requested information . finally , but importantly , as simple resolutions , resolutions of inquiry have no legal force .