title i defines a "qualified individual with a disability. any disclosures of medical information by an employee must be kept confidential . for an ada employment - related issue , if the threshold issues of meeting the definition of an individual with a disability and involving an employer employing over 15 individuals are met , the next step is to determine whether the individual is a qualified individual with a disability who , with or without reasonable accommodation , can perform the essential functions of the job . such an individual is "an individual with a disability who , with or without reasonable accommodation , can perform the essential functions of the employment position that such person holds or desires. the eeoc states that a function may be essential because ( 1 ) the position exists to perform the duty , ( 2 ) there are a limited number of employees available who could perform the function , or ( 3 ) the function is highly specialized . it is a defense to a charge of discrimination that an alleged application of a qualification standard has been shown to be job - related and consistent with business necessity . a qualification standard may include a requirement that an individual not pose a direct threat to the health or safety of other individuals . "direct threat" is defined as meaning "a significant risk to the health or safety of others that cannot be eliminated by reasonable accommodation. eeoc states that the severity of the illness is the determinate of whether pandemic influenza rises to the level of a direct threat , and that this determination is to be based on assessments by cdc or public health authorities . currently , the h1n1 influenza virus is not seen as posing such a threat . the ada requires the provision of reasonable accommodation unless the accommodation would pose an undue hardship on the operation of the business . "reasonable accommodation" is defined in the ada as including making existing facilities readily accessible to and usable by individuals with disabilities , job restructuring , part - time or modified work schedules , reassignment to vacant positions , acquisition or modification of equipment or devices , adjustment of examinations or training materials or policies , provision of qualified readers or interpreters , and other similar accommodations . the eeoc interprets reasonable accommodation as including work at home and the use of paid or unpaid leave . during a pandemic , reasonable accommodations must continue to be provided unless these constitute an undue hardship . for example , if employees are asked to telework to reduce the spread of the virus , an employee with a disability who needs an accommodation at work , such as a screen - reader , must be provided that same accommodation during telework , barring undue hardship . "undue hardship" is defined as "an action requiring significant difficulty or expense. factors to be considered in determining whether an action would create an undue hardship include the nature and cost of the accommodation , the overall financial resources of the facility , the overall financial resources of the covered entity , and the type of operation or operations of the covered entity .