this appears to be counterintuitive . the probability of having an outstanding dc plan loan decreased for heads of households who finished college or had graduate school educations compared with households that had not completed college . heads of households with a college degree had a 2.3% lower probability of having an outstanding loan compared with household heads that did not have a college degree . the probability of having an outstanding loan decreased an additional 1.6% for households that had graduate degrees compared with those household heads with undergraduate degrees . two explanations are possible: ( 1 ) household wealth increases with the education of a household and wealthier households have more resources available for meeting expenses , or ( 2 ) households with more education may have higher levels of financial education which may make them more aware of the risks of borrowing from their dc plans . household heads that had a savings horizon longer than 10 years had a 2.2% lower probability of having an outstanding loan compared with household heads with shorter savings horizons . although households in which the head is non - white have a greater percentage of loans outstanding compared with households in which the head is white , differences in race do not appear to be a statistically significant factor explaining the characteristics of households with outstanding dc plan loans . factors such as education or the amount of retirement assets had stronger relationships with the dependent variable . finally , the probability of having an outstanding loan was 3.9% lower for households that had an ira compared with those that did not have an ira . possible explanations include ( 1 ) households with iras may prefer to make withdrawals from their iras rather than borrowing from a dc plan ; ( 2 ) households with iras may be more disciplined savers and therefore may be less inclined to endanger their long - term savings goals ; or ( 3 ) households with iras are wealthier and have more sources of credit available to them . congress faces several competing factors in assessing policy with regards to allowing access to assets in dc plans . congress , in providing tax - advantaged retirement accounts , is encouraging households to save for retirement in order to supplement other sources of retirement income such as social security , employer provided db plans , and private savings . the decline in db plan coverage means that households will need to rely more on their own savings . allowing access to dc plan funds can both further and hinder that goal . allowing access can further that goal if allowing borrowing encourages participation or higher participant contributions . younger households might be less inclined to participate in dc plans that do not allow access to the funds until retirement because retirement may seem like a distant goal 30 or more years in the future . altering the statutory loan maximum from the lesser of $50,000 or 50% of non - forfeitable assets would likely not have an impact on dc plan loans .