, his or her tax dollars ) . the court explained that taxpayers challenging government actions related to the establishment clause would meet its two - part test for standing under flast . in contrast , the taxpayers in hein were not challenging "any specific congressional action or appropriation ; nor [were they asking] the court to invalidate any congressional enactment or legislatively created program as unconstitutional. rather , the expenditures challenged in hein were "general appropriations to the executive branch to fund its day - to - day activities" and "resulted from executive discretion , not congressional action. the hein plurality opinion emphasized the court's history of interpreting taxpayer standing narrowly and its strict requirement that some "logical nexus" exist between the taxpayers and the action being challenged . the opinion noted that the court previously had recognized taxpayer standing to challenge expenditures administered by executive officials . however , it distinguished that decision because it "involved a program of disbursement of funds pursuant to congress' taxing and spending powers that congress had created , authorized , and mandated. in hein , the taxpayers had not challenged a specific statute as a violation of the establishment clause and thus failed the flast standing requirements . the court held that the expenditures by the executive branch alleged to violate the establishment clause could be treated differently than legislative actions . iii jurisdiction does not impair the right to assert [one's] views in the political forum or at the polls. however , the ability of individuals to effect change through political and democratic means does not eliminate all cases where a large group of individuals would be affected by the challenged governmental action . in particular , the court has specifically allowed taxpayer standing for claims arising under the establishment clause . under the flast exception to the general prohibition on taxpayer standing , taxpayers may raise challenges of actions exceeding specific constitutional limitations ( such as the establishment clause ) taken by congress under article i's taxing and spending clause . the court has maintained its narrow interpretation of this exception , refusing to extend it to permit taxpayer lawsuits challenging executive actions or taxpayer lawsuits challenging actions taken under powers other than taxing and spending . these exceptions , the court has explained , result because the establishment clause is a constitutional limit on the government's ability to act . according to the court , the framers of the constitution feared abuse of governmental power that might result in favoring one religion over another . it is difficult to imagine circumstances in which potential abuses of the establishment clause could be enforced without this exception . although the court in frothingham held that taxpayers generally could not challenge the constitutionality of federal statutes , the court later lowered the barrier to taxpayer standing for such lawsuits . in 1968 , a group of taxpayers challenged the constitutionality of funding dispersed under the elementary and secondary education act of 1965 . the lawsuit , known as flast v. cohen , alleged that federal funds were being used to support education in religious schools in violation of the first amendment .