in recent years , however , these issues have not been the subject of much debate . certain questions do occasionally rise to command some degree of public attention , including speculation on the applicability of the twenty - second amendment to presidents who have been elected twice , or proposals for constitutional changes that would repeal the amendment or establish a single six - year presidential and vice presidential term . by design , however , constitutional amendments must pass a number of demanding tests before they can be incorporated in the nation's fundamental charter . those few of the many hundreds of amendments proposed that were successful arguably owe their success to one or more of the following developments: they incorporate a reform that has been considered and debated over a period of time , and has gradually gained the approval of a contemporaneous majority of the public that includes a wide range of social , cultural , and political support from diverse elements around the nation . they have been viewed as a remedy to a sudden and traumatic event in the nation's life that requires a swift and definitive solution . the issue of the president and vice president's term of office is generally regarded as an accepted constitutional norm that arouses little controversy in the 21 st century . both the four - year term and the venerable two - term tradition , initiated by george washington and ultimately incorporated in the constitution in 1951 by the twenty - second amendment , appear to be fixed elements in the nation's political landscape . in marked comparison , the issues of tenure and reelection of the president , and of the vice president ( an office added almost as an afterthought during the constitutional convention of 1787 ) , were the subject of intense and prolonged debate during the philadelphia gathering . delegates argued for three months over the length of the presidential term and whether the chief executive should be eligible for reelection before reaching a compromise package of provisions — a four - year term , and eligibility for reelection — several days before the convention adjourned . since that time , a wide range of changes to these conditions has been proposed as constitutional amendments , but relatively few conditions have been added to the original provisions governing the president's term of office . in addition to the twenty - second amendment cited above , the twelfth , ratified in 1804 , set the same qualifications for the vice president ; the twentieth , ratified in 1933 , set january 20 of every year following a presidential election as the date on which the chief executive's term begins ; and the twenty - fifth amendment clarified the question of vice - presidential succession to the presidency and authorized the president to nominate persons to fill vacancies in the vice presidency , subject to approval by vote of both houses of congress . proposals for a single term were popular in the 19 th century , and for several decades before the civil war , the concept of a voluntary limit of one presidential term in office drew wide support .