pole fences . wire fences if fitted with visibility markers where high potential for collisions has been documented . what activities are affected by the sgeo ? any anthropogenic development activity or wildfire event that results in removal of sagebrush vegetation or loss of sage - grouse habitat is considered surface disturbance in the ddct calculation . surface disturbance includes , but is not limited to , roads , well pads , mining operations , agricultural fields , buildings , some vegetation treatments , wind turbines , power lines , pipelines , or other oil and gas infrastructure . some linear features are considered exempt from ddct calculations . is there a de minimis exemption ? activities that are designated as de minimis , and exempted from the plan's requirements , include the following: 1 . existing animal husbandry practices ( including branding , docking , herding , trailing , etc. ) existing farming practices ( excluding conversion of sagebrush / grassland to agricultural lands ) . existing grazing operations that utilize recognized rangeland management practices ( allotment management plans , natural resource conservation service grazing plans , prescribed grazing plans , etc. ) construction of agricultural reservoirs and aquatic habitat improvements less than 10 surface acres and drilling of agriculture and residential water wells ( including installation of tanks , water windmills and solar water pumps ) more than 0.6 miles from the perimeter of the lek . within 0.6 miles from leks , no review is required if construction does not occur march 15 to june 30 and construction does not occur on the lek . all water tanks shall have escape ramps . any terrestrial habitat improvements < 10 acres will require compliance with the sgeo . agricultural and residential electrical distribution lines more than 0.6 miles from leks . within 0.6 miles from leks no review is required if construction does not occur march 15 to june 30 and construction does not occur on the lek . raptor perching deterrents shall be installed on all poles within 0.6 miles from leks . agricultural water pipelines if construction activities are more than 0.6 miles from leks . within 0.6 miles from leks no review is required if construction does not occur march 15 to june 30 and construction is reclaimed . irrigation ( excluding the conversion of sagebrush / grassland to new irrigated lands ) . spring development if the spring is protected with fencing and enough water remains at the site to provide mesic ( wet ) vegetation . herbicide use within existing road , pipeline , and power line rights - of - way . herbicide application using spot treatment . grasshopper / mormon cricket control following reduced agent - area treatments protocol . existing county road maintenance . cultural resource pedestrian surveys . emergency response . what are the core population areas , as defined by the 2011 sgeo , and how do they differ from areas mapped in 2008 ? a map of the core population areas is shown below , with comparison of the 2008 core areas ( version 2 ) , and the more recent 2011 areas ( version 3 ) . what are the stipulations on activities regarding sage grouse ?