additionally , h.r . 2454 would require state regulatory authorities and self - regulating power suppliers ( such as municipal utilities ) to consider implementing standards intended to ensure that utility smart grid systems would be compatible with plug - in electric drive vehicles . these provisions are briefly summarized below . for more detail see crs report r40643 , greenhouse gas legislation: summary and analysis of h.r . 2454 as passed by the house of representatives , coordinated by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] . subtitle f of title i of h.r . these reports are available in the climate change section of the crs website , located at http: / / crs.gov / pages / subissue.aspx ? the remainder of this report is divided into the following sections: electric power and natural gas technologies . electric power transmission and related technologie . 2454 contains several provisions relating to electric power transmission that have no counterparts in s. 1733 . 2454 deals with transmission planning and permitting . the subtitle provides for the following in respect to transmission planning: establishes a national transmission planning policy , which states that transmission planning "should facilitate the deployment of renewable and other zero - carbon and low - carbon energy sources for generating electricity to reduce greenhouse gas emissions while ensuring reliability , reducing congestion , ensuring cyber - security , minimizing environmental harm , and providing for cost - effective electricity services throughout the united states…. directs the federal energy regulatory commission to define electric transmission planning principles , based on the national policy , which can be used by planning entities . ferc is to facilitate coordination between state , regional , and industry transmission planning entities . in respect to permitting , the bill grants ferc new federal siting and permitting authority within the western interconnection . this authority to supersede state permitting decisions applies only to proposed transmission projects that meet certain criteria , including interstate projects "identified as needed in significant measure to meet demand for renewable energy. 2454 includes several provisions aimed at supporting development and installation of smart grid technologies ( see title i , subtitle e ) . the bill would direct the department of energy and environmental protection agency to identify products that could be cost - effectively equipped with smart grid capability . the legislation would also direct the federal trade commission to initiate a rulemaking to determine whether smart grid information , such as potential dollar savings to the consumer , should be added to energy guide product labels . ( energy guide is an existing federal program for labeling energy efficient products. ) the legislation would establish requirements for electric power retailers to reduce their peak loads using smart grid and other energy efficient technologies ; and would modify an energy efficiency public information program authorized by the energy policy act of 2005 ( epact05 ) to make it into a smart grid and energy efficiency information program . 2454 would also modify an epact05 energy efficiency appliance rebate program to add appliances with smart grid capabilities . section 152 of subtitle f of h.r . 2454 provides for net metering of federal agencies . net metering is a ratemaking concept intended to encourage the development of "distributed generation" ( i.e.