other provisions abortion . medical malpractice . end - of - life care . americans obtain health insurance in different settings and through a variety of methods . people may get health coverage in the private sector or through a publicly funded program , such as medicare or medicaid . in 2008 , 60% of the u.s. population had employment - based health insurance . employers choosing to offer health coverage may either purchase insurance or choose to self - fund health benefits for their employees . other individuals obtained coverage on their own in the nongroup market . however , there is no federal law that either requires individuals to have health insurance or requires employers to offer health insurance . approximately 46 million americans were estimated to be uninsured in 2008 . individuals and employers choosing to purchase health insurance in the private market fit into one of the three segments of the market , depending on their situation — the large group ( large employer ) market , the small group market , and the nongroup market . more than 95% of large employers offer coverage . large employers are generally able to obtain lower premiums for a given health insurance package than small employers and individuals seeking nongroup coverage . this is partly because larger employers enjoy economies of scale and a larger "risk pool" of enrollees , which makes the expected costs of care more predictable . employers generally offer large subsidies toward health insurance , thus making it more attractive for both the healthier and the sicker workers to enter the pool . so , not only is the risk pool larger in size , but it is more diverse . the secretary would establish a temporary reinsurance program to assist participating employment - based plans with the cost of providing health benefits to retirees and to eligible spouses , surviving spouses and dependents of such retirees . the house bill includes a number of provisions to raise revenues to pay for expanded health insurance coverage . some of these provisions are directly related to current health insurance coverage . these provisions limit employer deductions for certain health insurance plans and modify tax - advantaged accounts currently used for health care spending and coverage . they are discussed in greater detail in this section . table 4 identifies these provisions , their effective date , and recent estimates by the joint committee on taxation ( jct ) of the how much revenue each raise over a 10-year period . those provisions not directly relating to health insurance will not be discussed in this section . under current law , employers providing prescription drug coverage to retirees that meet federal standards are eligible for subsidy payments from the federal government . these qualified retiree prescription drug plan subsidies are excludible from the employer's gross income for the purposes of regular income tax and alternative minimum tax calculations . the employer is also allowed to claim a business deduction for retiree prescription drug expenses even though they also receive the federal subsidy to cover a portion of those expenses . 3962 would require employers to coordinate the subsidy and the deduction for retiree prescription drug coverage .