that is how the size standards have been set. representative tim lee carter , the subcommittee's ranking minority member , stated that "it seems to me that we may be fast growing into just a regular bank forum not just to small business but to all business. at that time , approximately 99% of all firms with employees were classified by the sba as a small business . roger rosenberger , sba's associate administrator for policy , planning and budgeting , testified at the hearing that the sba would undertake a comprehensive economic analysis of industry data to determine if its size standards should be changed . however , he also defended the validity of the sba's size standards , arguing that the task of setting size standards was a complicated and difficult one because of "how market structure and size distribution of firms vary from industry to industry. he testified that some industries are dominated by a few large firms , some are comprised almost entirely of small businesses , and others "can be referred to as a mixed industry. he argued that each market structure presents unique challenges for defining small businesses within that industry group . it also discusses p.l . 111-240 , the small business jobs act of 2010 , which authorized the sba to establish an alternative size standard using maximum tangible net worth and average net income after federal taxes for both the 7 ( a ) and 504 / cdc loan guaranty programs ; established , until the sba acted , an interim alternative size standard for the 7 ( a ) and 504 / cdc programs of not more than $15 million in tangible net worth and not more than $5 million in average net income after federal taxes ( excluding any carry - over losses ) for the two full fiscal years before the date of the application ; and required the sba to conduct a detailed review of not less than one - third of the sba's industry size standards every 18 months beginning on the new law's date of enactment ( september 27 , 2010 ) and ensure that each size standard is reviewed at least once every five years . 112-239 , the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2013 , which directs the sba not to limit the number of size standards and to assign the appropriate size standard to each naics industrial classification . over the subsequent decade , the sba reviewed the size standards for some industries on a piecemeal basis and , in 1994 , adjusted for inflation its size standards based on firm's annual sales or receipts ( an upward adjustment of 48.2% ) . the sba estimated that the adjustment would restore eligibility to approximately 20,000 firms that lost small - business status due solely to the effects of inflation . in 2002 , the sba adjusted for inflation its annual sales and receipts based size standards for the fourth time ( an upward adjustment of 15.8% ) . the sba estimated that the adjustment would restore eligibility to approximately 8,760 firms that lost small - business status due solely to the effects of inflation .