113-79 , title vii ) . studies consistently report high social rates of return ( 20% - 60% annually ) from public agricultural research . it is widely acknowledged that new innovations and technologies related to production , processing , marketing , and natural resource management are essential for continued productivity gains and economic growth of the sector . some of these same critics argue that usda has not been successful at elevating agricultural research to the same priority level with policymakers as other sectors , such as health , and that u.s. agriculture will suffer over the long term because of a lack of new innovations . these critics argue that the lack of public investment in new agricultural innovations will have dire consequences in the future , especially given new and varied challenges , such as rising production costs , especially for fuel and inputs ; new pest and disease outbreaks ; increasing frequency of extreme weather events , such as droughts and floods ; and climate change . on the other hand , some argue that the federal government should have a limited role in funding agricultural research and that taxpayer dollars should not be used to support what should be a private sector endeavor . in addition , due to a severely constrained federal budget in recent years , limited resources are available to support the agricultural sector . historically , congress has not prioritized increasing funding for agricultural research , education , and extension activities , and instead has tended to fund programs designed to provide more immediate benefits to farmers , such as income support and crop insurance . others believe that the states and the private sector should fill the research funding gap left by the federal government . at the same time , while private sector funding has increased over time to fill some of the gap in public spending , there is growing concern that private sector funding focuses primarily on taking existing technologies to market ( i.e. , more applied research ) and does not focus on basic problems and / or longer - term challenges that the agricultural sector may face in the future , such as environmental sustainability or adaptation to climate variability . some advocates have argued that some of usda's agricultural research portfolio duplicates private sector activities on major crops , including corn , soybeans , wheat , and cotton . they argue that funding should be reallocated to basic , noncommercial research to benefit the public good that is not addressed through private efforts . others point out that these crops are economically important to the food , feed , and energy sectors and should continue to receive significant amounts of public funding , especially for emerging threats , such as new pests and pathogens , limited water availability , and impacts of agriculture on human and environmental health . the mission area is composed of four agencies with the federal responsibility to advance scientific knowledge for agriculture . activities include the biological , physical , and social sciences related broadly to agriculture , food , and natural resources , delivered through research , statistics , extension , and higher education ( table 1 ) .