three justices dissented to the dismissal of the writ . justice stephen breyer , writing for himself , justice john paul stevens , and justice david souter , opined that "those who engage in medical research , who practice medicine , and who as patients depend upon proper health care , might well benefit from this court's authoritative answer. justice breyer explained that he would have held the patent invalid because "[t]here can be little doubt that the correlation between homocysteine and vitamin deficiency ... is a 'natural phenomenon'" that is not patentable . furthermore , justice breyer offered insight into his views regarding the legal correctness of the federal circuit's state street bank decision . justice breyer expressly criticized the state street bank ruling that relied on the "useful , concrete and tangible result" test first articulated by in re alappat : neither does the federal circuit's decision in state street bank help respondents . that case does say that a process is patentable if it produces a "'useful , concrete and tangible result. but this court has never made such a statement and , if taken literally , the statement would cover instances where this court has held the contrary . in a 2006 opinion involving a business method patent , ebay , inc. v. mercexchange , justice kennedy wrote a concurrence , joined by justices stevens , souter , and breyer , in which he criticized the "potential vagueness and suspect validity" of "the burgeoning number of patents over business methods. all that it provides is a formula for computing an updated alarm limit . the flook court then concluded that "a claim for an improved method of calculation , even when tied to a specific end use , is unpatentable subject matter under § 101. . in 1980 , the supreme court in diamond v. chakrabarty held that § 101 of the patent act allowed the patenting of genetically altered micro - organisms . the case involved a human - made , genetically engineered bacterium that is capable of breaking down multiple components of crude oil , an invention that would help in the control and treatment of oil spills . the chakrabarty court observed that congress , in drafting § 101 , used "expansive terms as 'manufacture' and 'composition of matter,' modified by the comprehensive 'any'," thus reflecting congress's intent to permit a broad range of patentable subject matter . the court found that the bacterium sought to be patented was a nonnaturally occurring manufacture or composition of matter ; thus , because the discovery was not the result of "nature's handiwork," it could be patented . a year after chakrabarty , the supreme court once again had an opportunity to examine statutory subject matter under § 101 in diamond v. diehr . the case involved a patent application that sought to claim a process for producing cured synthetic rubber products . the diehr court upheld the process patent , stating: [a] physical and chemical process for molding precision synthetic rubber products falls within the § 101 categories of possibly patentable subject matter . that respondents' claims involve the transformation of an article , in this case raw , uncured synthetic rubber , into a different state or thing cannot be disputed .