the proposed regulations do not contain these factors . they state that an impairment is a disability "if it substantially limits the ability of an individual to perform a major life activity as compared to most people in the general population . an impairment need not prevent , or significantly or severely restrict , the individual from performing a major life activity in order to be considered a disability. examples are also provided of impairments that are usually not disabilities . eeoc states that the following listed impairments will consistently meet the definition of disability: autism , cancer , cerebral palsy , diabetes , epilepsy , hiv or aids , multiple sclerosis and muscular dystrophy , major depression , bipolar disorder , post - traumatic stress disorder , obsessive compulsive disorder , and schizophrenia . the eeoc examples of impairments that may be disabling for some individuals but not for others include the following: asthma , high blood pressure , learning disabilities , back or leg impairments , carpal tunnel syndrome , and hyperthyroidism . "temporary , non - chronic impairments of short duration with little or no residual effects ( such as the common cold , seasonal or common influenza , a sprained joint , minor and not - chronic gastrointestinal disorders , or a broken bone that is expected to heal completely ) usually will not substantially limit a major life activity. eeoc's listing of specific impairments that "will consistently meet the definition of disability" could arguably be seen as contrary to the ada's statutory definition . one commentator contends that this may mean that an employer would have no argument against coverage of the listed disabilities and , therefore , this approach is contrary to the ada's individualized assessment approach . however , the eeoc appendix to the proposed regulations notes that , under the ada , disability is determined based on an individualized assessment , and that the proposed regulation "recognizes , and offers examples to illustrate , that characteristics associated with some types of impairments allow an individualized assessment to be conducted quickly and easily , and will consistently render those impairments disabilities. it is also interesting to note that in its list of conditions that will usually not substantially limit a major life activity , the eeoc included seasonal or common influenza . it did not discuss whether pandemic influenza would be covered . however , in separate guidance , the eeoc found that h1n1 , as currently experienced , would not be interpreted as a disability . the ada amendments act states that the purposes of the legislation are to carry out the ada's objectives of the elimination of discrimination and the provision of "'clear , strong , consistent , enforceable standards addressing discrimination' by reinstating a broad scope of protection available under the ada. using the proposed "type of work" standard , the eeoc envisions courts using evidence from the individual regarding his or her educational and vocational background and the limitations of the impairment . generally , the eeoc would not consider necessary expert testimony concerning the types of jobs in which an individual is substantially limited .