appendix a . factors in irs revenue ruling 87-41 1 . instructions . a worker who is required to comply with other persons' instructions about when , where , and how he or she is to work is ordinarily an employee . this control factor is present if the person or persons for whom the services are performed have the right to require compliance with instructions . training . training a worker by requiring an experienced employee to work with the worker , by corresponding with the worker , by requiring the worker to attend meetings , or by using other methods , indicates that the person or persons for whom the services are performed want the services performed in a particular method or manner . integration . integration of the worker's services into the business operations generally shows that the worker is subject to direction and control . when the success or continuation of a business depends to an appreciable degree upon the performance of certain services , the workers who perform those services must necessarily be subject to a certain amount of control by the owner of the business . services rendered personally . if the services must be rendered personally , presumably the person or persons for whom the services are performed are interested in the methods used to accomplish the work as well as in the results . hiring , supervising , and paying assistants . if the person or persons for whom the services are performed hire , supervise , and pay assistants , that factor generally shows control over the workers on the job . however , if one worker hires , supervises , and pays the other assistants pursuant to a contract under which the worker agrees to provide materials and labor and under which the worker is responsible only for the attainment of a result , this factor indicates an independent contractor status . continuing relationship . a continuing relationship between the worker and the person or persons for whom the services are performed indicates that an employer - employee relationship exists . a continuing relationship may exist where work is performed at frequently recurring although irregular intervals . set hours of work . the establishment of set hours of work by the person or persons for whom the services are performed is a factor indicating control . full time required . if the worker must devote substantially full time to the business of the person or persons for whom the services are performed , such person or persons have control over the amount of time the worker spends working and impliedly restrict the worker from doing other gainful work . an independent contractor , on the other hand , is free to work when and for whom he or she chooses . doing work on employer's premises . if the work is performed on the premises of the person or persons for whom the services are performed , that factor suggests control over the worker , especially if the work could be done elsewhere . work done off the premises of the person or persons receiving the services , such as at the office of the worker , indicates some freedom from control .