the second challenge is to eradicate disparities in care . racial and ethnic minorities and low - income groups face disproportionately higher rates of disease , disability , and mortality , largely because of variations in access to care , and quality of care . the third challenge is to reduce the burden of chronic disease , which affects almost half of all americans and accounts for three - quarters of health care spending . the final challenge is to eliminate unnecessary and ineffective care that compromises quality , drives up costs , and neglects the needs of patients . according to the institute of medicine ( iom ) , an estimated 30% - 40% of health care spending is wasted on unnecessary and even unsafe care . on october 19 , 2009 , senator max baucus introduced a comprehensive health care reform bill entitled the america's healthy future act of 2009 ( s. 1796 , s.rept . the legislation is based on the chairman's mark which was ordered reported , as amended , by the senate finance committee on october 13 , 2009 . s. 1796 consists of six titles . title i addresses private health insurance , and would establish both a health insurance exchange and an individual mandate . title ii includes provisions related to prevention and wellness , and generally promotes preventive services . title iii addresses the quality and efficiency of health care , and would strengthen quality measurement . title iv would promote transparency and integrity in the medicare program . title v includes a series of provisions intended to prevent health care fraud and abuse . finally , title vi contains revenue raising provisions . this report summarizes the workforce , quality , prevention , and other provisions in titles i , ii , iii , iv , and vi of s. 1796 . the report groups the bill's provisions under the following headings: ( 1 ) health workforce ; ( 2 ) health care quality ; ( 3 ) health information technology ; ( 4 ) prevention and wellness ; ( 5 ) maternal and child health services ; ( 6 ) health disparities ; ( 7 ) emergency care ; ( 8 ) health care for veterans ; ( 9 ) elder justice ; and ( 10 ) miscellaneous . in most instances , each section begins with some background on current law and practice so as to provide context for the subsequent brief descriptions of the bill's provisions . unless otherwise stated , references to "the secretary" refer to the secretary of hhs . a list of all the acronyms used in the report can be found in appendix . a companion report , crs report r40831 , public health , workforce , quality , and other provisions in the affordable health choices act ( s. 1679 ) , summarizes comparable provisions in the senate help committee's health reform legislation , the affordable health choices act ( s. 1679 ) .