the enactment of p.l . 103-40 , the government printing office electronic information access enhancement act of 1993 , required the production of electronic versions of the congressional record and the federal register , and provided authority for production and distribution of other government documents electronically . the act requires gpo to the "extent practicable , [to] accommodate any request by the head of a department or agency to include … information that is under the control of the department or agency involved" in its electronic directory and systems of online access . arguably , that language does not bind congress to make its materials available , since it is not a department or agency . nevertheless , congress has made some of its materials available in electronic form through gpo since p.l . 103-40 was enacted . gpo began producing electronic versions of the daily edition of the congressional record and the federal register in 1994 . soon after , gpo began providing access to electronic versions of congressional documents authorized for distribution by congress through its gpo access website . the agency began distributing new documents through its federal digital system ( fdsys ) , and migrating collections from gpo access in the spring of 2009 . in current practice , according to gpo , approximately 97% of all u.s. government documents are "born digital," published electronically and available through the internet , and will never be printed by the federal government . as a consequence of electronic production and dissemination , some congressional materials are more readily available to wider congressional , governmental , and public audiences than when they were produced and distributed only in paper form . further , changes in the production process from the creation of content through delivery to a user , in print or electronic form , have reduced the resources necessary to produce congressional information . in light of these changes , some have argued that eliminating paper versions of some congressional documents , and relying instead on electronic versions , could result in further cost and resource savings , and might provide environmental benefits . at the same time , however , current law regarding document production , authentication , and preservation , as well as some user demand , require a number of paper - based documents to be produced and distributed as part of the official record of congressional proceedings . as a result of requirements for both electronic and paper - based versions of congressional documents , gpo oversees an information distribution process that produces and distributes most of the congressional information for which it is responsible in both electronic and printed forms . this process provides the necessary information and appropriate formats for congress to carry out and document its activities , but it may also result in some unwanted printed copies of congressional documents being delivered to congressional users who prefer to access those resources electronically . more broadly , the transition to electronic distribution of materials may raise questions about the capacity of congressional authorities to effectively oversee gpo's management and distribution responsibilities regarding congressional information under current law and congressional practices .