some of these disputes are discussed below . generally speaking , efforts to recruit on high school and college campuses have been addressed separately in legislation . for purposes of clarity , they are also treated separately here . on some occasions , the clash between schools that want to restrict access to military recruiters and the laws that prohibit such restrictions has led to legal challenges . the most prominent of these challenges involved supreme court review of the solomon amendment in rumsfeld v. forum for academic and institutional rights ( fair ) , but other legal issues have arisen as well . in rumsfeld v. forum for academic and institutional rights ( fair ) , the supreme court unanimously rejected arguments by fair , an association of law schools and professors , that it was unconstitutional for the federal government to condition university funding on compliance with the solomon amendment . previously , a divided third circuit panel had agreed that the solomon amendment had compelled the law schools to convey messages of support for the military's policy of discriminatory exclusion , but the court reversed the lower court's decision . the appellate panel had relied in part on a 2000 supreme court decision , dale v. boy scouts of america — which held that the boy scouts have an expressive right to exclude gay scoutmasters — for the converse proposition that the nation's universities have a right to "expressive association" in opposing military recruiters where there is a conflict between the dod stance on sexual orientation and academic nondiscrimination policies . in the case , the universities objected that because of the military's dadt policy , permitting recruiters on campus would undermine their policies against discrimination and that the federal law therefore violated their free speech rights . fair's core argument was that the solomon amendment amounts to an "unconstitutional condition" because it exacts a penalty for the law schools' engaging in first amendment expressive conduct . while the government may impose reasonable conditions on the receipt of federal largesse , fair contended , it "cannot attach strings to a benefit to 'produce a result which [it] could not command directly.' when a law school violates the equal access rule , the government threatens loss of funding not only to the law school but to the entire university . thus , they claimed , requiring equal access forces laws schools to "propagate , accommodate , [or] subsidize an unwanted message. the government countered by pointing to the plenary powers of congress to "raise and support armies" and to "provide for the common defence. the third circuit decision could "undermine military recruitment in a time of war," it argued , while neither the law schools' right to free speech nor to expressive association were infringed by allowing military recruiters to conduct on campus interviews . in particular , the solicitor general distinguished the boy scouts case in that "recruiters are not a part of the institution itself and do not become members through their recruiting activities. recruiters speak for their employers , the brief claimed , not the schools , unlike the scoutmaster who represented the boy scouts in the earlier case .