appendix a . scope of state child protective services work data in table a - 1 are provided to suggest the scope of activity by state protective services that is related to the capta directive that states have procedures to receive and respond to allegations of child abuse and neglect . the population data shown are the census bureau estimate of the number of children ( individuals under age 18 ) living in each state on july 1 , 2007 . the fy2007 program data include the number of allegations of child abuse or neglect ( referrals ) received by cps , the number of those referrals that were investigated ( reports ) , and the number and rate of children found to be victims of abuse or neglect . the victim rate refers to the number of children who were reported to be victims of child maltreatment for every 1,000 children in the population . referrals and investigations typically involve more than one child . for example , on a national basis , states received 3.2 million referrals during fy2007 that alleged abuse or neglect related to an estimated 5.8 million children . cps workers responded with an investigation , or some other assessment of the family , for 1.9 million of the referrals , and the estimated number of children involved in those investigations ( or assessments ) was approximately 3.5 million . finally , the table shows the number and rate of children found to be victims in each state . appendix b . child , family , and caregiver risk factors among children in families investigated for child abuse or neglect the national survey of child and adolescent well - being ( nscaw ) , required by congress under section 429 of the social security act , included a nationally representative sample of children in families investigated for abuse or neglect . table b - 1 shows selected developmental and other risk factors among those children compared to children in the general population . findings refer to children in families investigated for child abuse or neglect , as a whole , and without regard to whether an abuse or neglect finding was substantiated by the cps investigator . table b - 2 presents nscaw findings concerning family and caregiver risk factors among the families of all children investigated for abuse and neglect , as well as by the level of services received following the investigation . these findings are based on the initial wave of data collection in the survey which was fielded in 1999-2000 . appendix c. trends in reported child abuse and neglect victims and types of abuse or neglect experienced table c - 1 shows national estimates of children subject to an investigation for child abuse or neglect and those found to be victims of child abuse or neglect . although these data were all reported under the national child abuse and neglect data systems ( ncands ) , the quality and kind of data reported varies significantly by year . in the earlier years , national estimates may necessarily have been derived based on information reported by a limited number of states . the fy2009 appropriation was $41.7 million .