they would be owned by investors . gse stockholders would receive stock in the new companies . the stock of the new companies could trade on one or more stock exchanges . if a mortgage borrower defaults , the losses flow to the private label mbs holder as specified in the mbs prospectus . covered bonds seek to reduce the risk of financial loss to the bond purchaser . regular bonds are backed by the income of the issuer and have no specific collateral . covered bonds have collateral and a claim on the income and assets of the issuer . typically , covered bonds have more collateral than the value of the bonds . if the value of the collateral declines ( due to prepayment , default , foreclosure , etc .

 ) , the issuer must add additional collateral . in a best practices paper , treasury said that there should be at least an extra 5% collateral coverage , that only 30-year fixed - rate mortgages should be included , and that the maximum loan - to - value ratio on mortgages included should be 80% . because covered bonds have a priority claim on the assets of the issuer , the remaining claimants are likely to receive less in the event of bankruptcy or receivership . in the case of an insured depository institution such as a bank or thrift , covered bonds would increase the fdic's losses . presently , covered bonds may not exceed 4% of an fdic - insured institution's liabilities . this limits the ability of insured depository institutions to issue covered bonds . some have suggested that covered mortgage bonds could be issued using mbs from the gses or their successors . covered bonds are popular in europe , where the covered bond issuer typically originates the mortgage . some analysts believe this aligns the interests of originators and bond holders . in germany , which issued the first covered bonds in 1899 , covered bonds reportedly have never defaulted . covered bonds are attractive to some because they could reduce the risks to purchasers of private label mbs , and increase competition in the secondary mortgage market . covered bonds are a method of raising funds for mortgages that provides more security to purchasers than non - gse mbs provide currently . while the gses guarantee that the purchasers of their mbs will receive timely payment of principal and interest , the issuers of private - label mbs do not include any such guarantee . should the government charge an actuarially sound guarantee fee ? if so , would not the private sector offer the same guarantee ? in what is frequently called the utility model , the federal government could explicitly regulate the gses' profit margins much as state utility regulators control utility profits . if a gse were to earn unusually high profits one year , the government could lower the profit margins — and profit — the next year . similarly , lower profits in one year could result in higher allowed profit margins the next . the goal of this option is to eliminate the incentive to increase profits with risky actions by eliminating or reducing the ability to gain from the risky actions .