this results because they have only one or a few students . one approach for reducing this result would be to limit lea participation to leas with a minimum total enrollment . another anomaly occurs when leas have offsetting program amounts that are just a few dollars less than their final srsa grant . for example , some leas receive grants as low as $39 . a solution to this would be to eliminate final grants that are deemed to be below a size to be effective . these funds could then be distributed to other leas to enhance their grants . some have considered the circumstance in which leas eligible for the srsa program have offsetting grants larger than their initial grant to be problematic . while such leas can still use the reap flex provision , they receive no additional reap funds . although this is in keeping with the intent of the reap purposes , some argue that such leas are still in need of additional assistance . one alternative to this situation would be to calculate the srsa initial grants without the minimum and maximum grants of $20,000 and $60,000 , subtract the offsetting grant amounts , then apply the minimum and maximum grant amounts . this would reduce the number of leas that are eligible but receive no funding . a final concern that some states have is that , unlike the rlis program , states receive no state administration funding under the srsa program , despite having to provide ed with much of the data used to allocate funds ( such as offsetting program grant amounts ) . this could be addressed by reserving 2% ( or some other percent ) of the appropriation for the srsa program for state administration . of course , this would reduce funds going to small , rural leas by the percentage reserved for state administration . although some argue that national poverty thresholds overstate poverty in rural areas compared to cities , others have suggested that the measure used to identify "low - income" leas for rlis eligibility does not adequately reflect poverty in very small , rural locations . the measure used for rlis eligibility is the same as that used for many federal programs ( including esea title i - a ) ; that is , the census bureau's small area income and poverty estimates ( saipe ) . , to counties and school districts ) . this process inevitably involves some degree of distributional error as it moves from large , populous areas to smaller , sparsely populated areas . some rural program proponents contend that in small , sparsely populated school districts , child poverty could be better estimated using data from the national school lunch program , commonly referred to as free and reduced - price lunch ( frpl ) data . state agencies that administer the program submit data on the number of frpl - eligible students to nces through its public elementary / secondary school universe survey ( part of the ccd ) . one proposal to use frpl data is contained in s. 1052 , the rural education achievement program reauthorization act of 2009 .