in such a case , a court would be likely to find that such legislation is not intended to be punitive . in response to this concern , various proposals were made to impose taxes on such bonuses . while the ninth circuit held that the legislation in question did meet the specificity prong of the bill of attainder analysis , it found that the legislation was not intended to punish the owners of the exxon valdez , and thus did not violate the punishment prong of the bill of attainder test . rather , the ninth circuit found that the legislation furthered a rational , non - punitive regulatory purpose . in the oil pollution act , congress recognized prince william sound as an "environmentally sensitive area," and included various provisions designed to protect the sound's environment and reduce the likelihood of future oil spills . the act established the prince william sound oil spill recovery institute and an oil terminal and oil tanker environmental oversight and monitoring demonstration program for prince william sound ; provided for a bligh reef navigation light and a vessel tracking and alarm system ; and increased equipment and requirements for oil spill response . the ninth circuit found that the exclusion of the exxon valdez from the prince william sound was consistent with this legislative purpose , and congress could legitimately conclude that a vessel that spilled over 1 million gallons of oil posed a greater risk to prince william sound than other tank vessels , because of a pre - existing defect , damage incurred as a result of the spill , or because the spill calls into question the practices of its operators . the court found this case similar to the supreme court case of nixon , which held that the presidential recordings and materials preservation act , which only applied to the preservation of documentary materials relating to the presidency of richard nixon , was not a bill of attainder . in both of these cases , the reasoning was that there was a specific need for quick legislative action regarding specific situations . regarding the exxon valdez , legislative action was needed to avoid another oil spill , while legislation specifically affecting president nixon was deemed necessary to avoid the possible loss of important historical documents . in both cases , the need for congress to "proceed with dispatch" allowed congress to pass legislation that established "a legitimate class of one. the holdings in both of these cases appeared to assume that further regulation which applied to persons or entities outside of these "legitimate class[es] of one" would be forthcoming . a court will also consider the legislative history of a provision in evaluating whether or not legislation is intended to be punitive . the court , however , has been reluctant to ascribe too much significance to legislative history alone , and will generally require more than just a few statements by individual members to find such motivation . further , it seems to be unsettled what information aside from that directly found within the legislative history of a law should be considered by a court . in some cases , extensive legislative history may suggest punitive intent .