strategies or technologies designated for n 2 o emission reduction are limited . the agriculture sector is the primary anthropogenic source of nitrous oxide . the bulk of u.s. n 2 o emissions stem from fertilizing agricultural soils for crop production . this is partly due to the dispersed nature of n 2 o emission sources . in the agriculture sector , the majority of n 2 o is released as a consequence of specific nitrogen cycle processes ( nitrification and denitrification ) when large amounts of synthetic nitrogen fertilizers are used for crop production . more efficient application of synthetic fertilizers ( eg , precision agriculture , nitrogen inhibitors , nitrogen sensors , controlled - release fertilizer products ) is one way to reduce excess amounts of nitrogen available for bacterial processing and eventual release to the atmosphere as n 2 o . high costs and difficulty in measuring these products' efficacy , among other deterrents , have hampered widespread adoption of practices to reduce n 2 o emissions . this report focuses on the contributions of n 2 o to alteration in the earth's climate and ozone depletion . policy options for n 2 o emission reduction , sources of n 2 o , and federal support to lower n 2 o emissions are discussed . nitrous oxide ( n 2 o ) , familiar to some as "laughing gas," contributes to climate change and ozone depletion . once released , n 2 o lingers in the atmosphere for decades ( its atmospheric lifetime is approximately 114 years ) and is 310 times more effective at trapping heat in the atmosphere over a 100-year time frame than carbon dioxide ( co 2 ) . n 2 o emission quantity estimates remained fairly constant from 2005 to 2007 , hovering around 325 million metric tons carbon dioxide equivalent ( co 2 e ) . n 2 o emission quantity estimates dropped in 2009 to below 300 million metric tons co 2 e. see table 1 . n 2 o emission mitigation options are available for agricultural soil management and nitric acid production . nitric acid is a chemical compound used to make synthetic fertilizers . n 2 o abatement options for nitric acid production include a high - temperature catalytic reduction method , a low - temperature catalytic reduction method , and nonselective catalytic reduction . the estimated reduction efficiencies ( the percentage reduction achieved with adoption of a mitigation option ) are 90% , 95% , and 85% , respectively . agricultural soil management mitigation options recommended by researchers and technology transfer specialists to discourage excess application of nitrogen fertilizers and soil disturbance ( table 2 ) are not generally being practiced . fertilizer and soil best - management practices aim to provide the crop with the nutrient and soil conditions necessary for crop production , and prevent nutrient and soil loss from the crop field ( eg , erosion , leaching ) . some may consider less money spent towards fertilizer use an economic incentive for agricultural producers . others may want to ensure that crop yields meet expected feed , fiber , and fuel mandates ( eg , for corn ethanol ) , which may be difficult to attain with less fertilizer use .