other individuals obtained coverage on their own in the nongroup market . however , there is no federal law that either requires individuals to have health insurance or requires employers to offer health insurance . approximately 46 million individuals ( 15% of the u.s. population ) were estimated to be uninsured in 2008 . individuals and employers choosing to purchase health insurance in the private market fit into one of the three segments of the market , depending on their situation — the large group ( large employer ) market , the small group market , and the nongroup market . more than 95% of large employers offer coverage . large employers are generally able to obtain lower premiums for a given health insurance package than small employers and individuals seeking nongroup coverage . although most of these past experiments failed ( eg , california's pacadvantage ) , other states have learned from these experiences and have fashioned potentially more sustainable models ( eg , massachusetts's connector ) . there are private - sector companies that also serve the role of making various health insurance plans easier to compare for individuals and small groups ( eg , ehealthinsurance ) , available in most , but not all , states because of variation in states' regulations . less than half of all small employers ( less than 50 employees ) offer health insurance coverage ; such employers cite cost as the primary reason for not offering health benefits . one of the main reasons is a small group's limited ability to spread risk across a small pool . insurers generally consider small firms to be less stable than larger pools , as one or two employees moving in or out of the pool ( or developing an illness ) would have a greater impact on the risk pool than they would in large firms . other factors that affect a small employer's ability to provide health insurance include certain disadvantages small firms have in comparison with their larger counterparts: small groups are more likely to be medically underwritten , have relatively little market power to negotiate benefits and rates with insurance carriers , and generally lack economies of scale . allowing these firms to purchase insurance through a larger pool , such as an association , gateway or an exchange , could lower premiums for those with high - cost employees . depending on the applicable state laws , individuals who purchase health insurance in the nongroup market may be rejected or face premiums that reflect their health status , which can make premiums lower for the healthy but higher for the sick . even when these individuals obtain coverage , there may be exclusions for certain conditions . reforms affecting premiums ratings would likely increase premiums for some while lowering premiums for others , depending on their age , health , behaviors , and other factors . states are the primary regulators of the private health insurance market , though some federal regulation applies , mostly affecting employer - sponsored health insurance ( esi ) . the health insurance portability and accountability act ( hipaa ) requires that coverage sold to small groups ( 2-50 employees ) must be sold on a guaranteed issue basis .