many of these grant programs have experienced decreases in funding . one overarching issue that the 111 th congress considered was the adequacy of funding provided for justice assistance programs . yet another aspect of these grant programs that congress considered was their scope , including whether the number of grant programs should be changed or their purpose areas altered . partly in response to the united states having the highest reported incarceration rate in the world , legislation was introduced in the 111 th congress that would have established a commission to undertake a comprehensive review of the u.s. criminal justice system . the national criminal justice commission act of 2010 ( h.r . of interest to lawmakers are the two indices of crimes that are the basis of the ucr . the fbi collects data on the number of offenses known to police , the number and characteristics of persons arrested , and the number of "clearances" for eight different offenses , collectively referred to as part i offenses . part i offenses include murder and nonnegligent manslaughter , forcible rape , robbery , aggravated assault , burglary , larceny - theft , motor vehicle theft , and arson . within the part i offenses , crimes are categorized as either violent or property crimes . violent crimes include murder and nonnegligent manslaughter , forcible rape , robbery , and aggravated assault . property crimes include burglary , larceny - theft , motor vehicle theft , and arson . the fbi also collects data on the number of arrests made for 21 other offenses , known as part ii offenses . the ucr collects crime data from the various state and local law enforcement agencies and presents it in a variety of formats in the ucr . the data on which the crime rates are derived are offenses reported to the police ( as opposed to arrests made by police or cases cleared by the police ) . the national violent crime rate has generally decreased since the mid - 1990s . however , interest in combating violent crimes across the united states has remained . although policy makers have been concerned with all forms of violent crimes , the selected issue areas discussed below were of interest to the 111 th congress . one of the primary questions spanning these issues was , what should be the federal government's role in combating various crimes ? another general issue was whether congress has provided the best regulatory , investigative , and prosecutorial tools to counter violent crime around the country . policy makers have been concerned with the prevalence and types of fraud committed across the country . in response , the 111 th congress passed the fraud enforcement and recovery act of 2009 ( fera ) , in part to address mortgage , securities , commodities , and financial fraud , among other things . the broad policy issue cross - cutting various types of fraud and theft was whether the federal response has or can effectively keep pace with the evolving nature of these crimes . as the nature of these crimes changes , how can policy makers provide the necessary resources and update the criminal statutes to allow for effective investigation and prosecution of these crimes ?