as such , the focus of reforming medical malpractice may be broadened . premiums for 2010 for malpractice insurance "have eased nationwide. data gathered by the national association of insurance commissioners ( naic ) indicate that total premiums for medical malpractice liability insurance have dropped every year from 2006 to 2009 . although the current medical liability insurance market is not exhibiting widespread symptoms of market disruption , problems still exist with affordability of malpractice insurance for certain specialties and in particular geographic regions ; such problems , however , are not as acute as compared with other crisis periods . other studies have found both higher effects and negligible effects from state tort reforms . according to the latest summary information published by the medical liability monitor in 2010 , the market "remains 'soft' or perhaps 'flat' with 67 percent of all rates holding at last year's level. thus , by extension , physicians and physician groups ( primarily the american medical association ) are not responding to current market conditions in the same manner as during periods in which they proclaimed a crisis . for example , during such periods , physicians and physicians groups have engaged in more public displays of dissatisfaction such as participating in "strikes. however , even during a period of relative calm , the malpractice system experiences issues with equity and access . for example , some observers have criticized the current system's performance with respect to compensating patients who have been harmed by malpractice , deterring substandard medical care , and promoting patient safety . the current legislative interest in medical malpractice reform differs from the past in that it has been largely driven by overall health reform and issues of healthcare costs , rather than an immediate crisis in malpractice liability insurance . instead of narrowly addressing what can be done to stabilize premiums for malpractice insurance , congress may decide to focus on how changes to the medical malpractice system might affect the overall health care system . in terms of direct costs , medical malpractice insurance adds relatively little to the cost of health care . medical malpractice premiums written in 2009 totaled approximately $10.8 billion , while health expenditures estimated by cbo total $2.6 trillion . indirect costs , particularly increased utilization of tests and procedures by physicians to protect against future lawsuits ( "defensive medicine" ) , have been estimated to be much higher than direct premiums . these conclusions , however , have been controversial , in part because synthesis studies have claimed that national estimates of defensive medicine are unreliable . cbo conducted its own analysis , as well as synthesized and analyzed previous studies on the relationship between medical malpractice and health care costs . the most recent cbo analysis estimated that federal tort reforms would reduce national health care spending by about 0.5% in 2009 ( equivalent to approximately $11 billion ) . sharply drawn conclusions about the causes of the crises have also been strongly debated . in the early 2000s , the debate largely focused on implementing federal limits on the tort system . the congressional budget office ( cbo ) has estimated that a nationwide limit on torts for medical malpractice would lower malpractice insurance premiums by approximately 10% .