providing housing help after a disaster . this is an important point in assessing fema's performance ; a lack of assistance from the state , poor overall preparedness efforts , and inadequate state authority for action , as well as a lack of cooperation from local officials , can make the development of post - disaster housing a much greater challenge . in some cases , the federal government may be better positioned than the states to lead post - disaster housing efforts . for example , crime and political events , fires and collisions are the stuff of local news . more complex , slowly developing , diffuse issues , however , are often ignored . the disaster housing work of fema , both its planning and its execution in concert with affected state and local governments and charitable groups , represents the type of "diffuse issue" that does not always garner extended media coverage or close attention . some observers have asserted that while fema has at times devoted time and committed staff and financial resources to mitigating against future disaster damage or to improving its logistics chain , the same attention has rarely been paid to the housing part of its mission . under the stafford act , disaster housing is a limited , temporary mission and as such was not expected to result in the same intense engagement over long periods as other fema public assistance or mitigation projects where the state is an active partner . is fema's current hierarchy of help effective and equitable for disaster victims ? has fema implemented the new housing - related authorities granted to it through post - katrina legislation ? also , due to the nature of housing itself , some may assume that nongovernmental social service agencies will provide the leadership at the state and local levels , as well as the remaining resources needed , to complete the disaster housing cycle . accordingly , congress may wish to consider a federal - state partnership for the housing program that begins to incorporate more of a state role in its administration , similar to ona , since that program has demonstrated that state input can be useful in program decisions and implementation . what approaches can the 111 th congress consider to improve disaster housing for future events ? in the wake of a disaster , local and state governments and charitable organizations take immediate steps to shelter families and individuals whose housing has been made uninhabitable by the disaster event . various stages of sheltering and housing assistance occur in the cycle of aid . federal assistance often does not come early in this cycle , if at all . while on average there have been about 50 disaster declarations per year , in many instances , federal help is neither requested nor granted . in these cases , where no presidential declaration has been made , responsibility for housing those in need falls upon the state and the local community . this form of emergency shelter is often provided by the chapters of the american red cross and other charitable providers or by the local governments themselves .