these federal exemptions are available to debtors only to the extent they are not prohibited by the applicable state . property exempted from the bankruptcy estate is not available to satisfy creditors . among the exemptions explicitly provided in the bankruptcy code — the federal exemptions — are a homestead exemption in the amount of $21,625 and a "wildcard" exemption of $1,150 that can also be applied to the homestead if the debtor chooses so long as the federal exemptions are available to the debtor . to the extent allowed under state law , the bankruptcy code allows debtors to choose between using the federal exemptions or those available under applicable state law . this is an "either / or" choice — debtors are not allowed to choose to use some state exemptions and some federal exemptions . when a petition is filed jointly by husband and wife or where the individual cases of a husband and wife are ordered to be jointly administered , each spouse must choose the same set of exemptions . however , debtors in many states have no choice to make because their state law prohibits the use of the federal exemptions . nonetheless , while the homestead exemption in many states is greater than the federal homestead exemption , provisions were introduced in bapcpa that impose limitations on the extent to which debtors can avail themselves of a state's homestead exemption . bapcpa established a maximum homestead exemption for all debtors in all states unless a minimum period for property ownership was met . subsection 522 ( p ) of the bankruptcy code generally prohibits exempting an equity interest in the property that was acquired by the debtor during the 1215-day period immediately preceding the bankruptcy filing to the extent that the interest exceeds $146,450 in value . this limit may also apply in some cases in which the debtor has been convicted of a felony or has a debt resulting from violations of securities laws , fraud in a fiduciary capacity , or as the result of certain acts that caused serious physical injury or death . additionally , if any part of the debtor's value in the residence is attributable to property disposed of in the 10-year period preceding the bankruptcy , the debtor's value in the residence must be reduced if all or part of the value in the previously owned property could not have been exempted in bankruptcy if the property were still owned when the debtor filed for bankruptcy . bapcpa also restricts debtors' options for determining their domiciliary state , which may effectively place limits on their homestead exemption . debtors must have lived in their current state for at least two years before they are eligible for that state's exemptions . debtors who have not lived in the same state for at least two years prior to filing for bankruptcy must look back at where they lived for the 180-day period immediately preceding that two years . if the debtor lived in more than one state during that 180-day period , the domiciliary state is the one in which the debtor lived for the greater part of that 180-day period .