who's reporting to whom ? how specific is the job description ? does the individual initiate , coordinate or execute policy ? are they accountable to the president , to the secretary , or to both ? to whom do private constituencies look to provide input , guidance or opinion ? who resolves the conflict between the two ? ... [w]ithout a clear delineation of responsibilities and reporting authority , this creates both a huge potential management problem and , clearly , the appearance of potential conflict ... [i]t can diminish the capacity of both advisor and secretary to operate effectively in accordance with the department's mission ... [f]rom time to time , it can cause confusion for those under the chain of command of the secretary , as well as outside the department purview . james p. pfiffner , professor , school of public policy , george mason university , discussed the role of white house advisors: [s]taff personnel certainly may have considerable power or influence as opposed to authority . but this power is entirely derivative of the president . white house staffers may communicate orders from the president , but they cannot legally give orders themselves ... white house staffers often make important decisions , but the weight of their decisions depend entirely on the willingness of the president to back them up .... white house czars play essential roles that lift the burden of coordination from the president . they help to reduce the range of options . but if the number of czars proliferate , they can clog and confuse presidential authority .... czars may create layers between the president and cabinet secretaries .... members of congress , as well as national leaders , may be confused as to the locus of authoritative decisions . foreign leaders may not know who speaks for the president ... [c]zars can pull problems into the white house that could be , and should be , settled at the cabinet level ... [o]nly those issues that are central to the president's policy agenda should be in the white house .... czars are often frustrated because they're supposed to be in charge of a policy area , but they do not have the authority commensurate with their responsibilities . czars cannot enforce decisions on departments or agencies ... [they] control neither personnel nor budgets , and for these they must depend on cabinet secretaries .... white house staffers enjoy proximity to the president .. . cabinet secretaries are often at a disadvantage in securing presidential attention . he also noted the role of congress: the framers of the constitution ... placed congress in article i for a reason . in republican governments , the legislature should predominate in policymaking , as james madison made clear in federalist 51 . lee a. casey , partner , baker hostetler , and former attorney - advisor , office of legal counsel , u.s. department of justice , discussed the authority of white house advisors: [white house] advisors ... have no power beyond the fact that they are close to the president . they cannot transform executive branch policy into the policy of the united states . they can't sign regulations . they can't submit legislation to congress .