regionalism south korean politics is highly regionalized . the gnp's base is in the southeastern and industrialized kyongsang ( also known as yongnam ) region , where lee won over 60% of the vote in the 2007 election . ( if lfp party head lee hoi - chang's total is added to lee's , the conservative candidates won around 80% of the yongnam vote ) the dp's base lies in the southwestern and more rural cholla region ( also known as honam ) , where its candidate chung dong - young won nearly 80% of the vote . before kim dae - jung's victory in the 1997 presidential election , south korea's military governments gave preferential treatment to the kyongsang region , leading cholla residents to accuse the government of discrimination . the greater seoul area , which is the home of nearly half of the south korean electorate , has emerged as the crucial swing vote in presidential elections . the remaining 54 are selected on the basis of proportional voting . national assembly members are elected to four - year terms . the next national legislative elections will be held in april 2012 , which is also the year of south korea's next presidential election ( scheduled for december ) . since the assembly's powers were enhanced in the 1987 constitution , it has at times altered the political climate by providing opposition parties with a forum to freely criticize , inspect , and embarrass the executive branch . indeed , one of the assembly's major accomplishments since 1987 has been to institutionalize its oversight of the executive ; executive branch officials regularly appear before committees , helping to make south korean policy - making more transparent than before . also , from time to time , opposition parties have used assembly proceedings to successfully stymie presidential initiatives , usually by boycotting legislative sessions . in 2004 , the conservative - dominated national assembly voted to impeach then - president roh moo - hyun , a vote that was overturned by south korea's constitutional court . in reality , however , the president and the state bureaucracy continue to be the dominant forces in south korean policymaking , as formal and informal limitations prevent the national assembly from initiating major pieces of legislation . for instance , by law the assembly can only cut funds from the president's budget , not propose any increases or alter the executive's budgetary allocations . south korean legislators suffer from numerous other limitations . the typical seoul legislative office , for instance , is staffed by only three salaried , full - time workers . even the prime minister , who has little power , is nominated by the president . the fact that parties in the assembly repeatedly have resorted to the brinkmanship tactic of the boycott reflects the legislative branch's weakness . the most recent boycott occurred in june 2008 , when the opposition democratic party refused to participate in the new assembly's session .