the bill is similar to h.r . 2454 in that it would distribute allowances to electricity ldcs and natural gas ldcs to assist consumers . the percentage of allowances that would be allocated to the states to assist heating oil and propane consumers is not specified in the bill . the expansion of the eitc proposed in h.r . 2454 would be effective in 2012 . 2454 would increase the maximum amount of the credit that filers without qualifying children would receive . this is largely patterned after the snap program . unlike snap , however , the program as passed by the house does not provide funding for state administrative costs . states would have to meet certain requirements in their administration of the energy refund program . they would be required to use public employees for all tentative and final eligibility determinations and use bilingual personnel in those portions of the state where a substantial number of people in low - income households speak a language other than english . moreover , should policymakers seek to account for different costs that households in different regions may experience ? the eitc is a refundable tax credit that supplements the earnings of low - income workers . the credit is considered refundable because it benefits even those filers who have no federal income tax liability ; these filers receive a check from the federal treasury . in addition to these issues , this section examines potential concerns and unintended consequences that may occur by providing direct assistance to households . in 2006 , the total value of the eitc was $44.4 billion , making it the largest low - income program providing cash , greater than ssi ( fy2006 outlays of $36.2 billion ) and far greater than tanf cash welfare ( fy2006 expenditures of $9.9 billion ) . the eitc was first restricted only to tax filers with children . it was not until 1993 when congress amended the tax code to provide an eitc to childless tax filers . the eitc for tax filers without qualifying children is far smaller than the credit for those with children . policymakers have a variety of options available for distributing allowance value to households . proposed delivery mechanisms in both the 110 th and 111 th congress have included: distributing equal dividends to all households , or to all individuals ; providing energy tax credits for low - and / or middle - income households with earned income or qualifying retirement income , or expanding the earned income tax credit ; reducing social security payroll taxes ; distributing allowances to electricity and natural gas local distribution companies ( ldcs ) to be used to "mitigate economic impacts on low - and middle - income consumers," or to assist all consumers ; allocating auction proceeds to the low income home energy assistance program and the weatherization assistance program ; and creating rebates for low - income households . in addition , president obama's fy2010 budget proposed to implement a cap - and - trade program and devote a majority of the proceeds to the "making work pay" tax credit , a reduction in payroll taxes for those workers below a certain income threshold .