both projects have international and industry partners . methane hydrate research by doe was initially authorized by the methane hydrate research and development act of 2000 ( p.l . the energy policy act of 2005 ( p.l . 109-58 , subtitle f , § 968 ) extended the authorization through fy2010 and authorized total appropriations of $155 million over a five - year period . the omnibus appropriations act , 2009 ( p.l . 111-8 ) , provided $20 million in fy2009 for natural gas technologies r&d , to include no less than $15 million for gas hydrates r&d . congress appropriated $15 million for the gas hydrate r&d program in fy2009 . the obama administration requested $25 million for the natural gas technologies program for fy2010 , which includes gas hydrate r&d . congress appropriated $17.8 million for the program in fy2010 , which would also fund research and development into unconventional gas production from basins containing tight gas sands , shale gas , and coal bed methane , as well as for gas hydrates . this section highlights existing efforts . the methane - to - markets partnership is an international initiative for methane capture and reuse from four sources: oil and gas , coal mines , landfills , and agriculture . the partnership is administered by the u.s. environmental protection agency ( epa ) , which supports the voluntary efforts of the 38 country partners . national governments , research institutions , and the private sector have collaborated since 2004 to develop cost - effective , near - term methane capture projects globally . the partnership receives its legal authority from the clean air act , section 103 ( 42 u.s.c . § 7403 ) , and the national environmental policy act ( nepa , 42 u.s.c . approximately $4.6 million was appropriated to the partnership for fy2010 . supplemental funding for the partnership is received from the u.s. department of state . other u.s. government partners — the department of energy , the department of agriculture , the agency for international development , and the trade and development agency — have the discretion to provide funds to support the partnership . financial support from government partners varies in amount and by fiscal year . epa facilitates a number of voluntary programs related to the methane - to - markets initiative that seek to reduce domestic methane emissions from different sectors . many of these programs receive broad legislative authority from the clean air act , section 103 ( 42 u.s.c . epa provides some technical assistance and educational material . the agstar program supports biogas capture and use at livestock operations managing liquid and slurry manures . the coalbed methane outreach program ( cmop ) works with the coalbed methane industry to reduce coal mine methane emissions via methane capture and reuse . the natural gas star program specializes in promoting the reduction of methane emissions from the oil production and natural gas sector . the landfill methane outreach program ( lmop ) encourages landfill gas energy projects .