a provision of p.l . 111-83 ( ยง568 ( c ) ) repeals the so - called "widow penalty. this penalty was the termination of a pending immigrant relative petition for an alien spouse and of a related , pending application for lpr adjustment of status or an immigrant visa , upon the death of the u.s. citizen spouse , when the couple had been married less than two years . in cases where only the first half of the process had been completed ( i.e. , the immigrant relative petition had been approved ) , the petition could be revoked where the related application for lpr status had not been granted or where the alien spouse had not been admitted into the united states on an immigrant visa . this penalty resulted from uscis's interpretation of the statutory definition of "immediate relative. uscis interpreted the definition to mean that an alien spouse ceased to be married to a u.s. citizen and to be an "immediate relative" of a u.s. citizen upon the death of the u.s. citizen spouse . where a couple had been married at least two years at the time of a u.s. citizen's death , however , uscis converted the immigrant petition filed by a u.s. citizen for an alien spouse into a self - petition by the surviving spouse . the new law enables the surviving alien spouse of a deceased u.s. citizen to self - petition for an immigrant visa / adjustment to lpr status regardless of the length of the marriage as long as the petition is filed within two years of the u.s. citizen's death and the surviving alien spouse has not remarried . as of the date of this report , uscis has not issued new regulations , although it has issued revised guidelines implementing the new law . uscis has also issued a draft policy memorandum on which the american immigration lawyers association has commented , but apparently no final memorandum has been issued as of the date of this report . uscis may extend its practice of converting any pending petitions filed by a u.s. citizen spouse before death into a self - petition for the surviving alien spouse , to include the petitions of previously ineligible alien spouses who were married for less than two years . an alien whose u.s. citizen spouse died before p.l . 2892 were not enacted in p.l . the omitted language included two senate - passed provisions . one would have allowed any employer participating in e - verify to verify the employment eligibility of existing employees . the other senate provision would have directed federal departments and agencies to require , as a condition of contracts they entered into , that the contractors use e - verify to verify the employment eligibility of all individuals hired during the term of the contract to work in the united states and all individuals ( whether new hires or existing employees ) assigned to perform work in the united states under the contract . other bills introduced in the 111 th congress would have more broadly changed existing law on employment verification . for example , the secure america through verification and enforcement act of 2009 ( save act ; h.r .