to this direct employment ( i.e. , direct jobs ) , indirect and induced employment are sometimes added as well . a variety of researchers , usually with the financial support of advocacy groups , have operationalized the diverse definitions of green jobs in order to estimate the number of green jobs at present or at some time in the future . the estimates are based on varying assumptions about , for example , the percentage of u.s. electricity that will be generated by different combinations of renewable resources in the coming decades or the level of public and private sector investments in various renewable energy sources . less often , the job estimates are based on firm - specific information about the number of persons who are currently employed producing green goods ( eg , solar panels ) or providing green services ( eg , energy audits ) . as a consequence of differences in definitions , assumptions , and methodologies , analysts have produced widely divergent estimates of current and prospective green jobs . complicating the estimation of the number of green jobs is the absence of an authoritative data source . federal statistical agencies , such as the bureau of economic analysis and the bureau of labor statistics ( bls ) , categorize the data they collect according to the north american industry classification system ( naics ) . in the case of the utility industry , for example , naics disaggregates firms into the categories of hydro , fossil fuel , nuclear and "other" sources . naics does not disaggregate the "other" category into those that use renewable sources of electricity production such as wind , solar and biomass . because renewables are part of the "other" category , no government series provides data on their output and employment . analysts consequently have developed ways to address the data deficiency , although their methods usually are not clearly articulated . for its part , the government agency responsible for labor force statistics , bls , has requested funding for fy2010 to develop data on the number of green jobs and their characteristics ( eg , wages , training requirements ) by industry and occupation . industry statistics are expected to be available in fy2011 . in addition , much of the empirical research has estimated only the numbers of green jobs . estimation or discussion of the net impact on total u.s. employment generally is lacking . net estimates take into account jobs throughout the economy eliminated or forgone in addition to those created to advance toward a low - carbon environmentally friendly economy . similarly , the literature does not take into account factors , such as supply constraints ( eg , a tight labor market ) and improvements in labor productivity ( i.e. global insight next forecast the number of green jobs in the categories of renewable electricity generation , residential and commercial retrofitting , and renewable transportation fuels . the second category , retrofitting , is beyond the scope of this report and will not be discussed . in terms of power generation , global insight relied on its energy group's forecast of a 30% increase in net electricity generation between 2008 and 2038 .