these applications had previously been processed in the anchorage district office . these changes generally took effect on march 14 , 2011 , although the sba has delayed implementation of the requirement that ancs report on the benefits provided to alaska natives through their participation in the 8 ( a ) program . several of these changes apply specifically to anc - owned firms . members of the 112 th congress have introduced legislation ( h.r . members of the 112 th congress have introduced legislation ( h.r . 598 , s. 236 ) that would remove all the "special rules" for contracting with anc - owned 8 ( a ) firms described in table 1 and subject anc - owned firms to eligibility and other requirements like those to which individually owned 8 ( a ) firms are subject . the proposed legislation would accomplish this , in part , by amending the alaska native claims settlement act ( ancsa ) so that ancs are no longer deemed to be socially or economically disadvantaged for purposes of sections 7 ( j ) and 8 ( a ) of the small business act . it would also amend the definition of "indian tribe" contained in section 8 ( a ) ( 13 ) of the small business act so that ancs no longer constitute "indian tribes" for purposes of the 8 ( a ) program . 598 and s. 236 would preclude ancs from receiving sole source awards in excess of $4 million ( $6.5 million for manufacturing contracts ) under the authority of the business opportunity development reform act ( bodra ) of 1988 . section 602 ( a ) of bodra currently provides that the "competitive thresholds" contained in section 8 ( a ) of the small business act do not apply to entities defined as "indian tribes" in section 8 ( a ) . excluding ancs from section 8 ( a ) 's definition of "indian tribe" would , thus , subject them to the competitive thresholds , as well as require that all affiliations of anc - owned firms count when the firms' size is determined and that an anc may participate in the 8 ( a ) program only one time . the proposed legislation would also amend section 8 ( a ) to ( 1 ) prevent anc - owned firms from receiving additional sole - source awards when the total amount of competitive and sole - source awards they have received in any year exceeds the total amount of competitive and sole - source awards that individually owned firms may receive ( currently , $100 million ) ; ( 2 ) prohibit the sba from exempting anc - owned firms from any time limitations on participation in the 8 ( a ) program to which individually owned 8 ( a ) firms are subject ; and ( 3 ) require ancs to report annually to the sba on their total revenue , the amount of this revenue attributable to the 8 ( a ) program , and the "total amount of benefits paid to shareholders.