all biomass is potentially fuel for wildfires . furthermore , reducing fuel loads has little , if any , benefit for protecting structures and communities from wildfires . in temperate ecosystems , wildfires are inevitable , because dry conditions and ignitions ( natural , such as lightning , and anthropogenic , such as matches and campfires ) occur . severe wildfires have been burning more structures and more area . many believe a significant cause is unnaturally high accumulations of biomass , and have proposed that congress provide more funding and broader authority for activities that reduce biomass fuels , and thus reduce the extent and severity of wildfires . the principal tools to reduce biomass fuels are prescribed burning — deliberate use of fire primarily to eliminate fine fuels — and thinning — cutting some vegetation to reduce understory growth , the density of the forest canopy , and the fuel ladders that can allow fires to move from the surface into the canopy . the existing authorities for federal agencies to reduce biomass fuel for wildfire protection are broad , though indirect . congress enacts annual appropriations for hazardous fuels treatments and for other management activities that can encompass fuel reduction efforts . however , the reporting on hazardous fuel treatment funding for the various types of fuel reduction activities and on accomplishments are insufficient for congress to assess progress in reducing biomass fuels . also , information on funding ( from annual appropriations and mandatory accounts ) used for thinning and other activities that are substantially intended for wildfire protection , and reporting on results , are inadequate to compare the benefits and costs of these activities and funds . distinguishing data on funding and accomplishments via prescribed burning , thinning , and other fuel reduction efforts by ecosystem or fire regime , and separating results from wildland fire use , would likely improve the understanding of the nature , extent , and results of appropriations . improved reporting on funding and on results , with information disaggregated by ecosystem or fire regime , may help congress in its deliberations over appropriate funding allocations among activities and agencies . some wildfires are low - intensity , surface fires that burn the surface fuels ( eg , grasses , needles , leaves ) . other fires , under certain conditions , become high - intensity conflagrations ( crown fires ) that burn through the forest canopy , killing many of the standing trees . whether a wildfire is a surface fire ( which can be controlled readily ) or a crown fire ( which cannot ) depends on the fuel characteristics and the weather ( wind , recent precipitation , and recent and current relative humidity ) . since weather is uncontrollable , fire protection efforts focus on altering fuel characteristics to try to prevent or minimize the damages caused by crown fires . many have proposed reducing fuel loads to increase the ability to suppress wildfires and to reduce the likelihood of crown fires , and thus reducing the extent and damage of wildfires . as noted above , this has been documented as a valid presumption in some ecosystems , and possibly valid in others . it is , however , not appropriate for all ecosystems .