it did not fund the local initiatives fund . the choice neighborhood initiative is an obama administration initiative that would provide competitive grants to revitalize severely distressed neighborhoods . 3288 , as passed by the house , estimated that the fha funds would not need the positive appropriations for hecms assumed by the president's budget . the house - passed version of h.r . 3288 would provide more than an 11% increase in regular annual appropriations for hud programs , 3% more than the president's request . that increase would require more than a 13% increase in net new budget authority , also attributable to a decline in rescissions . the senate committee - reported version of h.r . president obama's transformation initiative requested the authority to transfer up to 1% of funding provided for most hud accounts to fund activities related to the development of research , evaluation , and performance metrics ; program demonstrations ; technical assistance and capacity building ; and next - generation information technology . hud estimates that , at the requested funding level , the transfer authority would make $433.5 million available to the transformation initiative in fy2010 . in addition , the budget requested $20 million in new appropriations to fund specific activities designed to address mortgage fraud , including fraud in the federal housing administration ( fha ) mortgage insurance programs . both the house and senate versions of h.r . 3288 , as well as p.l . the public housing program provides publicly owned and subsidized rental units for very low - income families . although no new public housing developments have been built for many years , congress continues to provide funds to the more than 3,100 public housing authorities ( phas ) that own and maintain the existing stock of more than 1.2 million units . through the public housing operating fund , hud provides funds to phas to help fill the gap between tenants' contributions toward rent and the cost of ongoing maintenance , utilities , and administration of public housing . through the public housing capital fund , hud provides funding to phas for large capital projects and modernization needs . in fy2009 , congress provided $4.455 billion for the operating fund , which was sufficient to fund an estimated 90% of pha budget eligibility . in fy2010 , president obama requested just under $4.600 billion , which hud's congressional budget justifications estimate would fully fund phas' budget needs . several of the pha industry groups have contended that hud's estimates are incorrect and that to fully fund pha budgets , the operating fund would need $5.050 billion in fy2010 . 111-117 provided $4.775 billion for the operating fund . president obama's fy2010 budget requested $2.244 billion for the capital fund . of that amount , $2.199 billion would be available for formula grants . the amount requested is roughly equal to the estimated $2 billion in new capital needs that accrue every year in public housing . in addition to new needs , there is an estimated backlog of roughly $20 billion in unmet capital needs . both the house - passed and senate committee - passed versions of h.r .