interpol . established in 1923 , the international criminal police organization , or interpol , is a 187-member state organization that facilitates international police co - operation and efforts to prevent and combat international crime . with respect to counternarcotics issues , interpol assists its member states to identify new drug trafficking trends and criminal organizations , and supports law enforcement efforts to combat drug trafficking . in africa , interpol launched project cocaf ( cocaine trafficking from western africa to europe ) in 2006 , which facilitates information sharing between european and african law enforcement agencies to identify and target emerging drug trafficking routes , particularly cocaine shipment on commercial air flights from west africa . interpol has also facilitated two other related efforts , project proteus , which was designed to combat cocaine trafficking originating in south america and transiting western africa en route to europe , and project drum , an effort to target the diversion of precursor chemicals in africa . interpol is also involved in policy capacity building in africa , through a project called oasis africa ( providing operational assistance , services , and infrastructure support to african police forces ) . the organization also deploys response teams that provide specialized expertise and investigative aid to countries facing major or serious police issues or cases . european union ( eu ) . in december 2007 , the eu committed to greater counternarcotics cooperation with and assistance for africa in the joint eu - africa strategy , adopted at the lisbon summit . the european commission ( ec ) and several european countries also provide counternarcotics assistance to some african countries at the bilateral and regional or sub - regional levels , and through international multilateral institutions , like the unodc and the dublin group . two additional initiatives that are partially funded by the ec include the maritime analysis and operations center — narcotics ( maoc - n ) , located in portugal and established in 2007 , and the mediterranean anti - drug coordination center ( ceclad - m ) , located in france and established in 2008 . these efforts support maritime surveillance and intelligence coordination pertaining to drug trafficking interdiction operations along maritime routes between africa and europe . ecowas and the eu ministerial troika also meet regularly to promote mutual security cooperation , including with respect to counternarcotics efforts . the eu is reportedly planning to allocate between €18 and 22 million for drug interdiction and information gathering ; in addition , the ec has pledged to provide €15 million in support of institutional development issues in the law enforcement and judicial sectors under an effort dubbed the "dakar initiative. congress is involved in many aspects of u.s. international drug control policy . members regularly appropriate funds for counterdrug initiatives , conduct oversight activities on federal counterdrug programs , and legislate changes to agency authorities and other counterdrug policies . recent activities , as discussed above , include the 110 th congress's passage of p.l . 110-417 , which required a dod counternarcotics strategy for africa and the senate foreign relations committee's conduct of a june 23 , 2009 , hearing entitled confronting drug trafficking in west africa .