market.' regarding correlation , the ab upheld the panel's finding that "the usitc's reliance on an overall coincidence between an upward movement in subject imports and a downward movement in injury factors reasonably supports" the usitc's causation determination , finding that the stricter correlation called for by china was not required . the ab also upheld the panel's rejection of china's argument that the usitc had improperly attributed injury caused by other factors , such as the domestic industry's business strategy , changes in demand , and the competitive significance of tires imported from other countries , to imports from china . the panel and appellate body reports were adopted by the wto dispute settlement body on october 5 , 2011 . with the reports adopted , the dispute is effectively terminated and china has no further recourse under wto dispute settlement rules on the matters involved . protocol on the accession of the people's republic of china ( part i, general provisions ) 16 . transitional product - specific safeguard mechanism 1 . in cases where products of chinese origin are being imported into the territory of any wto member in such increased quantities or under such conditions as to cause or threaten to cause market disruption to the domestic producers of like or directly competitive products , the wto member so affected may request consultations with china with a view to seeking a mutually satisfactory solution , including whether the affected wto member should pursue application of a measure under the agreement on safeguards . any such request shall be notified immediately to the committee on safeguards . if , in the course of these bilateral consultations , it is agreed that imports of chinese origin are such a cause and that action is necessary , china shall take such action as to prevent or remedy the market disruption . any such action shall be notified immediately to the committee on safeguards . if consultations do not lead to an agreement between china and the wto member concerned within 60 days of the receipt of a request for consultations , the wto member affected shall be free , in respect of such products , to withdraw concessions or otherwise to limit imports only to the extent necessary to prevent or remedy such market disruption . any such action shall be notified immediately to the committee on safeguards . ( emphasis added ) . clearly , this is not the language of ordinary events in routine commerce . in our view , the text of article xix:1 ( a ) of the gatt 1994 , read in its ordinary meaning and in its context , demonstrates that safeguard measures were intended by the drafters of the gatt to be matters out of the ordinary , to be matters of urgency , to be , in short , "emergency actions. and , such "emergency actions" are to be invoked only in situations when , as a result of obligations incurred under the gatt 1994 , a member finds itself confronted with developments it had not "foreseen" or "expected" when it incurred that obligation .