it does not exist . appendix a . congressional efforts on behalf of public safety communications many of the statutes passed since 2001 have provided guidelines and set performance goals for public safety communications while delegating decisions about implementation to federal agencies and state officials . although congress has appropriated money for public safety communications it has not directly addressed the question of investment in network infrastructure , leaving it largely to federal agencies to set priorities for how public safety grants can be used . most of the grant programs are now administered through the department of homeland security ( dhs ) . grants for emergency communications have been used to purchase equipment that facilitates interoperability , for planning , and for training . what might be the consequences of a federal policy that forces communities to decide between radios for their police force or teachers for their children , radios to fight fires or funds to maintain parks ? experience with early deployments of narrowband networks appears to indicate that many communities are buying two , four , maybe ten radios to provide for interoperable communications among senior level emergency managers , leaving the rest of their first responder resources to make do with existing equipment that might not work on the new network . at present , federal funds appear to go to build a sort of state - of - the - art wireless highway that only the radio equivalent of hummers can use . several states and urban areas have submitted detailed plans to the fcc for building the nation's first broadband networks that might serve as a practical framework for evaluating policy options . these plans , developed according to fcc requirements , share many common features . notable from a policy point of view are several recommendations that provide a common theme in these early submissions . these may be summarized as: ( 1 ) sufficient funding is essential ; ( 2 ) networks that either cover an area designated as eligible for urban area security initiative programs , or cover a regional area — that is , large and / or densely populated areas — are more efficient to build , operate , and govern ; ( 3 ) several critical technologies and standards , such as for radios , must be developed before the networks can be fully effective ; ( 4 ) some form of governing sur - structure must be in place to assure uniformity of core operations while allowing for local customization of public safety applications ; and ( 5 ) collaboration with commercial partners is important for mustering all the skills and knowledge resources needed for developing the leading - edge broadband networks that are the goals of the submitted plans . a governance structure that can deliver these elements might meet the needs described by many representatives of the public safety community . to facilitate planning and coordination , and to provide direction , congress authorized the creation of an office of emergency communications ( oec ) within dhs . the oec was given the responsibility of preparing a national emergency communications plan ( necp ) .