eda is the lead agency of the icawg. although eda has published regulations governing subchapter a , trade adjustment assistance to communities , the department of labor has not yet published regulations governing assistance to community colleges and sector partnership grants . the absence of such guidance may delay timely implementation of program activities and undermine the program's effectiveness . in addition , congress did not immediately provide an initial appropriation for the subchapter b ( ccct ) and subchapter c ( ispg ) grants for fy2009 or fy2010 . congress did appropriate $500 million for ccct grants for each of the fiscal years fy2011 through fy2014 when it passed the health care and education reconciliation act of 2010 , p.l . 111-152 , which was signed by the president on march 30 , 2010 . this was well over a year after passing initial appropriations for subchapter a activities . in addition , congress has not yet appropriated funding for ispg activities . the principal role of the icawg is to provide access to other federal programs when a ctaa designated community undertakes grant activities . the ctaa program's legislation and its rules encourage coordination with other economic development programs , directing eda to identify possible grant assistance that might be available from other federal agencies , but does not guarantee trade adjustment assistance communities preference or priority in the awarding of such assistance . in addition , in an effort to enhance effectiveness and avoid duplication , the law anticipates a high degree of coordination between eda and the department of labor's employment and training administration ( eta ) , which is responsible for the administration of the community college - based training program grants and sector partnership grants authorized under subchapters b and c of the act . for instance , the statute requires an educational institution submitting a grant proposal to eta for ccct grant assistance to include a detailed description of the extent to which the proposed grant activity would fit within the strategic plan developed by a community eligible for ctaa assistance , and to explain how the ccct grant proposal relates to any project funded by a sector partnership grant . in addition , the statute requires an entity seeking a sector or industry partnership grant to include in its grant application a discussion of whether the community impacted by trade has sought or received ctaa implementation grant funds , whether an eligible education institution had sought or received ccct grant funds , and how the eligible sector partnership entity will use grant assistance in coordination with ctaa , ccct , and funds from other grant sources . congress may elect to amend the statue to more precisely define terms . 111-152 or to pay an employee at the dol to implement the relevant provisions of p.l . on august 18 , 2009 , the department of commerce's economic development administration ( eda ) published in the federal register final rules and regulations governing the implementation of the trade adjustment assistance for communities ( ctaa ) grant program . the regulations outline the responsibilities of eda in administering the program including determining a community's eligibility for ctaa planning and implementation grants , providing technical assistance to impacted communities , and evaluating grant applications .