ii. finally , the court stressed that its holding was narrow: we do not decide that the president possesses plenary power to settle claims , even as against foreign governmental entities... . but where , as here , the settlement of claims has been determined to be a necessary incident to the resolution of a major foreign policy dispute between our country and another , and where , as here , we can conclude that congress acquiesced in the president's action , we are not prepared to say that the president lacks the power to settle such claims . a review of the history of intelligence collection and its regulation by congress suggests that the two political branches have never quite achieved a meeting of the minds regarding their respective powers . presidents have long contended that the ability to conduct surveillance for intelligence purposes is a purely executive function , and have tended to make broad assertions of authority while resisting efforts on the part of congress or the courts to impose restrictions . congress has asserted itself with respect to domestic surveillance , but has largely left matters involving overseas surveillance to executive self - regulation , subject to congressional oversight and willingness to provide funds . investigations for the purpose of gathering foreign intelligence give rise to a tension between the government's legitimate national security interests and the protection of privacy interests and first amendment rights . the interception of wire , oral , or electronic communications is regulated by title iii of the omnibus crime control and safe streets act of 1968 ( "title iii" ) , as amended . government surveillance for criminal law enforcement is permitted under certain circumstances and in accordance with the procedures set forth in title iii . government surveillance for the gathering of foreign intelligence information is covered by fisa . these statutes are relevant to the analysis of the legality of the reported nsa surveillance to the extent that their provisions are meant to cover such surveillance , prohibit it , or explicitly exempt it from requirements therein . if congress meant for fisa to occupy the entire field of electronic surveillance of the type that is being conducted pursuant to the president's executive order , then the operation may fall under the third tier of justice jackson's formula , in which the president's "power is at its lowest ebb" and a court could sustain it only by "disabling the congress from acting upon the subject. in other words , if fisa , together with title iii , were found to occupy the field , then for a court to sustain the president's authorization of electronic surveillance to acquire foreign intelligence information outside the fisa framework , fisa would have to be considered an unconstitutional encroachment on inherent presidential authority . if , on the other hand , fisa leaves room for the nsa surveillance outside its strictures , then the claimed power might fall into the first or second categories , as either condoned by congress ( expressly or implicitly ) , or simply left untouched .