the forest service does not currently authorize any such projects on its lands . applicants seeking to make use of forest service lands for such a project would apply for "special use authorization" under the generally applicable regulations for such authorizations . blm will accept the highest bid from a qualified bidder . the winning bidder must pay 20% of the bid amount , the total amount of the first year's rental , and a processing fee to blm by the close of business on the day following the day of the lease sale . the remainder of the bid amount must be submitted to blm within 15 calendar days of the day of the sale . lands offered at a competitive lease sale that receive no bids are made available for noncompetitive leasing for a two - year period beginning the first business day following the date of the lease sale . for the first 30 days following the lease sale , leases are available only for parcels as configured for the lease sale ; after 30 days , blm accepts applications for any available lands covered by the lease sale . holders of mining claims on federal lands may apply for noncompetitive geothermal leases within the lands on which they hold claims . geothermal steam project leases can also be obtained though "direct use" leasing . direct use of geothermal energy involves the use of geothermal hot water directly for its intended end use , rather than for transfer into electricity that is then transmitted to the end user . applicants can obtain direct use leases if ( 1 ) the lands in question are open for geothermal leasing ; ( 2 ) blm determines that the lands are appropriate for direct use operations without sale for purposes other than commercial generation of electricity ; ( 3 ) blm has published notice of the proposal to use the land for direct use leasing ; ( 4 ) during the 90-day period following the publication of such notice , blm does not receive any nomination to include the land in question in the next competitive lease sale ; and ( 5 ) blm determines there is not competitive interest in the resource . geothermal leases generally have an initial primary term of 10 years , with a number of extensions that can extend the term at the discretion of blm . the first five - year extension is granted if the lessee has expended a minimum of $40 per acre in development activities that provide additional geologic or reservoir information . subsequent extensions may be granted upon showings of continued annual expenditures and progress in the development of geothermal resources . lessees are required to make annual rental payments to blm . for leases acquired in a competitive lease sale and issued on or after august 8 , 2005 , the annual rent is $2 per acre for the 1 st year and $3 per acre for the 2 nd through the 10 th year . for leases acquired non - competitively , the annual rent is $1 per acre for the first 10 years of the lease . for both types of leases , the annual rent is $5 per acre each year after the 10 th year .