it should also be noted that under h.r . 2454 , a large share of allowances ( eg , 17% of 2030 allowances ) are auctioned several years ahead of time for deficit reduction or consumer rebates . the revenue from these auctions would be generated in the year the allowances were auctioned , but entities could not use the allowances to cover their emissions until the "vintage year" or thereafter . if , for example , a 2030 allowance were auctioned in 2025 , that allowance could not be used to cover an entity's emissions until 2030 or later . therefore , the market value of allowances in those early auctions would likely be lower than allowances auctioned for use in the current year . this provision would lead to a forward shift in auction revenue for that share of allowances , but the potential revenue may be difficult to predict . that slight difference can be seen in figure 1 . an allowance under a cap - and - trade system is effectively a permit to emit — in the case of the two bills , a permit to emit one ton of carbon dioxide or its equivalent . these allowances represent significant value either in terms of a wealth transfer in the case of directly allocated allowances or government revenue in the case of auctioned allowances . both bills allocate allowances or auction revenue to support various purposes . in contrast , the percentage in the senate bill is based on covered entities' actual emissions — which would depend on multiple factors , including banking and offset use / supply — and can only be determined using emission projections . using epa's estimates of covered entity emissions ( results from the agency's h.r . 2454 analysis ) , the percentages would be 35% in 2016 , 41% in 2030 and 48% in 2050 . the house and senate programs would also differ in their allowable proportions of domestic and international offsets . in the house program , 50% of a covered entity's allowable offset submission could come from domestic projects , 50% from international sources ( i.e. , in 2016 , 13.5% of a covered entity's allowance submission could be domestic offsets ; another 13.5% could be international offsets ) . in the senate , the ratio is 75% from domestic projects and 25% from international projects . although both bills would provide conditional authority for epa to increase ( on an annual basis ) the percentage of international offsets allowed , the annual volume of international offsets could not exceed 1.25 billion tons in the senate bill , but could reach up to 1.5 billion tons in the house bill . in addition , the house and senate bills authorize different agencies to implement their respective offset programs . the senate bill would delegate domestic program authority to the president and international program authority to epa . the house bill would effectively create two offset programs: a domestic agriculture and forestry program would be implemented by the department of agriculture ; other domestic projects and all international projects would be under the primary authority of the epa . a major concern with respect to a cap - and - trade program is potential allowance market abuse and manipulation .