but all that is yet to be decided upon. clinton also said the administration's thinking developed as part of consultations with a wide range of other countries and that the u.s. remains interested in engaging with iran , even as it considers ways to pressure tehran through sanctions . how will sanctions affect engagement with iran and how might they increase or diminish the prospects for a negotiated resolution to iran's nuclear program ? in any case , the policies pursued by the united states and the international community will continue to affect regional approaches toward iran , and could have implication for other u.s. and international interests in the middle east . while attention in the united states tends to focus on the response of european countries to expanded unilateral sanctions or the likelihood that russia and china would join an international effort to impose sanctions on iran , many of iran's neighbors would also be affected . iran has strong economic relations and shared economic interests with many of its neighbors that could be complicated by efforts to further isolate it . it is unclear whether iran's neighbors would stop trade or forgo plans to cooperate in the area of resource exploitation in the face of international condemnation . the united arab emirates ( uae ) , for example , is among iran's major gasoline suppliers by virtue of the fact that much of the refined petroleum products that iran imports transit storage facilities in the uae en route to iran . turkey and armenia depend on cooperation with iran to reduce their dependence on russia for energy resources . expanded sanctions could force iran's neighbors to choose between cooperating with the international community and their own economic well - being . regardless of the answers to these questions , most analysts agree that sanctions are the logical next step and that if they fail the u.s. and the international community could be forced to weigh the costs of a preemptive strike against the implications of a nuclear iran . so far , the obama administration has as well . they have also both referred to the end of 2009 as a deadline for iran to demonstrate its willingness to cooperate with the international community on the nuclear issue . engagement and sanctions are both aimed at alleviating tensions over iran's nuclear program , but many also view them as the best hope for preventing a new war in the middle east . israeli prime minister binyamin netanyahu has made it clear that "all options remain on the table" for dealing with iran , including the military option . some argue that tension between iran and israel could bring israel and / or the united states and iran's arab neighbors closer together , perhaps even to some level of cooperation . others caution that any israeli strike could outrage iran's arab neighbors , and that the conflict would become regional and factious . the security of u.s. military personnel , facilities , and material in neighboring countries is also of concern to u.s. decision makers and regional leaders . most regional states ( with a few noteworthy exceptions ) are concerned primarily with avoiding potential conflicts with iran that could lead to military action or regional instability .