resources . concentrations in the earth's crust of naturally occurring liquid or gaseous hydrocarbons that can conceivably be discovered and recovered . undiscovered resources . resources postulated , on the basis of the geologic knowledge and theory , to exist outside of known fields or accumulations . undiscovered technically recoverable resources ( utrr ) . these deposits have been generally discovered and produced first . examples of the deposits at the top of the resource pyramid are the large oil deposits of saudi arabia and the enormous natural gas deposits of qatar . undiscovered economically recoverable resources ( uerr ) . all reserve estimates involve some degree of uncertainty . reserves appreciation . the observed incremental increase through time in the estimates of reserves ( proved and unproved ) of an oil and / or natural gas field as a consequence of extension , revision , improved recovery , and the additions of new reservoirs . oil and gas that may be produced as a consequence of natural pressure , artificial lift , pressure maintenance , or other secondary recovery methods , but without any consideration of economic viability . they are primarily located outside of known fields . moving down the pyramid , the quality and / or accessibility declines , and production becomes more difficult and expensive . a large oil deposit in the deep waters of the gulf of mexico would be further down the pyramid than a comparable deposit on land because of the added expense and technology required to produce it . it is important to note that the deposits at the bottom of the pyramid may be quite extensive . deposits may be of poor quality or diffuse , but may occur in vast quantities . examples of fossil fuel deposits that would be found at the bottom of the pyramid are oil shale and methane hydrates ( both discussed further under " sub - economic oil and natural gas resources " ) . oil shale and methane hydrate deposits contain massive amounts of oil and natural gas , but their mode of occurrence , poor accessibility , and difficult recovery make them difficult to produce and / or sub - economic currently . the economic threshold for producing deposits further down the pyramid is partly a function of commodity price . that threshold is also moved by the development of new extraction technologies that make production feasible at lower cost . for u.s. oil deposits , the resource pyramid ( figure 2 ) indicates that many of the high - quality , easy - to - find deposits have already been produced . current proved reserves ( see " terminology " ) include many deposits that are of lower quality or with poorer access than some historical production , but which are still economic under current market conditions . as long as demand for oil continues , the exploration and production process will move down the pyramid under the influences of price ( including environmental costs in some cases ) and technology . whether the vast deposits of oil shale that are lower on the pyramid will be produced depends on the price of oil , the cost of production ( including environmental cost ) , and the availability of technology to produce it .