grants to states program . imls has also investigated the potential of using a population - based state grant program as a mechanism to distribute federal funding for museum services . its reauthorization may be considered by the 111 th congress . one issue that may arise during reauthorization is the current status of conservation and preservation of museum and library collections . other issues that may arise include general issues of funding across museum and library services , the changing role of libraries in communities , and alternative funding models for museum services . this report describes the background , history , and current policy and programs of both library services and museum services . some argue that there is a continuing need for this program , and they argue that it should receive a specific authorization in the upcoming reauthorization . the fy2003 budget request to congress stated that librarians had "one of the highest median ages of any occupation ( 47 years old ) . the budget request indicated that impending retirements , among other things , supported the need for a new program to recruit and educate the next generation of librarians . the most recent bls employment projections indicate that more than two out of three librarians are 45 or older . for that reason , some recommend that language be added during reauthorization to ensure that lst state grant funds can be used for continuing education for library staff . enhancing policy research and coordination of library services . as discussed earlier in the report , the 2003 reauthorization of imls included new language requiring the agency to undertake analyses of the impact of library and museum services . the upcoming reauthorization may consider making this role more expansive by including more extensive , detailed requirements of imls . possible amendments would also reflect consideration of the implementation of existing provisions to date . in addition , there may be proposals for new authorizing language regarding the responsibilities ( previously housed with nclis and the department of education ) that have been delegated to imls ( also discussed earlier in this report ) . in addition , they provide after school activities , online homework help , early childhood literacy programs , technology training , and adult literacy classes , among other things . library advocates argue that the involvement of libraries in this wide array of community resources and services could be expanded with more support ; they are encouraging that an increased emphasis on these activities be incorporated into the upcoming legislation reauthorizing the imls . they also argue that the role for libraries in providing needed services to communities during national disasters should be addressed in the upcoming reauthorization . role of libraries as a p rovider of employment and job - training resources . one of the new activities being provided by more libraries is assistance for job seekers . many employers now require all job applications to be filed online . in addition to free internet access , examples of services that are currently being provided by libraries include online job searches , provision of career information , and training on resume development .