physicians . the secretary would be required to conduct a study to determine how this readmissions policy could be applied to physicians and issue a public report no later than one year after enactment . such approaches would be required to be considered: ( 1 ) creating a code ( or codes ) and budget neutral payment amount ( s ) under the fee schedule for services furnished by an appropriate physicians who sees an individual within the first week after discharge from a hospital or cah . ; ( 2 ) developing measures of readmissions rates for individuals treated by physicians ; ( 3 ) applying a payment reduction for physicians who treat the patient during the initial admissions that results in a readmission ; and ( 4 ) methods for attributing payments or payment reductions to the appropriate physician or physicians . funding . in addition to funds otherwise available , $25 million for each fiscal year beginning with 2010 would be appropriated to the cms program management account ; the amounts appropriated for a fiscal year would be available until expended . the cbo score is - $ 2 . 0 billion for fy2010-fy2014 and - $ 9 . 3 billion for fy2010-fy20 19 . sec . post - acute care services payment reform plan and bundling pilot program . medicare pays for most post - acute care ( pac ) services , including skilled nursing facilities ( snf ) , long - term care hospitals ( ltch ) , inpatient rehabilitation facilities ( irf ) , and home health , under prospective payment systems ( pps ) established for each type of provider . payments across pac settings may differ considerably even though the clinical characteristics of the patient and the services delivered may be very similar . the deficit reduction act of 2005 ( p.l . 109-171 ) required the centers for medicare and medicaid services ( cms ) to develop a post acute care payment reform demonstration ( pac demonstration ) to standardize patient assessment information from pac settings and to use these data to guide payment policy in the medicare program . this demonstration began in 2008 and a report is expected to be submitted to congress by the secretary in 2011 . cms has also established a three - year acute care episode ( ace ) demonstration to test the effects of using a bundled payment for hospital and physician services for a set of 9 orthopedic and 28 cardiovascular conditions . there are five participants in the ace demonstration which began early in 2009 . the provision would require the secretary to develop a detailed plan for bundling payments for medicare's pac services ( snfs , irfs , ltchs , hospital based outpatient rehabilitation facilities , and home health agencies services ) provided after discharge from a hospital and as determined appropriate by the secretary . the goals of this payment reform would be to improve the coordination , quality and efficiency of pac services and improve outcomes for individuals such as reducing the need for readmission to hospitals from providers .