sec . 3511 of ppaca would authorize the appropriation of ssan for the nih and samhsa offices . this section and amendments made by it would not alter existing regulatory authority ; terminate , reorganize , or transfer authority away from women's health offices in existence as of enactment without the approval of congress ; or change existing administrative activities at hhs regarding women's health . this section would add a new sec . 510 of the rehabilitation act requiring the architectural and transportation barriers compliance board , in consultation with fda , to issue regulatory standards for minimal technical criteria for medical diagnostic equipment ( as specified ) used in medical settings . the standards must ensure that individuals with disabilities can use , enter , and exit such equipment independently , to the maximum extent possible . the board would be required periodically to review the standards and amend them as necessary . this section would amend sec . 7 of the fair labor standards act of 1938 , to require employers to provide a reasonable break time for an employee to express breast milk for her nursing child for one year after the child's birth each time such employee has need to express the milk , and a place to do so , other than a bathroom , that is shielded from view and free from intrusion from coworkers and the public . an employer would not be required to compensate an employee for such break time . employers of fewer than 50 employees would not be subject to these requirements if they would impose an undue hardship by causing the employer significant difficulty or expense when considered in relation to the size , financial resources , nature , or structure of the employer's business . this provision would not preempt a state law that provides greater protections to employees . sec . 6801 expresses the sense of the senate that ( 1 ) health care reform presents an opportunity to address issues related to medical malpractice and medical liability insurance ; ( 2 ) states should be encouraged to develop and test litigation alternatives while preserving an individual's right to seek redress in court ; and ( 3 ) congress should consider establishing a state demonstration program to evaluate alternatives to the existing civil litigation system with respect to medical malpractice claims . sec . 4872 is now under consideration by the full senate . in a november 2008 report outlining its goals for health reform , the national priorities partnership , representing 32 key stakeholder groups in the health sector , identified four major challenges to the delivery of high - quality care . according to the partnership , the first is to improve patient safety by eliminating medical errors and other adverse events . these errors mostly result from faulty systems , processes , and conditions that lead to mistakes . the second challenge is to eradicate disparities in care . racial and ethnic minorities and low - income groups face disproportionately higher rates of disease , disability , and mortality , largely because of variations in access to care , and quality of care .