further , it had no religious purpose . enda contains several exceptions . first , the armed forces , which include the army , navy , air force , marines , and coast guard , would be exempt , and the legislation specifies that current laws regarding veterans' preferences in employment would not be affected . the courts have similarly held that uniformed military personnel are not covered by title vii , although civilian military employees are protected by title vii . notably , certain religious organizations would also be exempt from coverage under enda . this exemption is consistent with previous congressional efforts to avoid infringing on a religious organization's exercise of religion with respect to its employment practices , such as the title vii provision that exempts certain religious organizations from compliance with that statute . in that sense , enda would expand the current protection offered to religious organizations relating to discrimination in employment practices . title vii includes two exceptions that allow certain employers to consider religion in employment decisions . under the amendment , federal agencies or state or local agencies that receive federal funding would be prohibited from withholding benefits or barring program participation for religious employers who are exempt from enda . enforcement procedures under enda would parallel the enforcement provisions of title vii . thus , the department of justice ( doj ) would enforce enda against state and local governments , and administrative enforcement with respect to private employment would be delegated to the eeoc , which would have the same authority to receive and investigate complaints , to negotiate voluntary settlements , and to seek judicial remedies as it currently exercises under title vii . similarly , in devising remedies for sexual orientation or gender identity discrimination under the legislation , a federal court would have the same jurisdiction and powers as the court has to enforce title vii . in general , federal courts possess broad remedial discretion under title vii , including the ability to enjoin the unlawful employment practice and to "order such affirmative action as may be appropriate , which may include , but is not limited to , reinstatement or hiring of employees , with or without back pay ... or any other relief as the court deems appropriate. although the supreme court early on adopted a "make - whole" theory of title vii relief , including use of affirmative action remedies , minority preferences and the like , where necessary to redress discrimination of a particularly "egregious" or "longstanding" nature , enda would specifically forbid employers from using quotas or preferential treatment . likewise , the remedies under enda would be patterned on title vii's remedial provisions . under title vii , victims of discrimination may seek equitable relief , including limited back pay awards for wage , salary , and fringe benefits lost as the result of discrimination . private employers who intentionally discriminate in violation of the statute may be liable for compensatory and punitive damages , while plaintiffs may seek awards of compensatory , but not punitive , damages against federal , state , and local governmental agencies .