among the provisions in p.l . pension income is not classified as earned income . social security recipients who also receive wages — section 2201 of the arra provided for social security recipients to receive a one - time payment of $250 . the mwp credit was reduced by the amount of any payments under sections 2201 or 2202 of the arra . individuals who were advanced the $400 mwp credit and also received the social security economic recovery payment had to repay the excess received . the irs's response included in the inspector general's report indicated that the irs had been engaging in outreach efforts to increase awareness of the mwp credit . the irs has also indicated that it would alert taxpayers that they may request a waiver from the penalty for estimated taxes . the estimated tax penalty applies to individuals who fail to have a sufficient amount of income tax withheld throughout the year . individuals who received income from pensions may have seen an increase in the amount of their federal income tax withholding and therefore lower after - tax income ( "take home" ) in 2011 . this was not the result of any tax increase enacted by congress . this was a result of the expiration of the mwp tax credit on december 31 , 2010 . and this proposal , the payroll tax holiday , will give $320 , and there is that $80 difference . on the other hand , the proposal such as the house bill that contained the making work pay would not have included any of the three refundable tax credits that i mentioned , which cumulatively , for that family , are on average worth several hundred dollars . obviously it depends on how many kids the family has and what the situation is — but on average would work out to about $300 for such a family , one ; two , would not have included the continuation of unemployment insurance benefits , which provide $300 a week in benefits ; and three , takes no account of the extra growth increment that will come from this program . if you raised gdp by 1 percent , that's $2,000 for the average family . so as i've emphasized , this was a compromise . adjusted gross income ( agi ) includes income that would not be eligible for the mwp tax credit . examples include rental income , interest income , and rent and royalty income . salaries and wages composed 72.0% of agi for 2008 tax returns and was likely a larger percentage of income for single filers with agi of less than $20,000 and married filers with agi less than $40,000 . figure 1 and figure 2 show the dollar amounts available for single filers and married filers under the mwp tax credit and the social security payroll tax holiday . figure 1 shows that for individuals who made less than $20,000 , the dollar amount received under the mwp tax credit in 2010 was more than the dollar amount of the reduction in payroll taxes in 2011 .