circuit ) . accordingly , contract damages will continue to build as delays in the disposal of snf continue . this report analyzes more than 15 years of ongoing litigation over the government's obligations to collect and dispose of snf under the nwpa . first , the report will provide a brief overview of the nwpa , the statute's subsequent amendments , and its relationship to nuclear waste disposal . second , the report will provide a survey of key legal issues that have emerged during the protracted waste storage contract litigation , including a discussion of a significant jurisdictional dispute between the d.c . circuit and the u.s. court of federal claims . finally , the report will consider the prospects for future liability arising as a result of further delays in the disposal of the nation's high - level nuclear waste . issues relating to the nwpa have been consistently litigated for the last 15 years , and will continue to be litigated into the immediate future . many difficult legal questions have arisen during this time period due to the somewhat peculiar relationship between the nwpa and the standard contract and the courts' attempts to distinguish between statutory and contractual duties . although doe argued early on that the department had no obligations absent a completed permanent repository , the courts have ruled that doe had a statutory obligation to begin collecting snf by no later than january 31 , 1998 . as that statutory obligation was also converted into a contractual obligation through the standard contract , the courts have also determined that doe's delay in collecting the nuclear utilities' snf has placed the federal government in partial breach of contract . additionally , overturning a divergent decision by the u.s. court of federal claims , the u.s. court of appeals for the federal circuit ( federal circuit ) has affirmed a d.c . circuit order that prohibits doe from concluding that the lack of a permanent repository excuses doe from liability for the delay in acceptance of snf . approximately 78 lawsuits have been filed against doe related to the department's failure to commence the collection and disposal of snf . of the lawsuits , a large majority remain pending . as of the end of 2011 , the government's liability — based on settlements , final judgments , and entered judgments under appeal — stands at over $2 billion . the following section will highlight key court decisions that have emerged from the ongoing contractual dispute between doe and the nuclear power utilities . the total costs to taxpayers for delays associated with performing on the standard contract are difficult to project , especially given the uncertainty regarding the future of the yucca mountain facility or any alternative permanent repository for snf . however , absent a significant change in the direction of nwpa - related litigation , doe predicts that damages stemming from partial breach of contract claims will measure close to $20.8 billion if the government is able to begin accepting snf by 2020 — an unlikely occurrence given the administration's decision to terminate the yucca mountain project . approximately $500 million in additional legal damages will continue to build with each year beyond 2020 that doe is unable to begin accepting snf .