the programs are funded somewhat differently . dol allocates funding for the youth activities program to state wdbs based on a formula , while job corps enters into contracts with nonprofit and for - profit organizations and into an interagency agreement with the u.s. department of agriculture's forest service . the other programs competitively award grants to nonprofit and other organizations and local communities . table 1 summarizes the programs' major features . wioa provides funding authorization from fy2015 through fy2019 for youth employment and job training programs . funds appropriated for a program or activity carried out under title i of the act are available for obligation on the basis of a program year . section 169 authorizes evaluations and research . dol's employment and training administration ( eta ) administers the four programs . all of the programs offer employment , job training , and educational services . for example , local workforce development areas must provide specific elements , including mentoring and follow - up , to youth who receive services under the youth activities program . youthbuild program participants engage in employment and other activities primarily related to housing and other types of construction work . job corps is the only one of the programs that provides residential services ; youth can live onsite and receive health care services , child care , and other supports . further , the programs generally serve vulnerable youth . participants in youthbuild and job corps must be low - income and have specified barriers to employment . the same is true in the youth activities program , except those who are out - of - school do not have to be low - income . the youth component of the reentry employment opportunities program serves youth who have become involved in the juvenile justice or criminal justice system or youth at risk of becoming involved . the program year begins on july 1 in the fiscal year for which the appropriation is made and ends june 30 of the following year . funds for the youth activities program may first become available for a new program year in the preceding april . in addition , congress has tended to specify that funds appropriated for youthbuild and the youth component of the reentry employment opportunities program are available for obligation beginning in the april preceding a given program year . congress has generally required that obligated funds for job corps are made available for one program year , although funding for certain purposes can be obligated through later dates . funds obligated for any program year for the youth activities may be expended by each state receiving such funds during that program year and the two succeeding program years . local areas may expend funds received from the state during the program year and the succeeding program year . grants to provide education and employment activities for youth offenders have been funded by dol since fy1999 . under wia , these grants were made part of the reintegration of ex - offenders program . funding for the program was authorized under both wia and section 112 ( responsible reintegration of offenders ) of the second chance act ( p.l . 110-199 ) , enacted on april 9 , 2008 .