it was disbanded in 2005 . in april 2006 , national security advisor stephen hadley authorized creation of a new policy coordinating committee for public diplomacy and strategic communication ( pcc ) , to be led by the under secretary of state for public diplomacy and public affairs , with support from the deputy national security advisor for strategic communication and global outreach . the pcc was intended to act as the principal interagency coordination body for u.s. government communications with foreign publics , and is comprised of representatives from the state department , dod , the department of the treasury , the national security council , the intelligence community , and other agencies . the global strategic engagement center , established by former under secretary of state for public diplomacy and public affairs james k. glassman , acts as a subject - matter advisory group for the pcc , and also serves as a response unit for counterterrorism communications . it is staffed by civilian personnel from the state department , the central intelligence agency , and other agencies , as well as by active - duty military personnel . in 2007 , the pcc released the national strategy for public diplomacy and strategic communication . it articulates three strategic objectives for u.s. government communications with foreign publics: 1 . america must offer a positive vision of hope and opportunity that is rooted in our most basic values . with our partners , we seek to isolate and marginalize violent extremists who threaten the freedom and peace sought by civilized people of every nation , culture and faith . america must work to nurture common interests and values between americans and peoples of different countries , cultures and faiths across the world . it identifies three main target audiences: ( 1 ) key influencers , those who can effectively guide foreign societies in line with u.s. interests ; ( 2 ) vulnerable populations , including the youth , women and girls , and minority groups ; and ( 3 ) mass audiences , who are more connected to information about the united states and the world than ever before through new and expanding global communications media . the strategy identifies three public diplomacy priorities: expand education and exchange programs , "perhaps the single most effective public diplomacy tool of the last fifty years" ; modernize communications , including a heightened profile for u.s. officials in foreign media , increased foreign language training for u.s. diplomats , and utilization of internet media such as web chats , blogs , and interactive websites ; and promote the "diplomacy of deeds," publicizing u.s. activities to benefit foreign populations through humanitarian assistance , health and education programs , and economic development , as well as u.s. government activities that show respect for foreign culture and history . as the first steps toward better interagency coordination and unity of effort with regard to public diplomacy and strategic communication , the strategy asked each relevant agency to develop an agency - specific plan to implement the objectives of the strategy , as well as to increase information sharing with other agencies to encourage clear and consistent messaging across all u.s. government communications to foreign publics .