this is somewhat unusual . between the 101 st ( 1989-1991 ) and the 110 th congress ( 2007-2009 ) , 12 out of approximately 80 congressional advisory commissions have either explicitly required , or otherwise contained language that could allow , members to serve as commissioners . using members of congress as commission members may complicate one of the potential advantages of the typical commission structure — the use of unelected experts one step removed from the political process . on the other hand , if a commission has the ability to construct legislative packages that would be subject to expedited congressional consideration , appointment of non - members to a commission might be viewed as a delegation of legislative power away from congress . in addition , some proposals for commissions in previous congresses arguably would have transferred some power to the president . from either perspective , appointment of commissioners who are not members of congress might raise questions about congress delegating power and authority to the president or unelected , nongovernmental interests . as described previously , each of the proposals employs a structure that provides for appointments by both the majority and minority parties in congress , as well as by the executive branch . one of the proposals , s. 276 , would provide for an even partisan balance of appointments , with an equal number of appointments from majority and minority congressional leaders , as well as a requirement that the seven presidential appointments be three democrats , three republicans , and one person who "shall not be affiliated with any political party. s. 2853 and s. 1056 would both provide for an even partisan balance of congressional appointments , but also include two partisan executive branch appointments ( the secretary of the treasury and one discretionary presidential appointment in s. 2853 ; the secretary of the treasury and the director of omb in s. 1056 ) . 1557 would provide for a majority advantage in congressional appointments and two partisan executive branch appointments ( the director of omb and the secretary of the treasury ) . 1557 and s. 1056 would include two non - voting members , the comptroller general and the director of the congressional budget office . most past congressional commissions have been structured to be bipartisan , with either an even split of appointments between majority and minority or with a one - or two - member advantage for the majority . for example , the 9 / 11 commission had an even partisan split of appointments . by achieving a nonpartisan or bipartisan character , congressional commissions may make their findings and recommendations more politically acceptable to diverse viewpoints . the bipartisan or nonpartisan arrangement can give recommendations strong credibility , both in congress and among the public , even when dealing with divisive issues of public policy . similarly , a commission bill that is perceived as partisan may have difficulty gathering the necessary support in congress . in some cases , however , seeking bipartisanship may reduce the potential legislative coalition for the bill , if supporters believe that the commission's work would be compromised by creating a bipartisan commission .