art . i , § 8 , cls . 1 , 3 , 7 , 14 , and 17 — by enacting criminal statutes. section 4248 , it contended , "is a rational incident to congress' article i powers to enact criminal laws , provide for the operation of a penal system , and assume for the united states custodial responsibilities for its prisoners. the comstock group responded that the constitution does not permit enactment of legislation whose sole nexus to an enumerated power is that it is rationally related to an endeavor which is itself valid only because it is necessary and proper for carry into execution an enumerated power: "the government characterizes § 4248 as an exercise of congress' powers to enact criminal laws and operate a prison system . those powers are not enumerated anywhere in the constitution . rather , they are justified as necessary and proper means of carrying out specific enumerated powers. moreover , the comstock group contended the distinction is important because after an individual has served his sentence the connection to an enumerated power no longer exists: "once the power to enforce a federal criminal law has been exhausted , further exercises of federal power are not 'necessary and proper' to effectuating the enumerated power underlying that federal law. the court in united states v. comstock adopted the justice department's sequential or stepping stone argument , up to a point . the court agreed that the necessary and proper clause permits congress to create federal criminal laws to ensure compliance with legislation enacted pursuant to one of its enumerated powers . having permitted the creation of criminal laws , it permits legislation necessary and proper to punish offenders . having permitted the punishment of offenders , it permits legislation necessary and proper to punish offenders by imprisonment . having permitted the punishment of offenders by imprisonment , it permits legislation necessary and proper to create penal institutions in which terms of imprisonment may be served . having permitted the creation of penal institutions for federal criminal offenders , it permits legislation necessary and proper to safeguard others from those in federal custody both before and after the offenders are release from federal custody . or in the words of the court , section 4248 "is a necessary and proper means of exercising the federal authority that permits congress to create federal criminal laws , to punish their violation , to imprison violators , to provide appropriately for those imprisoned , and to maintain the security of those who are not imprisoned but who may be affected by the federal imprisonment of others. the court made it clear , however , that it had applied its method of analysis only after considering factors in the case which both justify the conclusion and limit its application . the considerations include " ( 1 ) the breadth of the necessary and proper clause," as understood dating from chief justice marshall's landmark pronouncement in mcculloch v. maryland , 17 u.s. ( 4 wheat. )