, no new mechanisms ) . more are planned during the copenhagen meeting . it has become increasingly uncertain whether it will be possible in copenhagen to reach comprehensive and detailed agreement to address climate change in the period beyond 2012 , when the kyoto protocol's first period of ghg commitments expires ( discussed in " background " below ) . without a new detailed accord , alternative outcomes are possible . one alternative could be a "framework" decision among high - level officials that spells out a plausible mandate for a future treaty — an outline more likely than the current one to gain broad consensus among nations . another alternative could be a breakdown of negotiations . while all parties may contribute to a potential breakdown , many people would blame the united states . resulting anger could spill over into other international issues , influencing other u.s. foreign policy objectives . the climate change issue has become politically significant internationally and domestically , with major legislation to control greenhouse gases passed by the house ( h.r . 2454 ) and under development in the senate ( s. 1733 among others ) . domestic legislation will interplay with any commitments made internationally , and actions taken by other countries to address climate change will likely have an impact on the united states . congress will decide whether the united states becomes a party to any agreement . if the president submits an agreement as a treaty , the senate must give its consent to ratification for the treaty to be legally binding on the united states . alternatively , both chambers of congress would have to approve any agreement that the president submits before such agreement becomes binding on the united states . consequently , the u.s. congress has taken an interest in what the u.s. delegation may offer and oppose in copenhagen . members may also have interest in how the united states and its allies handle diplomatic and public reactions coming out of the copenhagen meeting , whatever its outcome . recognition has crystallized that the objective to halt growth of ghg concentrations in the atmosphere requires slowing then reversing growth of ghg emissions by all major countries . despite these facts , most countries argue that the annex i countries have not fully met their unfccc and kyoto protocol obligations to reduce ghg emissions and assist developing countries ( with the united states especially criticized ) . although non - annex i parties now discharge most of current ghg emissions , the annex i parties continue to be responsible for the majority of the increase since the industrial revolution of atmospheric ghg concentrations linked to climate change . thus , most countries argue , the wealthiest countries continue to have the greatest historic responsibility to cut ghg emissions . as the copenhagen meeting opens , it remains unclear whether the fundamental obstacle of the number and form of agreement ( s ) can be surmounted . at the negotiations held in bangkok in early october , "substantial" progress was made in reducing text on the negotiating table and on certain topics: adaptation , technology cooperation , and capacity building . nonetheless , negotiators in copenhagen face many contentious issues regarding substantive commitments , described below .