this report will be updated as events warrant . the process for raising a constitutional point of order against a pending question does not differ from that for raising other points of order . a senator seeking to raise a constitutional point of order would simply address the presiding officer at a time when no one else holds the floor . the senator might say , "mr. president , i rise to point of order" or simply "point of order , mr. president" and then proceed to state and explain the way in which the pending matter violates the constitution . raising a constitutional point of order ( or any point of order ) confers no special recognition rights — unless a unanimous consent ( uc ) agreement has provided for it being raised , or considered as raised , at a certain time . no senator can interrupt another senator without his or her consent for the purposes of raising a point of order . in addition , a senator loses the floor after he or she has raised the point of order , though the senator could again seek recognition from the presiding officer once the point of order is submitted . constitutional points of order are not common , relative to many other points of order that are more routinely made ( eg , that an amendment violates the congressional budget act or that an amendment to an appropriations bill constitutes legislation ) . table 1 presents data on constitutional points of order in the senate made since 1989 ( the start of the 101 st congress ) on which the senate voted , as identified in the legislative information system ( lis ) and the daily digest . ( an examination of references to constitutional points of order in the full text of the congressional record for the congresses in question did not produce any additional examples. ) the table does not include any constitutional points of order that were raised but then withdrawn before a senate vote or those that may have been rendered moot because the underlying matter was withdrawn or otherwise negatively disposed of . of the cases identified , more than half ( 11 of 17 ) were disposed of negatively , either through a direct vote on the point of order or via a successful motion to table ; the remaining six points of order were sustained . five of the six sustained points of order were in relation to an alleged violation of the origination clause ( article 1 , section 7 , clause 1 , which provides that only the house may originate revenue measures ) . of the 11 points of order that were not well taken , 10 were raised in relation to other constitutional provisions . the table makes clear that constitutional points of order raised in the 106 th and 107 th congresses were raised exclusively on the grounds that the pending matter would violate the origination clause . in the most recent congresses ( 111 th and 113 th ) in which constitutional points of order were raised , however , they were raised only in relation to other provisions of the constitution .