there have also been occasional reports of rape by militant groups . in somalia , forces allied with the transitional federal government ( tfg ) and clan militias have been accused by human rights groups of perpetrating sexual violence against civilian residents and displaced populations . during ethiopia's occupation of south - central somalia between mid - 2006 and january 2009 , ethiopian troops were also accused of sexual assault . in northeast drc , southeast car , and southern sudan , sexual violence has been carried out not only by domestic armed groups , but also by members of the lord's resistance army ( lra ) , an insurgent group that originated in northern uganda over 20 years ago . lra fighters have reportedly raped and mutilated civilians and abducted boys and girls for sexual slavery . the obama administration has sought to emphasize international women's issues as a foreign policy focus . state department officials have repeatedly referred to sexual violence as a "weapon of war" and an issue that requires u.s. attention . secretary of state hillary clinton and melanne verveer , the obama administration's ambassador - at - large for global women's issues , have spearheaded the administration's public efforts through multiple statements , official travel , writings , and actions at the united nations . on september 30 , 2009 , clinton chaired a u.n. security council session on women , peace , and security in armed conflict ; the session resulted in the unanimous passage of security council resolution 1888 , which pertains to sexual violence in conflict situations . president obama stated that the resolution reinforced the importance his administration places on issues of violence against women and children . in october 2010 , the administration announced its decision to develop a "national action plan" on the implementation and promotion of u.n. security council resolution 1325 ( 2000 ) , which addresses the impact of war and conflict on women and highlights the need for protection of women and girls from human rights abuses . the following case study is included in this report due to the relative gravity of sexual abuse perpetrated in drc , and due to recent high levels of attention from u.s. policy - makers , including within the obama administration and congress . active u.s. programs aimed at addressing sexual violence in drc constitute a large share , in funding and number , of u.s. policy efforts focusing on sexual violence in african conflicts . many observers have praised the obama administration for its attention to the issue of sexual violence in african conflicts . secretary of state clinton's visit to goma , for example , was lauded by human rights advocates and humanitarian organizations . at the same time , a number of concerns have been raised regarding the coordination , scale , and effectiveness of u.s. programs . some have also questioned whether post - conflict ( or "peaceful" ) settings , where sexual violence levels may be equally high , receive sufficient attention and funding . an overriding concern , as with many foreign assistance issues , is whether partner nations share u.s. priorities over the scale of the problem and the choice of programs and policies to counter it .