figure 1 . map of uruguaysource: map resources . adapted by crs graphics . on november 29 , 2009 , senator josé "pepe" mujica of the ruling center - left broad front ( fa ) coalition was elected president of uruguay in a second - round runoff vote . in legislative elections held concurrently with the october 25 , 2009 , first - round vote , the fa retained its majorities in both houses of the uruguayan congress . the new legislature and president are to be inaugurated to their respective five - year terms on february 15 and march 1 , 2010 . mujica will replace popular incumbent president tabaré vázquez , who was constitutionally ineligible to run for a second consecutive term . most analysts expect broad policy continuity from the mujica administration . uruguay enjoys friendly relations with the united states , though it traditionally has had closer ties to europe ( the origin of the vast majority of the population ) and its south american neighbors . ties between uruguay and the united states have increased in recent years , especially since the administration of jorge batlle ( 2000-2005 ) , which closely aligned itself with the united states . in 2002 , the united states provided uruguay with a one week balance of payments loan to assist the country in countering the fallout from the argentine financial crisis . moreover , batlle laid the groundwork for ongoing trade discussions with the united states through the 2002 creation of a joint commission on trade and investment ( see " trade " below ) . while many analysts expected the vázquez administration to distance the country from the united states and forge closer relations with fellow members of the common market of the south ( mercosur ) once it took office , those predictions have not been borne out . ongoing disputes within mercosur over trade asymmetries and a bitter conflict with argentina over the construction of a cellulose pulp mill along the shared uruguay river have led to frosty relations between uruguay and its neighbors . likewise , the vázquez administration has sought to strengthen ties with the united states in order to diversify its trade relations and reduce its economic reliance on argentina and brazil , which played a significant role in the country's 1999-2002 recession . additionally , mujica may attempt to amplify uruguay's growing trade relations with asia , as he has reportedly designated former ambassador to china luis almagro as his foreign minister . trade ties between the united states and uruguay have grown substantially since 2002 , when the countries created a joint commission on trade and investment . the joint commission has provided the means for ongoing u.s. - uruguay trade discussions , which led to the signing of a bilateral investment treaty in october 2004 and a trade and investment framework agreement ( tifa ) in january 2007 . the tifa is a formal commitment to pursue closer trade and economic ties . it established a council on trade and investment , which serves as the formal mechanism for liberalizing bilateral trade and investment between the two countries .