when that case reached the d.c . circuit on appeal , the government essentially asked the appellate court to overturn al bahlul's conviction on the basis that hamdan ii provided binding precedent on the question presented , namely , the validity of convictions for conspiracy , solicitation , and material support of terrorism for conduct preceding passage of the military commissions act ( mca ) in 2006 . ( hamdan ii did not address conspiracy or solicitation , but the government conceded that these offenses do not constitute universally recognized violations of the international law of war. ) the court complied with the request in a per curiam order . the government sought and was granted a rehearing en banc in the bahlul case . u.s. law provides for the trial of suspected terrorists , including those captured abroad , in several ways . those who are accused of violating specific federal laws are triable in federal criminal court . provisions in the u.s. criminal code relating to war crimes and terrorist activity apply extraterritorially and may be applicable to some detainees . those accused of violating the law of war or committing the offenses enumerated in the military commissions act ( mca ) , as amended by the military commissions act of 2009 , may be tried by military commissions under the mca , or by general court - martial under the ucmj . the procedural protections afforded to the accused in each of these forums may differ . the mca authorizes the establishment of military commissions with jurisdiction to try alien "unprivileged enemy belligerents" for offenses made punishable by the mca or the law of war . notwithstanding the recent amendments to the mca , which generally enhance due process guarantees for the accused , critics continue to question their constitutionality . one issue that has been raised by proponents of the use of military commissions is the concern that federal criminal courts would endow accused terrorists with constitutional rights they would not otherwise enjoy . the mca does not restrict military commissions from exercising jurisdiction within the united states , and the supreme court has previously upheld the use of military commissions against "enemy belligerents" tried in the united states under procedural rules that differed from the federal rules . the supreme court has not settled the question regarding the extent to which constitutional guarantees apply to aliens detained at guantanamo , making any difference in rights due to location of the trials difficult to predict . some view the unpredictability of the supreme court's acceptance of the military commission procedures as a factor in favor of using civilian trial courts . the following charts provide a comparison of the military commissions under the revised military commissions act and standard procedures for federal criminal court under the federal rules of criminal procedure and the federal rules of evidence . chart 1 compares the legal authorities for establishing both types of tribunals , the jurisdiction over persons and offenses , and the structures of the tribunals .