patent rights do not enforce themselves . patent owners who wish to compel others to respect their rights must commence enforcement proceedings , which most commonly consist of litigation in the federal courts . although issued patents enjoy a presumption of validity , accused infringers may assert that a patent is invalid or unenforceable on a number of grounds . the court of appeals for the federal circuit ( federal circuit ) possesses nationwide jurisdiction over most patent appeals from the district courts . inventors the exclusive right to their ... discoveries. in accordance with the patent act of 1952 , an inventor may seek the grant of a patent by preparing and submitting an application to the uspto . uspto officials known as examiners then determine whether the invention disclosed in the application merits the award of a patent . uspto procedures require examiners to determine whether the invention fulfills certain substantive standards set by the patent statute . this report closes with congressional issues and options . the u.s. constitution confers upon congress the power "to promote the progress of ... useful arts , by securing for limited times to .. . an invention that constitutes a "process , machine , manufacture , or composition of matter" may be patented . it must also be novel , or different , from subject matter disclosed by an earlier patent , publication , or other state - of - the - art knowledge . in addition , an invention is not patentable if "the subject matter as a whole would have been obvious at the time the invention was made to a person having ordinary skill in the art to which said subject matter pertains. this requirement of "nonobviousness" prevents the issuance of patents claiming subject matter that a skilled artisan would have been able to implement in view of the knowledge of the state of the art . the invention must also be useful , a requirement that is satisfied if the invention is operable and provides a tangible benefit . in addition , the application must disclose the "best mode," or preferred way , that the applicant knows to practice the invention . if the uspto allows the patent to issue , its owner obtains the right to exclude others from making , using , selling , offering to sell or importing into the united states the patented invention . those who engage in those acts without the permission of the patentee during the term of the patent can be held liable for infringement . adjudicated infringers may be enjoined from further infringing acts . the patent statute also provides for an award of damages "adequate to compensate for the infringement , but in no event less than a reasonable royalty for the use made of the invention by the infringer. the maximum term of patent protection is ordinarily set at 20 years from the date the application is filed . at the end of that period , others may employ that invention without regard to the expired patent . the supreme court enjoys discretionary authority to review cases decided by the federal circuit . if congress decides that patent evergreening does not present a significant issue , then no action need be taken .