part 180 . federal agencies use this guidance to promulgate their own regulations for debarment and suspension , and a grantee must look at the individual agency's regulations for the specific rules that affect grants with that agency . although omb's guidelines are not considered mandatory , it is useful to look at them for a general understanding of the common rules pertaining to debarment and suspension in federal grant programs . on september 17 , 2009 , the house passed h.r . 3221 , the student aid and fiscal responsibility act of 2009 . title vi of this act , known as the defund acorn act , would limit certain organizations so they could not be a party to any federal contract , grant , cooperative agreement , or any other form of agreement ( including a memorandum of understanding ) or receive federal funds . these provisions would apply to any organization that had been indicted for a violation under any federal or state law governing campaign financing or election administration ; any organization that had its state corporate charter terminated due to its failure to comply with federal or state lobbying disclosure requirements ; and any organization that has filed a fraudulent form with any federal or state regulatory agency , as well as any organization which has employed , has under contract , or gives express or apparent authority to an individual who has been indicted for a violation under federal or state law relating to an election for federal or state office . organizations covered by the bill include acorn and its known affiliates . acorn and its affiliates were barred from receiving funds by section 163 of the 2010 continuing appropriations resolution , which provides that "[n]one of the funds made available by this joint resolution or any prior act may be provided to the association of community organization[s] for reform now ( acorn ) or any of its affiliates , subsidiaries , or allied organizations. on december 11 , however , this prohibition against acorn was found to be an unconstitutional bill of attainder . additionally , the consolidated appropriations act , 2010 , signed by the president on december 16 , 2009 , provides in various places that none of the funds made available under various divisions of the act or any prior act may be provided to acorn or any of its affiliates , subsidiaries , or allied organizations . the issue of debarment and suspension in federal grant programs was discussed during a house oversight and government reform hearing on march 18 , 2010 . although the main focus of this hearing was debarment and suspension of government contractors , officials from the department of transportation discussed debarment and suspension in dot grant programs as part of their testimony , particularly dot grants under the american recovery and reinvestment act ( arra ) . omb first issued guidelines in 1987 . executive departments and agencies adopted a government - wide common rule in 1988 that was consistent with the guidelines and revised the rule in 2003 . omb revised this rule again in 2006 and placed it in the code of federal regulations as guidance .