this definition is not in h.r . section 313 , general provisions . in the chairman's mark , definition ( 20 ) adds citation ( 45 u.s.c . 351 , et seq. ) for the railroad insurance act . this cite is not in h.r . section 313 , general provisions . the spending limit designation of where funding for the climate change worker assistance fund is to be established in a proposed title vii of the clean air act differs with h.r . in the senate version , section 209 of division b has proceeds of allowance auctions being available pursuant to section 771 ( b ) ( 5 ) of the caa . the house version has amounts deposited per section 782 ( j ) of the caa . this appears to be a result of differences in house - senate organization for proposed new sections of the caa . increased funding for energy worker training program: section 422 of h.r . 2454 adds another $25 million in funding to section 171 ( e ) ( 8 ) of the workforce investment act of 1998 , and establishes a separate account in the u.s. treasury to be known as the "energy efficiency and renewable energy worker training fund. title iv of the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 ( arra ) specifies that $100 million of the $4.5 billion made available to the u.s. department of energy's office of electricity delivery and energy reliability be used for worker training . title viii of arra provides $500 million to the u.s. department of labor under "training and employment services" for research , labor exchange , and job training projects that prepare workers for careers in renewable energy and energy efficiency . both the house and senate bills contain essentially the same provisions intended to provide employment retraining with a focus on jobs in renewable energy and energy efficiency in part 1 — green jobs , and financial assistance for workers found to have been made redundant by climate change mitigation requirements , or those whose earnings have been significantly reduced in part 2 — climate change worker adjustment assistance . the source of funding for the provisions of part 1 , while apparently associated with the establishment of the "energy efficiency and renewable energy worker training fund," is not clearly established in either bill . the term "green jobs" is undergoing definition at the labor department as to what these jobs are , and the sector or sectors they will be classified in under the north american industry classification system ( naics ) . the naics is used by the federal government to collect and analyze data with regard to the u.s. economy . there is agreement that green jobs will relate to renewable energy and energy efficiency , but the extent to which these jobs will be exclusive to these areas is under debate as the skills and training necessary may be transferable from and to other job classifications . the level and specialization of these jobs could vary from tradesmen such as electricians and welders , to technical engineers or financial managers , and from intellectual design to maintenance workers . part 2 of the legislation focuses on assisting workers impacted by climate change mitigation measures .