can be used for transfers . the government can rely on formulas to provide funds and can identify states and to some extent local governments . nonprofits do not generally have these mechanisms in place and are therefore not normally the recipients of automatically distributed funds . nonetheless , policies could be established to direct stimulus funds , via grants , to nonprofits during times of economic distress . can the objective be met more efficiently with a government program or a nonprofit one ? these questions , of course , must be considered on a project by project basis . for example , evidence on crowding - out and crowding - in suggested variation by type of charity . are subsidies that are tied to specific features of the charity desirable compared to grants ? these subsidies include existing ones , such as the postal subsidy and tax subsidies that are tied to reliance on charitable giving or investment funds , or , in the case of state and local subsidies , need for real property . normally having benefits triggered by these characteristics might be thought to be less desirable than targeted grants , because the government can make a judgment about whether the activity is desirable . that is , the tax subsidies tend to favor education and arts , while grants tend to be more important in other charities . it could also collect and provide information to the public . moreover , while the information on crowding - in or crowding - out of grants is mixed , it largely suggests crowding - in . on the other hand , recent evidence on price elasticities suggests that the government spends more than a dollar to induce an additional dollar in charitable contributions . the government may want to seek to design policies that provide the greatest increase in revenue for nonprofit and charitable organizations with the least cost to the government . ( see the discussion below for ways to increase the "bang for the buck." will the funds provided cause crowding - in or crowding - out of private giving ? moreover , some would argue that the federal government cannot easily make judgments about the value of different options or charitable objectives , leading one to conclude that a general subsidy may be in order . it is also important to consider proposals for reform which could affect not only the level of funding , but the mix of existing funding . since different types of charities receive different shares of their funds from different sources , policies that change incentives regarding one funding source will have a larger impact on some charities relative to others . one example would be taxing investment income for charitable organizations . such a reform would affect university endowments . but would it be better to tax the returns of university endowments and use the revenue to expand aid for poor students or expand funding for university research grants ? these types of questions prove very difficult to answer in practice . the consequences of new initiatives can also vary across charitable sectors , and should be considered .