crs takes no position on any of the options identified in this report . if current disclosure requirements are not determined to be sufficient to capture program level lobbying activity , or if current executive branch restrictions were made permanent , the lobbying disclosure act could be amended to institute provisions similar to current executive branch lobbying restrictions . currently , lobbyists must file quarterly disclosure reports with information on their activities and covered officials contacted . in addition , the lda , as amended by the honest leadership and open government act of 2007 , requires federally registered lobbyists to file semi - annual reports on certain campaign and presidential library contributions . the disclosure requirements might be further amended to cover program specific disbursement information . changes to the lda would require the introduction and passage of a bill by congress , as well as the president's signature . the white house or the recovery accountability and transparency board could create a central database to collect all recovery act projects and contacts by federally registered lobbyists in a single , searchable location . creating a central , searchable portal might allow for department and agencies to see which lobbyists , if any , are involved in a given project and allow individuals and groups to better understand which departments and agencies are responsible for projects of interest . a similar website has been established for stimulus fund recipients to register and disclose how funds are being spent . congress or the president might determine that the current lobbying registration and disclosure provisions , executive orders , and executive branch memoranda on recovery act lobbying restrictions are effective . instead of amending the lda , issuing additional executive orders , or issuing additional memoranda , congress or the president could continue to utilize existing law to provide lobbyists access to covered governmental officials . changes to the lda or executive branch policy could be made on an as - needed basis through changes to lda guidance documents issued by the clerk of the house and secretary of the senate , through executive order , or through the issuance of new memoranda by the president . these guidelines laid the foundation for formal lobbying restrictions issued in july 2009 . critiques of the obama administration's policy toward federally registered lobbyists have focused on recovery act restrictions and lobbyists serving as members of federal advisory committees . in each instance , the american league of lobbyists has written to the white house critiquing the programs and suggesting policy modifications . creation of restrictions on federally registered lobbyists' access to executive branch departments and agencies has already changed the relationship between lobbyists and covered executive branch officials . if desired , there are additional options which might further clarify lobbyists' relationships with executive branch officials . these options each have advantages and disadvantages for the future relationships between lobbyists and governmental decision - makers . one of president barack obama's first actions was to issue ethics and lobbying guidelines for executive branch employees . this report outlines the development of registration requirements for lobbyists engaging executive branch officials since 1995 .