appendix a . the rise of unfunded mandates as a national issue and umra's legislative history unfunded mandates became a national issue during the 1980s as state and local government officials and their affiliated public interest groups , led by the national league of cities ( nlc ) , u.s. conference of mayors ( uscm ) , and national association of counties ( naco ) , began an intensive lobbying effort to limit unfunded intergovernmental mandates . their efforts were supported by various business organizations , led by the u.s. chamber of commerce , which opposed the imposition of unfunded mandates on both state and local governments and the private sector , particularly mandates issued through federal rules . with a patchwork of differing standards across the states , would we see a migration of factories and jobs to states with lower standards ? i think so . but by mandating floors in environmental and workplace conditions , the federal government ensures that states will comply with minimal standards befitting a complex , interrelated , and decent society . or let us look at gun control . my state of new jersey generally has strong controls on guns . but new jerseyans still suffer from an epidemic of gun violence – in no small measure because firearms come into new jersey from other states . without strong national controls , this will remain a problem . that is why we passed a ban on all assault weapons and why we passed the brady bill . currently the federal government discourages a scenario whereby a given state decides not to enforce some worker health and safety laws as a way of lowering costs and attracting industry . a state right next door might feel compelled to lower its standards in order to remain competitive . in the absence of a federal standard , we would likely see a bidding war that lowers the quality of life for all americans . these are some of a host of very fundamental , very basic , and even profound questions raised by the notion that we should never have unfunded mandates . these are questions each member of the senate should consider long and hard , before moving to drastically curtail — or make impossible — any unfunded mandates . after voting on 44 amendments and several cloture motions , the senate approved s. 1 on january 27 , 1995 , 86-10 . one of the amendments approved by the senate was the "byrd look - back amendment," which is the only provision in umra that allows for the regulation of any mandates based on actual rather than estimated costs . it provided that legislation containing intergovernmental mandates would be considered funded , and hence not subject to a point of order , if it authorized appropriations to cover the estimated direct costs of the intergovernmental mandate and incorporated a prescribed mechanism requiring further review if , in any fiscal year , congress did not appropriate funds sufficient to cover those costs .