the procurement had not been set aside for sdvosbs . however , the solicitation had included an evaluation factor focusing on firms' sdvosb status , as well as a statement that the source selection authority would "favorably view an offeror's small business status. under the solicitation , firms' sdvosb status and understanding of the requirements carried equal weight , and each was more important than any other evaluation factor . washington - harris group argued that the solicitation and the federal acquisition regulation ( far ) required sdvosb contractors to perform at least 50% of the contract requirements in order to be evaluated favorably as an sdvosb . washington - harris group's reference to the far appears to have been to part 19.14 , which requires , among other things , that a clause containing the limitations on subcontracting discussed in table 2 ( clause 52.219-27 ) be incorporated in all solicitations . gao rejected washington - harris group's arguments regarding the solicitation because the solicitation distinguished between sdvosb prime contractors and sdvosb joint venturers and required only the latter to perform more than 50% of the work . it also rejected the argument that the far clause containing the limitations on subcontracting applied to this procurement . gao reached this conclusion because the far states that clause 52.219-27 is required only when "[o]ffers are solicited only from service - disabled veteran - owned small business concerns [and] [o]ffers received from concerns that are not service - disabled veteran - owned small business concerns shall not be considered. given this language , gao concluded that the clause did not apply to this procurement because the procurement was not set aside for sdvosbs . because clause 52.219-27 did not apply to the procurement , it found that the agency did not improperly evaluate skyline favorably as an sdvosb when awarding the contract even though skyline proposed to subcontract over 50% of the work on the contract . gao did not directly address the differences between the general contracting authorities and the small business act in its decision . it also did not address contracting with small businesses that are not sdvosbs . however , because contracts awarded under the general contracting authorities cannot be set aside for sdvosbs while those awarded under the authority of the small business act can be , and because the same limitations on subcontracting apply to other types of small businesses as apply to sdvosbs , gao's decision can arguably be construed to mean that limitations on subcontracting do not apply to any non - disaster and non - emergency "preference contract" awarded to any type of small business under the general contracting authorities . some commentators have suggested that gao's decision could result in agencies using more preference contracts and fewer set - asides . such a shift from set - asides to preference contracts would not necessarily result in the government paying higher prices . while greater subcontracting generally tends to increase costs because each tier of subcontractors imposes additional overhead costs , recent legislation may help ensure that the government is aware of and does not compensate certain costs .