( see table 1 . ) some analysts suggest that many estimates of china's foreign aid , in both prc official publications and the scholarly literature in the west , do not capture the full extent of prc economic assistance and related activities . the china statistical yearbook 2003-06 released an annual aid figure of $970 million . according to other sources , annual prc foreign aid ranges from $1.5 billion to $2 billion . these figures would place china's aid levels alongside those of australia , belgium , or denmark . according to some sources , in 2006 , prc direct investment flows to the western hemisphere totaled roughly $100 million , less than its outbound investment to africa ( $500 million ) . african oil reportedly accounts for 80% of china's trade in the region and about one - third of its oil imports . nearly 70% of prc infrastructure financing on the continent reportedly is concentrated in angola , nigeria , ethiopia , and sudan , all of which have major oil fields . angola , the democratic republic of congo ( drc ) , and sudan pay for much of their assistance or loans from china with oil . however , europe and the united states remain the largest buyers of african petroleum ( 33% and 36% of african oil exports , respectively ) . estimates of china's share of the african oil market range from 10% - 16% , although the prc reportedly plays a larger role in the continent's minerals markets . ( see table 6 . ) in 2007 , china reportedly offered malawi "aid and investment" worth $6 billion in major economic sectors . in january 2008 , malawi switched diplomatic relations to the prc . ( see table 7 . ) the wagner team compiled a list of prc economic assistance and related investment projects or offers in africa reported during the 2002-2007 period . the combined values amounted to $33 billion . nor does beijing publicly release foreign aid data . some analysts surmise that the chinese leadership is reluctant to be perceived as a major aid donor , since the prc itself continues to be a recipient of foreign assistance and because the government fears that its citizens may object to lavish spending on economic projects abroad . estimates of china's foreign aid vary widely due to the lack of official data and to disparate definitions of aid . broad characterizations , such as the one adopted in this report and referred to as "economic assistance," often include low - interest loans and prc government - backed investments as well as grant - based development aid . a relatively small portion of chinese economic assistance includes what typically is characterized as "official development assistance" ( oda ) as provided by the world's major aid donors , such as development grants , poverty - reduction programs , humanitarian assistance , and food aid . china also provides relatively little military and security - related assistance .