with the exception of some ga products , these attempts have largely been commercial failures . the large commercial jet aircraft manufacturing sector is a boeing and airbus duopoly . over the years , aerospace firms from several non - traditional aircraft manufacturing nations have attempted to enter various parts of the international commercial aircraft sector . as mentioned earlier , a number of new initiatives appear to be under way . while aerospace firms in europe and japan have long driven competition with the united states , russia and china have not , until recently , been strong competitors in the international market . nowadays , both nations appear to have plans to dominate a much larger share of their own domestic markets and , in turn , perhaps the global market . most notable is a new chinese initiative to build an aircraft to compete in the same markets as the a320 series and the b737 series . comac was launched by the chinese government in may 2008 for the express purpose of overseeing the development and production of large civil aircraft . the comac c919 , an approximately 156-seat aircraft with dimensions similar to the a320 , is in development , though a production date has not yet been announced . slated for certification no later than 2016 , that model would compete directly with boeing and airbus . though still in early design , chinese officials have said the c919 should have operating costs 10% below those of comparable western jetliners . another competitor could be russia's united aircraft corporation ( uac ) , a russian government - owned joint stock company . uac has stated it plans to become the third - largest aircraft manufacturer worldwide by 2015 . both chinese and russian aircraft manufacturers face significant hurdles in building commercial aircraft , since neither has ever built such airplanes for the commercial market , which requires planes to be reliable , have low operating costs , and be easily maintained . another outstanding barrier to their market entry is certification by u.s. and eu aviation authorities . congress has been discussing broad issues affecting the competitiveness of the nation's aerospace manufacturing industry for most of this decade . in the early 2000s , the presidential commission on the future of the u.s. aerospace industry released its recommendations on how to maintain the competitiveness of the aerospace sector . the aerospace commission called for a national aerospace policy along with a government - wide framework to implement this policy , as well as the removal of prohibitive legal and regulatory barriers that impede the ability of the industry to grow . the commission also advanced policies to maintain u.s. global aerospace leadership by proposing investments in america's industrial base , workforce , and research and development infrastructure . many industry analysts argue that globalization helps the united states achieve its business objectives and enhances the competitiveness and vitality of aerospace exporters . but u.s. export licensing laws can negatively impact a customer's ability to acquire aerospace products and parts from the united sates .