benefits . financing . waste , fraud , and abuse . payments to territories . demonstrations and pilot programs . miscellaneous . each topic contains a brief summary of existing medicaid law and related background to provide context for the description of changes proposed by h.r . medicaid is a means - tested entitlement program operated by states within broad federal guidelines . to qualify , an individual must meet both categorical ( i.e. , must be a member of a covered group such as children , pregnant women , families with dependent children , the elderly , or the disabled ) and financial eligibility requirements . medicaid's financial requirements place limits on the maximum amount of assets and income individuals may possess to participate in medicaid . additional guidelines specify how states should calculate these amounts . the specific asset and income limitations that apply to each eligibility group are set through a combination of federal parameters and state definitions . consequently , these standards vary across states , and different standards apply to different population groups within states . of the approximately 50 different eligibility "pathways" into medicaid , some are mandatory while others may be covered at state option . examples of groups that states must provide medicaid to include pregnant women and children under age six with family income below 133% of the federal poverty level ( fpl ) , and poor individuals with disabilities or poor individuals over age 64 who qualify for cash assistance under the ssi program . examples of groups that states may choose to cover under medicaid include pregnant women and infants with family income exceeding 133% fpl up to 185% fpl , and "medically needy" individuals who meet categorical requirements with income up to 133% of the maximum payment amount applicable under states' former aid to families with dependent children ( afdc ) programs based on family size . "childless adults" ( nonelderly adults who are not disabled , not pregnant and not parents of dependent children ) , for example , are generally not eligible for medicaid , regardless of their income . 3962 makes several changes to medicaid eligibility . among the provisions that would impact eligibility , the bill would add four new mandatory eligibility groups , and add two new optional eligibility groups . finally , additional benefits include premium payments for coverage provided through managed care arrangements and medicare premium and cost - sharing support for persons dually eligible for both medicare and medicaid . medicaid's basic benefit rules require all states to provide certain "mandatory" services ( eg , inpatient hospital care , physician services , lab / x - ray services ) . the statute lists additional services that are considered optional ( eg , other licensed practitioners , rehabilitative services , nursing facility services for individuals under age 21 ) - that is , federal matching payments are available for optional services if states choose to include them in their medicaid plans . states define the specific features of each mandatory and optional service to be provided under that plan within broad federal guidelines . 3962 would make a number of changes to benefits under the medicaid program .