these cases are described below . congress has , in the past , legislatively responded to discrimination issues at usda and could decide to intervene again in the future . this section discusses past congressional actions and possible future responses for congress to consider if it wishes to become involved in usda - related discrimination issues generally or the garcia dispute specifically . the ongoing civil rights issues within usda have led to various legislative responses by congress . for example , in the 2002 farm bill , congress created the office of the assistant secretary for civil rights , which has the statutory responsibility of ensuring compliance with all civil rights laws and ensuring the incorporation of civil rights components into all strategic planning initiatives of the department . meanwhile , the 2008 farm bill , the food , conservation , and energy act of 2008 , established a moratorium on acceleration and foreclosure proceedings by usda against any farmer or rancher who has filed a program discrimination claim . accrual of interest and offsets are also to be waived while a complaint is pending , although if the farmer does not prevail in the discrimination complaint the accrued interest and offsets come due . usda has issued a notice implementing the farm bill provision . any borrower who has filed a discrimination complaint that has not yet been resolved should therefore not be subject to acceleration , foreclosure , the accrual of interest , or offsets . in the 2008 farm bill , congress also inserted a non - binding sense of congress regarding claims brought by socially disadvantaged farmers and ranchers . the provision stated that all pending claims and class actions brought against usda by socially disadvantaged farmers or ranchers including native american , hispanic , and female farmers or ranchers , based on racial , ethnic , or gender discrimination in farm program participation should be resolved in an expeditious and just manner . in addition , when final approval for the settlement in pigford ii became contingent on congressional action , congress approved the claims resolution act of 2010 to provide the $1.15 billion appropriation to fund the settlement agreement . there are several other possible options for congressional involvement in the garcia dispute specifically or usda - related discrimination issues more generally . at one end of the spectrum of options , congress could simply choose not to intervene , thus remaining neutral , as is typically the case . in general , congress is not considered to be the institution that is best suited to mediate legal disputes , which is why such situations are resolved by the courts , which have both the means and the expertise to evaluate the merits of legal claims and to provide remedies when appropriate . indeed , one could argue that congress already provided a remedy for situations involving discrimination against credit applicants when it enacted the ecoa . under this view , congress's involvement could end with the enactment of this legislative remedy , and the application of that remedy would be left to the courts . at the other end of the spectrum , if congress decides to become involved in the garcia dispute or related litigation , a number of approaches could be considered .