110-365 ) , as amended . periodic legislation can also affect federal outlays ( see " a&o reimbursement ," below ) . the largest cost category is premium subsidies , which lower the cost to farmers of purchasing insurance policies . the 2008 farm bill ( p.l . 110-246 ) allows usda to renegotiate the sra once every five years starting with the 2011 reinsurance year ( which runs from july 1 , 2010 , through june 30 , 2011 ) . the negotiation process involved usda developing a draft agreement , meeting separately with the insurance companies , and responding to the comments , concerns , and suggestions of the insurance companies and the public . on june 10 , 2010 , rma issued what it called the final draft of a new sra to cover the 2011 reinsurance year and subsequent years . on july 13 , 2010 , usda announced that the agreement had been signed by all 16 approved insurance companies , putting it into effect for the 2011 reinsurance year . this report discusses federal crop insurance costs , the sra that had been in effect for the 2010 reinsurance year , and issues related to the renegotiation of the sra . as a reinsurer , the federal government is liable for insured losses as agreed to in the current sra . in a number of recent years , the government has received a gain because of relatively favorable weather . the fourth category is other expenses such as rma salaries and benefits or costs associated with research and development activities , which typically account for a small portion of total costs . in recent years , government costs for crop insurance have increased substantially ( figure 1 ) . after ranging between $2.1 and $3.6 billion annually during fy2000-fy2006 , costs rose to $5.7 billion in fy2008 and more than $7 billion in fy2009 as higher policy premiums from rising crop prices drove up premium subsidies for farmers and expense reimbursements to private insurance companies . the standard reinsurance agreement is a cooperative financial agreement between fcic and each of the approved crop insurance companies to deliver eligible crop insurance contracts . it becomes effective upon its execution and fcic's approval of the company's plan of operations for the applicable reinsurance year . the sra for the 2010 reinsurance year ( ending june 30 , 2010 ) contains four sections: definitions ( see box , "selected terms defined in the standard reinsurance agreement" ) , reinsurance , a&o expense reimbursement , and general provisions . as part of usda's preparation for renegotiating the sra , the department hired a firm to calculate rates of return for crop insurers . in a two - part study , milliman , inc. , estimated historical rates of return on equity for crop insurers and "reasonable" rates of return in order to determine if crop insurers are being over - or undercompensated by the government . the reasonable rate of return was defined as the "cost of capital" or , in this case , the returns received by property and casualty insurers , which was considered to be an investment of equivalent risk .