a very long haul. since the late 1980s , chinese vehicles have become increasingly sophisticated as a result of partnerships with major foreign automakers ( eg , vw , gm , toyota , honda , nissan , mazda , hyundai , and kia ) designed to foster "cooperation in technology development. an activist government policy has liberalized the chinese automotive sector in some key respects such as permitting foreign investment , but it requires foreign manufacturers to undertake joint ventures with local partners in order to obtain market access . the stated goal of the chinese government then was to create a market dominated by a limited number of internationally competitive joint venture assemblers , supplied by local parts manufacturers , and producing to world standards . after nearly three decades of rapid economic growth , the domestic chinese auto industry has made substantial progress . many independent domestic automotive manufacturers have emerged and have ambitions to become global auto companies . although they have to overcome hurdles , such as creating their own designs and meeting world standards in terms of product quality , safety , and environmental features , the domestic manufacturers are expanding their market share and are slowly moving up the value chain . china's annual vehicle output increased from less than 2 million vehicles in the late 1990s to over 18 million in 2011 . its auto industry is already a major force propelling the chinese economy and its workforce , with an annual gross output of more than rmb 3 trillion yuan ( approximately $ 440 billion ) in 2009 and over 3.7 million workers in automotive production , according to china's auto industry association and official . american automotive manufacturers were among the earliest international companies to move into china with the opening of the market to foreign investors in the 1980s . in 1983 , after tedious and difficult negotiations , american motors corporation ( amc ) signed a joint - venture ( jv ) agreement with china's beijing automotive works , the first such major manufacturing deal reached by a western industrial company in china . despite this early initiative , american companies largely lost out in the early period of growth in the chinese automotive market , first to japanese imports , and then to european investors , particularly vw . one strategy the chinese government has been exploring is whether to allow domestic automakers to acquire foreign brands . opportunities to purchase distressed foreign assets came during / following the 1997-1998 asian financial crisis and then the global economic slowdown in 2008-2009 . the united states and other producers had been highly critical of china's 1994 industrial policy for the automotive sector . this policy was replaced by a new one issued by the government in may 2004 , with provisions discouraging the importation of auto parts and encouraging the use of domestic technology to be discussed later in this report . in march 2009 , the state council , the highest executive organ of the central government , released the automotive readjustment and revitalization plan ( the plan ) , an industry - specific development blueprint for the auto sector in china , aiming to boost the chinese auto sector amid the global economic slowdown .