title iv of h.r . 2454 would amend the bill's new title vii of the clean air act by creating a new part f to address carbon leakage . the purpose of the new part f is both environmental , in terms of reducing potential carbon leakage resulting from potential shifts of production and investment from the united states to countries without carbon controls , and economic , in terms of preventing the associated job loss from such a shift . specifically , the purposes of part f as a whole would be ( 1 ) "to promote a strong global effort to significantly reduce greenhouse gas emissions and , through this global effort , stabilize greenhouse gas concentrations in the atmosphere at a level that will prevent dangerous anthropogenic interference with the climate system," and ( 2 ) "to prevent an increase in greenhouse gas emissions in countries other than the united states as a result of direct and indirect compliance costs incurred under" the new title viii . the free allocation scheme ( subpart 1 ) would be further aimed at the following: ( 1 ) "to provide a rebate to the owners of and operators of entities in domestic eligible industrial sectors for their greenhouse gas emissions costs incurred under this title , but not for costs associated with other related or unrelated market dynamics" ; ( 2 ) "to design such rebates in a way that will prevent carbon leakage while also rewarding innovations and facility - level investments in energy efficiency performance improvements" ; and ( 3 ) "to eliminate or reduce distribution of emission allowances under subpart 1 when such distribution is no longer necessary to prevent carbon leakage from eligible industrial sectors. the ira scheme ( subpart 2 ) would have these additional purposes: ( 1 ) "to induce foreign countries , and , in particular , fast - growing developing countries , to take substantial action with respect to their greenhouse gas emissions consistent with the bali action plan developed under the united nations framework convention on climate change" and ( 2 ) "to ensure that the measures described in subpart 2 are designed and implemented consistent with applicable international agreements to which the united states is a party. both vehicles in title iv of h.r . 2454 aimed at competitiveness and leakage concerns — the granting of free emission allowances to domestic firms and the imposition of border measures on imported products — raise issues involving u.s. obligations under world trade organization ( wto ) agreements . legislation providing free emission allowances to carbon / energy - intensive trade - exposed industries may arguably confer a subsidy for purposes of the wto agreement on subsidies and countervailing measures . although the bill would require epa to establish a border measure ( ira ) program consistent with u.s. international agreements , a category that would include u.s. trade agreements , a requirement that importers purchase iras to accompany particular imports might nonetheless be found to constitute a prohibited import surcharge or , if the product may not otherwise enter the united states , a prohibited quantitative restriction under the general agreement on tariffs and trade 1994 ( gatt ) .