world's largest countries and entitie . these possible scenarios are discussed in greater detail below . some believe that the g - 20 will be an effective forum for international economic cooperation moving forward . the g - 20 will be able to play this role , it is argued , for three reasons . first , the g - 20 includes all the major economic players at the table , but at the same time is small enough to facilitate concrete negotiations . second , the involvement of national heads of state in the negotiations could serve to facilitate commitments in major policy areas . third , as the issues discussed by the g - 20 leaders expand , the g - 20 may be able to facilitate cooperation by enabling trade - offs among major concerns , such as climate change and trade , that are not possible in issue - specific forums and institutions . g - 20 optimists typically point to the g - 20's successes at the height of the financial crisis , when the g - 20 played a unique , strong , and central role in steering the recovery efforts . the g - 20 was the source of major decisions regarding fiscal stimulus , regulatory reform , tripling the imf's lending capacity , and other response efforts . the g - 20 also tasked other international organizations , such as the bank for international settlements ( bis ) , the imf , the world bank , and the financial stability board ( fsb ) , with facilitating , monitoring , or implementing various aspects of the response to the crisis . finally , g - 20 proponents argue that , even if agreement on policies is not always reached , it is a critical forum for discussing major policy initiatives across major countries and encouraging greater cooperation . others are skeptical that the g - 20 will be an effective forum for international cooperation moving forward for at least four reasons . first , the g - 20 includes a diverse set of countries with different political and economic philosophies . as economic recovery becomes more secure , it is argued that this heterogeneous group with divergent interests will have trouble reaching agreements on global economic issues . some argue that the g - 20 has failed to provide adequate leadership in responding to the eurozone crisis or in helping forge a conclusion to the doha negotiations . second , some believe the g - 20 does not include the right mix of countries . it is argued that europeans are overrepresented at the g - 20 ( with germany , france , italy , the united kingdom , and the european union accounting for 5 of the 20 slots ) , while some important emerging - market countries are excluded . poland , thailand , egypt , and pakistan have been cited as examples ( see appendix b ) . by concentrating european interests while excluding important emerging markets from the negotiating table , it will be difficult , it is argued , to achieve cooperation on economic issues of global scope .