the supreme court disagreed . after prolonged proceedings , the district court granted final class certification and final settlement approval in september 2005 . categorizing §411 ( a ) as an "enforcement mechanism" rather than a "rights - creating statute" and relying on second circuit precedent that "not all members of a settlement - only class need to possess a valid cause of action under the applicable law," he concluded that "the fact that some of the otherwise presumably valid copyrights have not been registered is an insufficient basis for undoing this class - action settlement. concepts , inc. and distinguishing the supreme court's ruling in eberhart v. united states , the appellate court held that the requirement of copyright registration prior to an infringement suit is jurisdictional and that the phrase "copyright claim" referred to each claim within a purported class . thus , because many of the plaintiffs' copyrights were unregistered , the second circuit held that the district court lacked the authority to certify the class and , as a result , lacked jurisdiction to approve the settlement . it also held that this "jurisdictional defect" precluded supplemental jurisdiction under 28 u.s.c . §1367 ( a ) as well . judge walker dissented , arguing that , although the second circuit had labeled §411 ( a ) as jurisdictional in the past , the supreme court's ruling in eberhart , which encouraged lower courts to "more carefully distinguish between true jurisdictional bars and claim - processing rules that may be waived," merited a re - evaluation of the copyright registration requirement . on march 2 , 2009 , the u.s. supreme court granted certiorari to review the case on the following question: "does 17 u.s.c . §411 ( a ) restrict the subject - matter jurisdiction of the federal courts over copyright infringement actions ? §411 ( a ) reads as follows: [n]o civil action for infringement of the copyright in any united states work shall be instituted until preregistration or registration of the copyright claim has been made in accordance with this title . in any case , however , where the deposit , application , and fee required for registration have been delivered to the copyright office in proper form and registration has been refused , the applicant is entitled to institute a civil action for infringement if notice thereof , with a copy of the complaint , is served on the register of copyrights . the register may , at his or her option , become a party to the action with respect to the issue of registrability of the copyright claim by entering an appearance within sixty days after such service , but the register's failure to become a party shall not deprive the court of jurisdiction to determine that issue . petitioners in the case ( reed elsevier et al. ) argued that the §411 ( a ) registration requirement is a mandatory prerequisite to suit , not a restriction on the court's jurisdiction .