they agreed to hold a second meeting in 2010 . the obama administration has taken other potentially noteworthy steps . divergent u.s. and asean approaches to burma have also been an irritant to u.s. - asean relations since burma became a member of the organization in 1997 . the united states has pursued a policy of diplomatically shunning the burmese military regime and imposing stringent economic sanctions against the country — creating difficulties in engaging both politically and economically with a grouping that includes it . in the fall of 2009 , the state department announced a new burma policy , in which the united states would hold dialogues with the burmese leadership while still maintaining u.s. sanctions . this move , which brings washington closer to asean policy , could help to improve u.s. - asean ties . additionally , on the sidelines of the july 2009 arf meeting , secretary clinton met with the foreign ministers of the lower mekong countries , excluding burma ( i.e. , vietnam , cambodia , laos , and thailand ) , in the first - ever u.s. - lower mekong ministerial meeting . the ministers issued a joint statement outlining the wide - ranging areas of discussion , which included responses to climate change , fighting infectious disease , and education policy . president obama plans to visit indonesia and australia in march 2010 . his talks with indonesian president yudhoyono will likely focus on trade and security ties as well as raise the profile of the region's largest and arguably most democratic nation . taken together , the message of the administration's symbolic and substantive moves appears to be that the united states intends to engage with asean and southeast asian countries at a higher level , and do so more persistently . there remain questions about how far this change in approach will persist , particularly as it raises expectations in southeast asia . for instance , will the u.s. - asean leaders' meeting be regularized , as many southeast asian leaders hope ? on the other hand , by raising the profile of u.s. - asean ties , the united states likely will place new pressures on asean to increase its own utility in resolving regional crises and addressing security and economic issues in a more concerted manner , lest a more activist united states eventually bypass it . the association of southeast asian nations was founded on august 8 , 1967 , with the adoption of the asean declaration in bangkok , thailand . originally , the association had five members — indonesia , malaysia , philippines , singapore , and thailand — and expanded to its current 10 members during the 1980s and 1990s with the addition of brunei darussalam , vietnam , laos , burma , and cambodia . although asean is starting to play a more active role in dealing with its members' differences — most notably over burma's human rights record — much of what the group does is still done through informal channels . asean is at the center of several other security - and trade - related groupings in the asia - pacific region .