however , h.r . 2454 would be established within the usgcrp . 2454 , as passed by the house , expands the focus of the u.s . 2454 includes much more detail , authorizes several subsidiary programs , and specifies the organizations to manage them . authorizations are subject to future appropriations . for the adaptation provisions , the house relies on hortatory language , such as that found in section 480 ( b ) , to support full appropriations for certain natural resources programs: "... such sums as are deposited in the natural resources climate change fund , and the amounts appropriated for subsection ( c ) shall be no less than the total estimated annual deposits in the natural resources climate change adaptation fund. while the allocations of allowances and of the proceeds from auctions are distributed similarly by s. 1733 , in the senate bill , in all cases related to adaptation , the auction proceeds for programs or funds would be automatically available to be obligated ( i.e. , spent ) "without further appropriation. the provision of funding "without further appropriation" might be controversial . comparable language in provisions of the house bill ( none related to adaptation programs , however ) has been scored by the congressional budget office ( cbo ) as mandatory spending . even with mandatory funding , the ultimate funding of specific programs and activities will in many cases be determined by agency , state , and / or tribal decision - makers . developing countries , especially those that are least developed , and the poorest communities , are the most vulnerable to the impacts of climate change . in these vulnerable countries and communities , the impacts of climate change can pose a direct threat to people's very survival . specific impacts highlighted by the fourth assessment report of the intergovernmental panel on climate change ( ipcc 2007 ) include the following . by 2020 , yields from the 93% of crop production in africa that is rain - fed could be reduced by up to 50% . worldwide , approximately 20% - 30% of plant and animal species are likely to be at increased risk of extinction if increases in global average temperature exceed 1.5°c - 2.5°c . widespread melting of glaciers and snow cover will reduce melt water from major mountain ranges ( eg , hindu kush , himalaya , andes ) , where more than 1 billion people currently live . displacement of an estimated 200 million people due to sudden climate - related disasters is projected by 2050 ; it is estimated that in 2008 more than 20 million people were displaced by sudden climate - related disasters . increased adverse health impacts and mortality will result from higher frequency and intensity of climate - related diseases such as heat stroke , malaria , dengue , and diarrhea . international assistance for adaptation , especially to help the most vulnerable developing countries , is one of the major commitments of industrialized countries under the united nations framework convention on climate change ( unfccc ) , to which the united states is a party .