conflicts between priorities can emerge . for example , if more electricity is required to charge hybrid and electric vehicles and that electricity comes from traditional steam - electric power plants , water consumption could increase thus making water - use goals less achievable . increased coal use to generate the electricity could exacerbate ghg emissions . such potential conflicts and possible impacts on the priorities of other agencies are likely to be taken up by the steering committee . the development of a process for resolving such issues is likely be an area of considerable focus . in signing executive order ( eo ) 13423 , strengthening federal environmental , energy and transportation management , president george w. bush revoked five earlier executive orders affecting federal agencies' energy and environmental management . section 11 of the order consolidated and strengthened the five executive orders and two memorandums of understanding ( mou ) and established new and updated goals , practices , and reporting requirements for environmental , energy , and transportation performance and accountability . in some cases , the bush order put in place replacement energy and environmental efficiency goals for previous goals with target dates that had passed . eo 13423 also implemented and supplemented provisions of the 2005 energy policy act ( epact ; p.l . 110-140 ) dealing with energy and environmental management by federal agencies . the combination of epact ( title i , part a ) and eo 13423 defined the energy efficiency objectives for federal agencies under the bush administration . eo 13423 directed all federal agencies to improve energy efficiency and reduce greenhouse gas emissions through reductions in energy intensity ( 3% annually through the end of fy2015 , and 30% by the end of fy2015 , relative to each agency's baseline energy use in fy2003 ) . agencies scored progress in reaching building energy - efficiency goals in terms of reductions in energy consumption versus gross building area . for the energy reduction goals of epact , eo 13423 excluded some inherently inefficient industrial types of buildings were from this scoring . eo 13423 ( section 2f ) mandated specific energy reduction targets for new construction and renovations . further , it directed federal agencies to meet objectives set in the federal leadership in high performance and sustainable buildings memorandum of understanding ( "sustainable buildings mou" ) . the sustainable buildings mou called for new buildings to be 30% more cost efficient than industry standards , and for buildings undergoing major renovations to be 20% more cost efficient than a pre - renovation , 2003 baseline . the order also encouraged federal agencies to incorporate sustainable practices into projects underway , and sell or dispose of unneeded assets . the revoked eo 13123 had directed improvements in building energy efficiency , promoted the use of renewable energy , and set goals for reduction of greenhouse gas ( ghg ) emissions associated with energy use in buildings , among other energy - related requirements . in contrast , bush's eo 13423 had no specific ghg reduction target .