these data are not provided by the house . the architect of the capitol maintains five legislative branch statutory revolving funds: the house member gym revolving fund , the senate staff health and fitness facility revolving fund , the senate restaurants revolving fund , the capitol visitor center revolving fund , and the recycling revolving fund . in addition , the aoc operates the judiciary office building development and operations revolving fund . the library of congress has long administered funds associated with intra - governmental programs , special events and programs , and services to other libraries and the general public . while congress has considered a number of changes to the laws governing the administration and use of the library's revolving funds in recent years , these funds currently are operated under the authority of 2 u.s.c . ยง182 et seq . the annual legislative branch appropriations bills regularly place limits on the library's obligational authority in connection with reimbursable and revolving fund activities not funded through appropriations . this language is pursuant to 2 u.s.c . ยง132a - 1 , which beginning with fy1995 , has limited obligations for any reimbursable and revolving fund activities to the total amounts provided ( 1 ) in the annual regular appropriations act making appropriations for the legislative branch , or ( 2 ) in a supplemental appropriations act that makes appropriations for the legislative branch . the legislative branch acts have also , since fy2002 , allowed the temporary transfer of funds from the "salaries and expenses" heading to the revolving fund for the fedlink program and for the federal research program , with reimbursement to the former following payments for these services from federal agencies and libraries . the fy2015 legislative branch appropriations act , for example , contained language limiting the reimbursable and revolving fund activities not funded by appropriations to $203.1 million . a summary of the revolving funds , as well as requested obligational authority , is presented in the library's annual budget justification and the annual budget requests . in 1953 , a revolving fund was created for the operation and maintenance of the government printing office ( gpo ) . the agency was renamed the government publishing office in 2014 , and its revolving fund was renamed the gpo business operations revolving fund . the revolving fund , which is available without fiscal year limitation , was initially provided $1 million for [e]xpenses necessary for the operation and maintenance of the government printing office ( except the office of the superintendent of documents ) including rental of buildings ; expenses of attendance at meetings , when authorized by the joint committee on printing ; maintenance and operation of the emergency room ; purchase of uniforms for guards ; boots , coats , and gloves ; repairs and minor alterations to buildings ; and expenses authorized in writing by the joint committee on printing for inspection of government printing activities . since its enactment , the revolving fund language was amended on multiple occasions . 624 , the fy1957 legislative branch appropriations act ( 84 th congress ) , the revolving fund was repealed and replaced with separate revolving funds for the house and the senate .