table 2 summarizes these programs . the va has an ongoing pilot program to assess the effectiveness of providing assisted living ( al ) services to eligible veterans with tbi . the al - tbi pilot program is administered through contracts with non - va ( private sector ) residential care facilities that specialize in rehabilitation for individuals with tbi . in administering the al - tbi pilot program , the va collaborates with the defense and veterans brain injury center , a component of the defense centers of excellence for psychological health and traumatic brain injury ( which itself is a collaborative effort of the va and the dod ) . the al - tbi pilot program was established as a five - year pilot program pursuant to section 1705 of the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2008 ( p.l . section 501 of the veterans access , choice , and accountability act of 2014 ( p.l . 113-146 , as amended ) extends the pilot program through october 6 , 2017 . the program was further amended by the veterans traumatic brain injury care improvement act of 2014 ( p.l . 113-257 ) , which changed reporting requirements and modified the terminology ( eg , changing ''assisted living'' to ''community - based brain injury residential rehabilitative care'' ) . in addition to the pilot program , the va has authority to contract with non - va ( private sector ) facilities to provide assisted living services specifically to oef / oif veterans with tbi whose deficits in adls and iadls would otherwise require nursing home care that generally exceeds their nursing needs . this authority was established under section 507 of the caregivers and veterans omnibus health services act of 2010 ( p.l . within the category of community residential care ( as described in table 2 ) , medical foster homes ( mfhs ) serve more medically complex and disabled veterans by combining placement in a small adult foster home with enrollment in home - based primary care ( as described in table 2 ) . currently more than 600 va - approved caregivers provide mfh care to more than 700 veterans in 43 states — paid by the veterans . the va has proposed legislation authorizing payments for care in va - approved mfhs for veterans who would otherwise need nursing home care . the va argues that many veterans who presently reside in nursing homes at va expense would opt for mfh instead if the va paid for it . the va estimates that the 10-year ( fy2016 – fy2025 ) costs would be $176 million . the caregivers and veterans omnibus health services act of 2010 ( p.l . those who screen positive must be offered further evaluation and specialized treatment . the va adapted a screening instrument from one used by the dod . this screening instrument was incorporated into the computerized patient record system , which automatically alerts providers when a screening is required and prompts them to ask a series of questions . if a veteran screens negative for possible tbi , no further action is required .