( see below. ) some contend that the supplemental emission reduction targets in both bills might be unrealistic , due to the lack of readiness and unwillingness of some developing countries to participate in the program . they argue that , in the early years of the program , funds from allowances might have to flow largely to capacity - building activities rather than emission - reducing activities , thus delaying progress toward the emission reduction targets . supporters counter that an abundance of emission reduction opportunities are ready to be funded , and that sub - national or program - level projects are the first steps toward reducing emissions . 2454 since proceeds can only be used to purchase international redd offsets . deforestation is a significant source of global co 2 emissions . the two primary climate change bills , h.r . 2454 and s. 1733 , generally include similar processes to reduce emissions from deforestation and forest degradation ( redd ) . both would use allowances for capacity building in developing countries and for supplemental emissions reductions . both would allow international redd offsets for covered entities in the united states . both contain a reserve to stabilize carbon offset prices and possibly supplement redd efforts . 2454 generally contains more details on the implementation of these programs ; s. 1733 leaves more of the details to be determined in regulation . 2454 would use the u.s. environmental protection agency as the primary federal administrator of these redd - related programs ; s. 1733 would rely substantially on the u.s. agency for international development for implementation . allowances for redd activities could include both capacity building and supplemental emissions reductions . the pending legislation provides significant details on the supplemental emissions reductions , although "forest" is undefined and concerns about the effectiveness of implementation for supplemental reductions will persist until countries can demonstrate their capacity . the bills do not identify how to balance funding between supplemental emissions reduction and capacity building , although developing country capacity for implementing redd is critical to both the supplemental reductions and redd offsets . furthermore , the activities included in "capacity building" are ill - defined . carbon offsets from redd activities offer a substantial opportunity to reduce global co 2 emissions . however , concerns persist about offsets generally and about redd offsets in particular . many developing countries do not have the ability ( personnel and equipment ) to verify ( to measure , monitor , and report on ) avoided deforestation , and may have difficulty acquiring or developing the ability . because of existing forest protection programs , many question whether redd activities would merely substitute for efforts that a country would undertake anyway . furthermore , avoiding deforestation in one location may merely displace it to another location ( leakage ) . further , s. 1733 would not limit purchases to international redd offsets , and therefore other types of international offsets could presumably be purchased . when the offsets are converted back into emissions allowances , it would be at a one - to - one ratio under s. 1733 . the strategic reserve under h.r .