appendix a . significant information - sharing systems law enforcement online ( leo ) established prior to the 9 / 11 attacks , leo is a secure , internet - based communications portal for law enforcement , first responders , criminal justice professionals , and anti - terrorism and intelligence agencies around the globe . managed by the fbi's criminal justice information services division , leo catalyzes and strengthens collaboration and information - sharing by providing access to sensitive but unclassified information and various state - of - the - art communications services and tools . it is available around the clock and is offered free of charge to members of the criminal justice and intelligence communities , as well as military and government agencies associated with infrastructure protection in the united states . how does one determine if the right "dots" are being connected ? congress may wish to ask the nsi pmo about metrics to measure the success of the nsi program . regional information sharing systems program ( riss ) also established prior to the 9 / 11 attacks , riss is a national network of six multistate centers designed to operate on a regional basis . it is federally funded and administered by doj's bureau of justice assistance ( bja ) . riss supports law enforcement efforts nationwide to combat illegal drug trafficking , identity theft , human trafficking , violent crime , and terrorist activity , and to promote officer safety . the regional centers provide member law enforcement agencies with a broad range of intelligence exchange and related investigative support services . riss operates a secure intranet , known as rissnet™ , to facilitate law enforcement communications and information sharing nationwide . homeland security information network ( hsin ) after the 9 / 11 attacks , dhs established the hsin , a secured , web - based platform for sensitive but unclassified information sharing and collaboration between federal , state , local , tribal , private sector , and international partners . the hsin platform was created to interface with existing information - sharing networks to support the diverse communities of interest engaged in preventing , protecting from , responding to , and recovering from all threats , hazards , and incidents under the jurisdiction of dhs . there are five community of interest portals on hsin: emergency management , critical sectors , law enforcement , multi - mission agencies , and intelligence and analysis . hsin provides real - time , interactive connectivity between states and major urban areas and the 24 / 7 dhs operations center — the national operations center ( noc ) . the hsin - intelligence portal provides state , local , and tribal officials with access to unclassified intelligence products . classified intelligence products are provided to state and local fusion centers that have the appropriate security infrastructure through the homeland security data network ( hsdn ) . through hsdn , users can access collateral secret - level terrorism - related information including products from the national counterterrorism center's ( nctc ) nctc online .