but the fatal complication was mootness . before the court could rule on the merits , the city returned the cars it had seized from the claimants and settled their other claims . forfeiture is the confiscation of property as a consequence of the property's relation to some criminal activity . forfeiture comes in one of two forms , depending upon the procedures used to accomplish confiscation . and should the delay be judged by speedy trial or general due process standards ? the speedy trial standards focus on which party is most responsible for the delay and the consequences of the delay for the accused . the due process standards ask whether a delay - resulting procedure involves a risk of erroneous governmental deprivation of an individual's interests ; the extent to which additional safeguards will mitigate or eliminate that risk ; and the costs to the government ( including administrative burdens ) should those safeguards be required . the united states supreme court agreed to consider the issue in alvarez v. smith ( doc . 08-351 ) , cert . granted , 129 s.ct . 1401 ( 2009 ) , but the case became moot before the court could address the issue . had the property owners prevailed , adjustments in federal law might have been required . the case was complicated by several factors . first , the supreme court has already said in united states v. $8,850 ( vasquez ) , that the due process consequences of delays between seizure and a forfeiture hearing are to be judged using the speedy trial standards of barker v. wingo . second , the lower federal appellate court instead found applicable the general due process standards of mathews v. eldridge , but remanded to the district court to determine the appropriate remedy . this failure to identify the necessary remedial safeguards could have made supreme court review more difficult , since one of the mathews factors is the extent of governmental inconvenience posed by the safeguards proposed in the name of due process . third , the appropriate remedy may be elusive since the same level of proof is required to justify both the seizure and final confiscation — probable cause . criminal forfeiture involves the confiscation of the property following conviction of the property owner . civil forfeiture involves the confiscation of property following a civil proceeding in which the property itself is often treated as the defendant . in most cases , due process permits civil forfeiture notwithstanding the innocence of property owner . neither magistrate nor court need necessarily approve the seizure of personal property for forfeiture purposes . the law enforcement agencies which seize forfeitable property often share in the distribution of proceeds following confiscation . under the illinois law at issue , cars and other conveyances used to facilitate or conceal controlled substance offenses are subject to forfeiture . the same is true of any money or thing of value furnished , used , or acquired in the course of a controlled substance offense . property may be seized under process or a warrant .