in general , h.r . following are examples of these issues . under current law , fda requires domestic and foreign food facilities to register once , with no renewal requirement , although they must also report in a timely manner any relevant changes in their registration information . failure to register is prohibited , but as a practical matter the agency relies on each facility to take that initial step , as well as to report changes . also , it does not appear that food from unregistered facilities would be considered adulterated or misbranded , and therefore prohibited from being introduced into interstate commerce . ( fda's authority to deem food adulterated or misbranded , and its relationship to "prohibited acts" and associated penalties , is explained in the appendix . ) exactly how many facilities may fail to register is unknown . in the course of its investigation of pca , fda reportedly learned about 20 additional facilities making peanut products without the agency's knowledge . ( for example , investigators also found salmonella at a pca facility in plainview , tx , that opened in 2005 . texas public health officials had not previously inspected the plant because it had not been registered for a state manufacturer's license. ) 2749 and s. 510 contain provisions to expand federal facility registration requirements , in different ways . among the key differences , h.r . 2749 would require annual registration renewal and would impose registration fees , while s. 510 would require biennial registration renewal and would not impose registration fees . both bills would authorize processes by which fda could suspend a facility's registration . 2749 , food products from unregistered facilities ( including due to suspension ) would be deemed misbranded , so their introduction into interstate commerce would be prohibited . s. 510 would prohibit the importation , the offer to import , and the introduction into interstate commerce of food products from facilities whose registration had been suspended . this incident illustrates that the pulsenet genetic fingerprinting system quickly identified a multi - state outbreak caused by a specific strain of salmonella , but that it took about two months of subsequent epidemiologic investigation , including patient interviews , before food vehicles were identified . fda noted during its investigation that it had not previously considered peanut products to be at high risk of bacterial contamination , but that such products would likely be considered for greater scrutiny in the future . food safety officials often lack good information about the kinds of hazards and contaminants that may be present in different kinds of foods . this is particularly true for fda - regulated foods . epidemiologic investigation is often needed during outbreak investigation to focus in on suspected food vehicles for testing . the house passed h.r . 2749 , the food safety enhancement act of 2009 , on july 30 , 2009 . the senate committee on health , education , labor , and pensions has reported s. 510 , the fda food safety modernization act . the bills cover much of the same material , although they differ somewhat in their specific approaches .