some appropriations bills account for more earmarks than others . the abbreviations in table 1 are used to reference the bills . in addition , the transportation - hud bill separately identifies contract authority , which is included in these tables as non - mandatory appropriations . the difference between the total and non - mandatory appropriations can be large for some bills , such as labor - hhs - education ( which has mandatory funds for medicare and medicaid , among other programs ) and agriculture ( which has mandatory funds for food stamps and the farm commodity programs ) . for all 12 fy2010 appropriations bills combined , 1.5% of the total value of regular appropriation is earmarked , and 2.4% of the non - mandatory appropriation is earmarked . the percentages of regular fy2010 total appropriations that were earmarked ranged from 0% for the state - foreign operations appropriations bill to 16.9% for the energy - water appropriations bill ( table 2 , figure 3 ) . however , for all of the bills except two ( energy - water , and military construction - va ) , the percentages of total appropriations that were earmarked are less than 3% . when mandatory funds are excluded , the percentages earmarked can change significantly . for example , the percentage of the fy2010 total appropriation earmarked for military construction - va is 7.9% , but it increases to 11.5% of the non - mandatory appropriation ( table 2 , figure 3 ) . for financial services , the respective percentages are 2.4% and 4.3% ; for agriculture , 0.3% and 1.5% ; and for labor - hhs - education , 0.1% and 0.6% . house and senate rules do not require congressional disclosure of presidentially requested earmarks . the disclosure lists for some bills , however , include the "president" as a requester . table 3 presents the number and value of fy2010 earmarks in the disclosure lists that were requested by the president . it is not clear that administration earmarks are defined or disclosed consistently across all appropriations bills . thus , it is possible that there may be more presidentially requested earmarks than are reflected in table 3 . mandatory spending primarily funds entitlement programs . it is controlled by the authorization ( or legislative ) acts , which are under the jurisdiction of the authorizing committees . the disclosure list for the fy2010 financial services bill also identified the judiciary as a requester for five earmarks . nine of the 11 fy2010 appropriations bills with congressionally disclosed earmarks list the "president" ( or the "judiciary" ) as a requester of some earmarks , alone or with members of congress . the total across all appropriations bills in fy2010 is 2,039 earmarks worth $21.8 billion ( 18% of the total number and 68% of the total value ) . only the defense and legislative branch appropriations bills did not identify earmarks as requested by the president in fy2010 . the president is disclosed as the only requester ( no members of congress are listed ) for a subset of earmarks . the 12-bill total is 1,265 earmarks worth $9.5 billion ( 11% of the 11,320 total number and 30% of the $32.0 billion total value ) .