in response , it received 380,000 comments . on september 28 , 2009 , epa also proposed the aforementioned emission standards for ghgs from new light - duty motor vehicles — the standards required by caa section 202 ( a ) and referred to in this report's title . ( september 2009 was a busy month for epa on the climate change front . besides proposing vehicle emission standards , the agency went final with its ghg monitoring rule for large stationary sources , and proposed a "tailoring rule" discussed in part four of this report. ) most recently , epa published its final endangerment determination for ghgs from new motor vehicles on december 15 , 2009 . actually , epa's endangerment determination consists of two findings , one addressing each component of the section 202 ( a ) endangerment provision . first , epa found that current atmospheric levels of the six major ghgs — from all emission sources — constitute in combination "air pollution which may reasonably be anticipated to endanger public health and welfare. this is a generic determination , not tied to any particular source category . given that epa responds to the petition ( or acts without petition ) , one issue that arises under every non - 202 ( a ) endangerment provision is the effect of the generic component of the agency's 202 ( a ) finding . recall that the generic component declared that ghgs already in the atmosphere from all sources may , in combination , reasonably be anticipated to endanger public health or welfare . because non - 202 ( a ) endangerment provisions use identical language , arguably at least the generic component of those provisions also must be deemed satisfied . this is an important preliminary step in understanding the legal relevance of epa's 202 ( a ) endangerment finding to other endangerment - triggered sections of the caa — but it is only a preliminary step . beyond this , as the following discussion shows , there are differences in the language surrounding the endangerment provisions , and lower levels of ghg emissions from most non - section - 202 source categories . these differences , it would appear , generally give epa leeway in deciding whether to regulate ghgs from sources other than new motor vehicles , notwithstanding the 202 ( a ) finding . part five offers a summary and comment . the events leading up to epa's endangerment finding for new motor vehicle ghgs in 2009 began a decade earlier . in 1999 , 19 organizations and 13 states petitioned epa to regulate the four ghgs emitted by new motor vehicles ( carbon dioxide , methane , nitrous oxide , and hydrofluorocarbons ) . petitioners invoked caa section 202 ( a ) : the [epa] administrator shall by regulation prescribe … standards applicable to the emission of any air pollutant from any class or classes of new motor vehicles … which in his judgment cause , or contribute to , air pollution which may reasonably be anticipated to endanger public health or welfare .