however , there are separate contracting programs for them . contracting opportunities for disadvantaged small businesses are perennially of interest to the members and committees of congress because of small businesses' widely asserted role in job creation . veterans and persons with disabilities are not presumed to be disadvantaged for purposes of these programs . disadvantaged groups include indian tribes , alaska native corporations , native hawaiian organizations , and community development corporations . in fy2014 , the federal government awarded $34.7 billion in contracts or subcontracts to sdbs , including $16.3 billion in contracts to 8 ( a ) participants . presumptions based on race have been found to constitute "explicit racial classifications," subjecting programs that incorporate them to "strict scrutiny" if they are challenged on the grounds that they violate the constitutional guarantee of equal protection . for a challenged program to survive strict scrutiny , the government must show that the program is necessary to meet a compelling government interest . presumptions based on gender are similarly subject to heightened scrutiny , with the supreme court in united states v. virginia having required the state of virginia to provide an "exceedingly persuasive justification" for its policy of maintaining an all - male military academy . in contrast , classifications that are not based on race , gender , or another suspect classification , and that do not involve the exercise of a fundamental right , will generally be upheld so long as they are rationally related to a legitimate government interest . the ability of programs to withstand strict or other heightened scrutiny may depend , in part , upon how the program is structured . in a recent decision , the u.s. district court for the district of columbia found that the 8 ( a ) program is not unconstitutional on its face , although it is unconstitutional as - applied in the military simulation and training industry . particularly in its rejection of the facial challenge to the 8 ( a ) program , the court emphasized certain aspects of the program's history and requirements when finding that "breaking down barriers to minority business development created by discrimination" constituted a compelling government interest , and the government had a strong basis in evidence for concluding that race - based action was necessary to further this interest . for example , the court rejected the plaintiff's assertion that the 8 ( a ) program was "not truly remedial," but rather favored "virtually all minority groups … over the larger pool of citizens," because non - minority individuals may qualify for the program , and all 8 ( a ) applicants must demonstrate economic disadvantage . similarly , in finding that the program was narrowly tailored to meet the government's interests , the court noted ( 1 ) that goals for contracting with small disadvantaged businesses are purely aspirational , and there are no penalties for failing to meet them ; ( 2 ) the nine - year limits on program participation for individual owners and firms ; and ( 3 ) that sba may not accept a requirement for the 8 ( a ) program if it determines that doing so will have an adverse effect on another small business or group of small businesses .