the caseload also increasingly became nonwhite . amendments to the program made in 1950 authorized benefits for caretakers . the social security act of 1935 ( p.l . 74-271 ) provided federal funding for these types of programs by creating the aid to dependent children ( adc ) program . in the early years , benefits were paid only on behalf of the children ( not the caretaker , usually the mother ) . families receiving benefits were usually headed by a widow or had a disabled father . however , over time , the nature of both the program and the families it aided changed . social security survivors benefits were created in the social security amendments of 1939 , and those receiving adc increasingly were families where the father was alive but absent . in 1956 , the goals of creating "self sufficiency" and strengthening family life were added to adc , along with funding for services that would seek to achieve these goals . in 1962 , the program was renamed aid to families with dependent children ( afdc ) . policymakers became concerned that cash assistance was a contributing cause of economic disadvantage . providing cash to a nonworking parent was seen as a work disincentive , during a time when an increasing number of women , and mothers , were going to work . two - parent families never became a large portion of the cash assistance caseload . the 1980s also saw increasing attention to the notion of "welfare dependency. economic studies generally confirmed that providing cash assistance was a disincentive to work . additional research conducted in the 1980s showed that mandatory welfare - to - work programs could move families off the rolls and into employment . the family support act of 1988 ( p.l . 100-485 ) established in afdc the notion of mutual responsibility between the cash assistance recipient and the state . it created the job opportunity and basic skills ( jobs ) training program , which provided employment services , education , and training for cash assistance recipients . further , there was concern that restricting benefits to only single - parent families ( usually headed by the mother ) contributed to the trend of an increasing number of children living in single - parent families . the social science research on the impact of assistance , as embodied in afdc , on family structure is inconclusive . cash assistance benefits for families headed by two able - bodied parents became available in 1961 at state option . most tanf funding is set at a fixed amount that does not change with state circumstances . in addition to federal grants to states , there are also tanf competitive grants to community - based organizations for healthy marriage and responsible fatherhood initiatives . to many , tanf is synonymous with cash assistance ( sometimes called "welfare" ) for needy families . as discussed above , this is not true: tanf is far broader than cash assistance . however , the policy concerns around cash assistance are what led to the creation of tanf . it was not until the family support act of 1988 ( p.l .