3590 , which are summarized below . listed uspstf recommendations include , in parentheses , the uspstf grades for the service , as follows: grade a: the uspstf recommends the service , based on high certainty that the net benefit is substantial . grade b: the uspstf recommends the service , based on high certainty that the net benefit is moderate or there is moderate certainty that the net benefit is moderate to substantial . grade c: the uspstf recommends against routinely providing the service . there may be considerations that support providing the service in an individual patient . there is at least moderate certainty that the net benefit is small . grade d: the uspstf recommends against the service , based on moderate or high certainty that the service has no net benefit or that the harms outweigh the benefits ; or i statement: the uspstf concludes that the current evidence is insufficient to assess the balance of benefits and harms of the service . then it discusses two issues: ( 1 ) do clinical preventive services help medicare control costs ? and ( 2 ) what is the utilization of medicare clinical preventive services , and how might it be improved ? this report then discusses current legislative proposals to reform the health care system , with respect to provisions regarding medicare coverage of preventive services . as with clinical recommendations in general , specific uspstf recommendations may not be appropriate for individuals with certain risk factors or other special considerations , or may be modified by certain clinical considerations . finally , the appendix provides a comparison of medicare coverage of preventive services with uspstf recommendations for such services . this report will be updated as events warrant . the bill is a comprehensive health reform proposal that represents an amalgam of separate measures reported by the committee on finance and the committee on health , education , labor , and pensions ( help ) . to be eligible for payment under medicare , items or services must meet the following three conditions: ( 1 ) the item or service must fall within a defined medicare benefit category ; ( 2 ) the item or service must be "reasonable and necessary" for diagnosis or treatment ; and ( 3 ) the item or service is not statutorily excluded from coverage . the statute vests the authority with the secretary of hhs to determine what constitutes medically reasonable and necessary . thus , the secretary has the legal authority to specify which items or services are covered in a defined benefit category and under what conditions . as previously mentioned , medicare law has been amended several times to add new coverage , including coverage of certain preventive health care services . 2808 , introduced by senator vitter , which would provide that "for the purposes of this act , and for the purposes of any other provisions of law , the current recommendations of the [uspstf] regarding breast cancer screening , mammography , and prevention shall be considered the most current other than those issued in or around november 2009. . the process for medicare coverage decisions for new technologies and procedures are made through two pathways .