appendix a . summary of federal renewable energy and energy efficiency incentives / index of programs appendix b . index of programs by applicant eligibility and technology type appendix c. expired federal energy efficiency and renewable energy incentive programs 1 . assisted housing stability and energy and green retrofit investments program ( recovery act funded ) 2 . clean renewable energy bonds ( crebs ) 3 . energy efficiency and conservation block grants program ( eecbg ) 4 . energy efficiency and renewable energy technology deployment , demonstration , and commercialization grant program 5 . energy efficient appliance rebate program ( eearp ) 6 . energy efficient appliance tax credit for manufacturers 7 . new era rural technology competitive grants program 8 . program of competitive grants for worker training and placement in high growth and emerging industry sectors 9 . qualified energy conservation bonds 10 . the united states has an abundance of natural resources . for much of the nation's history , energy availability was not a concern as commerce and industry needs could be met by domestic supplies . however , industrialization and population growth , and the continuing development of a consumer - oriented society , led to growing dependence on foreign sources of energy during the 20 th century to supplement the demands of a growing economy . recognition of the implications of dependence on foreign sources of energy , coupled with concerns over the volatility of prices driven by fluctuations in supply spurred by world events , prompted federal efforts to increase u.s. energy independence and reduce domestic consumption . a major result has been the establishment of a number of programs focused on energy efficiency and conservation of domestic resources and on research programs that target the development of renewable sources of energy . many of these programs have roots going back almost 40 years and have been redesigned many times over that period . many of the current programs have been reauthorized and redesigned periodically to meet changing economic conditions and national interests . the programs apply broadly to sectors ranging from industry to academia , and from state and local governments to rural communities . each program has been designed to meet current needs as well as future anticipated challenges . since 2005 , congress has enacted several major energy laws: the energy policy act of 2005 ( epact 2005 ; p.l . 109-58 ) ; the energy independence and security act of 2007 ( eisa ; p.l . 110-140 ) ; the energy improvement and extension act ( eiea ) , enacted as division b of the emergency economic stabilization act ( eesa ; p.l . 110-343 ) ; and the american recovery and reinvestment act ( arra ; p.l . each of those laws established , expanded , or modified energy efficiency and renewable energy research , development , demonstration , and deployment ( rdd&d ) programs . the department of energy ( doe ) operates the greatest number of efficiency and renewable energy incentive programs . the department of the treasury and the department of agriculture ( usda ) operate several programs .