one year earlier . however , most buyers reportedly were reluctant to contract on a longer - term basis . if usda does announce another trq increase , the impact of the additional imports on increased supply and prices in subsequent months will depend on the size of the increase . the focus will be on how much the announced increase covers the difference between projected ending stocks and what supply would be needed to conclude fy2010 with a 13.5% to 14.5% stocks - to - use ratio — the range of an informal benchmark that usda appears to be working with ( see " significance of sugar ending stocks " for explanation ) . at present , applying these ratios would imply additional imports ranging from about 200,000 st to 300,000 st . this assumes there is no additional increase in imports from mexico beyond what usda already projects and that usda's may 2010 increase in its domestic food use estimate remains unchanged . however , if higher estimates of sugar food use are considered , additional sugar supplies ( i.e. , imports ) would be required to meet the range of usda stocks - to - use ratios cited above . with additional imports , prices could fall some , but the extent of the drop would depend on the amount that actually enters against the announced quota and on how quickly raw sugar is imported and refined . sugar users , beginning in march 2009 , have made repeated requests for usda to increase import quotas for raw and refined sugar in order to head off a shortage in the domestic sugar supply . the 2008 farm bill ( p.l . 110-246 , subtitle d of title i ) further requires usda to operate the sugar program on a "no - cost" basis ( i.e. , to result in no federal government outlays ) . it is administered by the farm service agency . each tool is described below , with a discussion of what the 2008 farm bill requires and what usda has announced in exercising its authorities for the fy2009 and fy2010 sugar programs . they also have proposed that usda and ustr administer the sugar import quota in ways that maximize the amount of foreign sugar that actually enters the u.s. market each year . the policy debate will continue to revolve around how usda should implement available authorities to either maintain sugar import quotas at already announced levels or raise them to increase available supplies . because either alternative would affect market prices , the following reviews u.s. sugar use , supply , and prices in light of historical experience . sugar processors seek to maintain their advantage in negotiating sales prices with users . food and beverage firms want prices for refined sugar that are lower and closer to the historical average . members of congress have weighed in with letters to usda in support of each side's position . u.s. sweetener trade with mexico — now free in both directions — continues to be watched carefully because of its impact on u.s. sugar supplies and prices . the uncertainty that usda faces in projecting how much sugar from mexico might enter the u.s. market has implications for how it manages u.s. sugar policy .