4626 , or section 262 of h.r . 3962 ( eg , joint rate - setting ) , might nevertheless be found to be permissible under the "state action" doctrine ; or found not to be violations of the antitrust laws at all , even without the protection of either mccarran - ferguson or the "state action" doctrine . congress' response was the 1945 mccarran - ferguson act . in paul v. virginia ( 75 u.s. ( 8 wall. ) 168 ( 1868 ) ) , the supreme court ruled that "[i]ssuing a policy of insurance is not a transaction of [interstate] commerce. in united states v. south - eastern underwriters ass'n . ( 322 u.s. 533 ( 1944 ) ) , the court held , however , that the federal antitrust laws were applicable to an insurance association's interstate activities in restraint of trade . although the 1944 court did not specifically overrule its prior determination , the case was viewed as a reversal of 75 years of precedent and practice , and created significant apprehension about the continued viability of state insurance regulation and taxation of insurance premiums . it prohibits application of the federal antitrust laws and similar provisions in the federal trade commission ( ftc ) act , as well as most other federal statutes , to the "business of insurance" to the extent that such business is regulated by state law ; the single exception to that immunity is the statement that nothing in mccarran - ferguson "shall render the sherman act inapplicable to any agreement to [or act of] boycott , coerc[ion] , or intimidat[ion]. early mccarran - ferguson decisions mostly favored insurance companies . after 1969 , however , the exemption for the "business of insurance" was generally limited to activities involving the underwriting and spreading of risk , and those surrounding insurance companies' relationships with their policyholders ; agreements between insurance companies and entities outside the insurance industry were specifically not deemed any part of "the business of insurance. in 2003 , the supreme court ruled that mccarran case law prohibiting the indirect application of federal antitrust ( or other ) laws to the "business of insurance" would no longer control with respect to those areas over which congress has unquestionable legislative authority ( eg , erisa , civil rights , securities ) , notwithstanding insurance - company involvement . recommendations for the repeal of mccarran - ferguson have been voiced for a number of years , coming , for example , from the american bar association ( aba ) and , most recently , from the antitrust modernization commission ( amc ) , a body established by congress to "to examine whether the need exists to modernize the antitrust laws and to identify and study related issues. the aba has repeatedly expressed the "view that industry - specific exemptions from the antitrust laws are rarely justified , and that evidence that the exemption results in consumer benefit should exist to justify any such exemption. in its chapter on "government exceptions to free - market competition," the 2007 amc report and recommendations cautions that the harms of an antitrust exemption be "carefully weigh[ed]" against any loss of consumer benefit .