some of the other models that have been discussed are more modest in scope . for example , in addition to including a provision establishing a medicare advisory board , h.r . 3590 would establish a private , non - profit corporation titled the patient - centered outcomes research institute to conduct comparative clinical effectiveness research . the corporation , which would be overseen by a board of governors composed of 17 members appointed by the comptroller general , would be charged with identifying national priorities for performing comparative effectiveness research and contracting with public and private organizations to conduct such research . another proposal would create an organization or entity to oversee the market for private health insurance . these entities , which are referred to as health insurance exchanges , would be responsible for establishing and enforcing standards for private health plans related to benefits , coverage , enrollment , and beneficiary cost - sharing . proposals to establish an independent entity in medicare also vary in scope and structure . some measures would create an independent commission , board , or entity with the authority to determine specific medicare policies , particularly those related to provider reimbursement and benefit coverage . others would create a governance structure with a broader scope of authority . for example , in a recent paper for the new america foundation on reforming medicare's governance , certain health experts advocate creating a new independent board called the medicare guardians . under this proposal , the medicare guardians would function like a board of directors for medicare with broad authority to enact policies directed at restructuring how the program pays for and delivers health care . congress has debated the merits of creating a new administrative entity in medicare several times throughout the program's history , most recently in the medicare reform discussions of 2000 and 2001 . at that time , congress was considering adding a new prescription drug benefit to the program and exploring options to foster competition among private medicare plans . however , there were concerns that cms ( at that time the health care financing administration , or hcfa ) , already overwhelmed with new responsibilities , would not be able to manage an increase in its workload . various reform proposals recommended a number of solutions to rectify the agency's management problems , including expanding its authority to perform its responsibilities , increasing the agency's annual budget , creating separate agencies to administer parts of the program , and establishing a medicare board to manage competition among private plans and traditional medicare . currently , medicare policy is determined largely by congress and the three congressional committees that have jurisdiction over the program: the house committee on ways and means , the house committee on energy and commerce , and the senate committee on finance . these committees regularly propose and draft legislation to modify all aspects of the medicare program , including payment policy , benefits , coverage , and program administration . in some areas , congress has created legislative language that is very detailed and prescriptive . for example , policymakers have established sophisticated payment systems and methodologies for reimbursing providers participating in medicare parts a and b .