the amendment consists of seven divisions . division a provisions are intended to improve affordability of health insurance through the development of state reinsurance programs and high - risk pools , private insurance reforms , state innovation programs , and administrative simplification . division b provisions are intended to improve access to health insurance for small businesses . these include the establishment of association health plans . division b would also establish requirements to improve interstate purchasing of health insurance coverage and expand tax preferences for health savings accounts and high - deductible health plans . division e focuses on employee wellness programs and would specify how a group health plan or a health insurer offering group health coverage could vary premiums and cost sharing based on participation in a standards - based wellness program . division f focuses on fraud , waste , abuse , and abortion . division g focuses on licensure of biosimilar products and would provide a pathway for such licensure . this report discusses each of the broad topics addressed in the amendment . each discussion consists of an overview of the issue and current law followed by a summary of provisions of the amendment . a biosimilar , often called a "follow - on" biologic , is similar to a brand - name biologic while a generic drug is the same as a brand - name chemical drug . chemical drugs are small molecules for which the equivalence of chemical structure between the brand - name drug and a generic version is relatively easy to determine . in contrast , comparing the structure of a biosimilar and the brand - name biologic is far more scientifically challenging . a biologic is a preparation , such as a drug or a vaccine , that is made from living organisms . most biologics are complex proteins that require special handling ( such as refrigeration ) and are usually administered to patients via injection or infused directly into the bloodstream . in many cases , current technology will not allow complete characterization of biological products . additional clinical trials may be necessary before the fda would approve a biosimilar . congress is interested in creating an expedited pathway for the approval of biosimilars for the same reasons it was interested in allowing access to generic chemical drugs in 1984: cost savings . the pathway for biosimilars would be analogous to the fda's authority for approving generic chemical drugs under the drug price competition and patent term restoration act of 1984 ( p.l . often referred to as the hatch - waxman act , this law allows the generic company to establish that its drug product is chemically the same as the already approved innovator drug , and thereby relies on the fda's previous finding of safety and effectiveness for the approved drug . the generic drug industry achieves cost savings by avoiding the expense of clinical trials , as well as the initial drug research and development costs that were incurred by the brand - name manufacturer . the cost of brand - name biologics is often prohibitively high . for example , the rheumatoid arthritis and psoriasis treatment enbrel reportedly costs $16,000 per year .