both bills establish a u.s . emergency rapid response to food crisis fund to respond to unexpected urgent food assistance needs . 3077 does not include that provision . the bills authorize the president to provide assistance through u.s. land - grant universities , other eligible universities , and public and private partners of universities in the united states and other countries for ( 1 ) research on problems affecting food , agriculture , forestry , livestock , and fisheries ; ( 2 ) improved human and institutional capacity for the global application of agricultural and related environmental sciences ; ( 3 ) agricultural development and trade research and extension services to support rural population access to national and global markets ; and ( 4 ) application of agricultural sciences to solving food , health , nutrition , rural income , and environmental problems . some of the funds appropriated would be available for the usaid collaborative research support program and the consultative group on international agricultural research . food aid provided under s. 384 and h.r . 3077 could be purchased locally or regionally and funds could be provided to finance the provision of emergency non - food assistance , including vouchers or cash transfers , safety net programs , or other appropriate non - food assistance . the food aid provided in these bills would be in addition to u.s. commodity food aid provided under the food for peace act ( p.l . s. 384 was introduced on february 5 , 2009 , and reported by the senate foreign relations committee on may 13 , 2009 . 3077 was introduced on june 26 , 2009 , and referred to the house foreign affairs committee . 2817 declares that it shall be u.s. policy to reduce global hunger , advance nutrition , increase food security , and ensure that relevant federal policies and programs ( 1 ) provide emergency response and direct support to vulnerable populations in times of need ; ( 2 ) increase resilience to and reduce , limit , or mitigate the impact of shocks on vulnerable populations ; ( 3 ) increase and build the capacity of people and governments to sustainably feed themselves ; ( 4 ) ensure adequate access to the required calories and nutrients needed to live healthy lives ; ( 5 ) strengthen the ability of small - scale farmers to sustain and increase their production and livelihoods ; and ( 6 ) incorporate sustainable and environmentally sound agricultural methods and practices . the bill establishes a white house office on global hunger and food security in the executive office of the president and directs the president to appoint , as head of the office , a coordinator on global hunger and food security . the coordinator would be charged with developing and implementing a comprehensive government - wide strategy to address global hunger and food security and to ensure that the strategy ( 1 ) contributes to achieving the millennium development goal of reducing global hunger by half not later than 2015 and to advancing the united nations comprehensive framework for action with respect to global hunger and food security ; and ( 2 ) is integrated into any review or development of a federal strategy for global development .