supply control is also affected by imports . legislation has been introduced in both the house and the senate in 2009 to apply import controls on specific dairy products . the milk import tariff equity act ( s. 1542 and h.r . 3674 ) would impose tariff - rate quotas on imports of casein ( the main protein found in milk ) and milk protein concentrates . some believe a change in federal milk marketing orders also could be used to stabilize the milk market and boost dairy farm returns . one bill in the 111 th congress , the federal milk marketing improvement act of 2009 ( s. 1645 , first introduced as s. 889 ) , is designed to "help farmers get a fair price for their milk" and provide relief and assistance to dairy farmers by using the cost of milk production as the basis for pricing milk . the bill contains provisions for usda to administratively reduce prices received by farmers , in an effort to limit milk production , if the secretary of agriculture determines that an excess amount is being produced for the national domestic market . supporters of price stabilization and supply control say that incentives within the dairy industry to overproduce need to be offset by a program to control supplies in a more measured way . critics contend that supply control could reduce the competitiveness of the u.s. dairy industry , limit its incentive to innovate , and raise consumer prices because , they argue , a pricing system based on supply control and / or cost of production potentially rewards inefficiency . critics also argue that administratively matching supply and demand can be difficult because the process would require accurate forecasts of demand and supply factors that are notoriously fickle . other industry groups , including the national milk producers federation ( nmpf ) , the largest trade association representing milk producer cooperatives , prefer a more market - based approach for addressing milk pricing issues , along with changes to existing dairy programs as part of an overall adjustment to federal dairy policy . the nmpf proposes a new dairy producer income insurance program that would make indemnity payments when operation losses occur ( similar to a revenue insurance program ) and reform of the federal milk marketing order system , specifically the provisions for calculating minimum farm milk prices and the existing price discovery mechanism . the organization also advocates discontinuing the dairy product price support program in order to speed up market adjustments . the federal government plays a prominent role in that process . as such , they claim the best approach is to find ways for producers to manage price risks without limiting the industry's ability to capitalize on domestic and international demand opportunities . detractors expect that incentives to overproduce will aggravate the financial woes of the dairy industry indefinitely , so controlling potential price variability with supply management is necessary for long - term financial health for producers . promoters of a market - based approach , including dairy food manufacturers , say that price volatility will be a part of the dairy industry , as it is for other commodities .