sec . 7521 ( a ) ) , "cause or contribute to air pollution that may reasonably be anticipated to endanger public health or welfare. many in the agricultural sectors are concerned that this action may set the stage for a series of rules to regulate ghg emissions in other sectors , including the u.s. agricultural sectors . epa's endangerment finding follows action taken by epa in 2008 when it issued an advance notice of proposed rulemaking ( anpr ) . since that time , there has been confusion about the extent that u.s. agriculture would be affected by that proposed rule . some farm groups believed that , as part of the notice , epa was proposing to impose a "cow tax" on livestock operations . however , the anpr did not recommend the use of any particular caa authority to regulate any emissions , nor did it commit to specific next steps to deal with ghgs , and it did not include a formal proposal to regulate ghgs . among the options discussed in the anpr was the potential to use the caa's permitting program ( in title v ) to regulate sources of ghg emissions . agricultural sources were not singled out or highlighted in this discussion . the anpr did mention the agricultural sectors , but only as background discussion as a source of ghgs , similar to that for other sectors , such as electric utilities . the title v permit program does require regulated sources to pay permit fees to states , which could be the source of concern among some that , if epa were to use the permitting program in the caa to regulate ghgs , which some claim would automatically result in mandatory fees . epa noted in its anpr that the caa allows considerable flexibility in setting fee schedules . epa also stated that in the event of future regulation , it would be appropriate for permitting agencies to use that flexibility in setting any permit fees ( by lowering fees for ghgs , compared with other pollutants , or setting lower fees for smaller sources , or other means ) . some of these same issues and concerns have persisted regarding epa's endangerment finding . however , it remains unclear whether this action will trigger other obligations by epa that could affect the u.s. agricultural sectors . in march 2009 , senator thune and representative lucas introduced bills ( s. 527 and h.r . 1426 , respectively ) that would prevent epa from imposing title v operating permits for controlling ghgs resulting from biological processes associated with livestock production . the house interior , environment , and related agencies appropriations bill ( h.r . 2996 , sec . 420 ) includes a similar provision prohibiting the use of available funds to promulgate or implement any regulation requiring the issuance of permits under title v of the clean air act "for carbon dioxide , nitrous oxide , water vapor , or methane emissions resulting from biological processes associated with livestock production. in october 2009 , the fy2010 interim appropriations conference agreement included an amendment to block epa efforts to require permits for ghgs emitted by livestock . appendix a . selected differences in offset provisions: h.r .