the courts of iraq and afghanistan have jurisdiction to prosecute them pursuant to applicable status of forces agreements . some contractors , particularly u.s. nationals , may be prosecuted in u.s. federal courts or military courts under certain circumstances . the report briefly discusses the possible implication of the roles of private security contractors with respect to inherently governmental functions . nonetheless , the use of armed contractors has raised concerns related to whether the role they play is suitable for outsourcing and whether the legal framework is adequate to hold contractors accountable under u.s. law for any abuses or other transgressions they may commit . despite the amendment to the ucmj to subject military contractors supporting the armed forces during contingency operations to court - martial jurisdiction , and despite the extension of meja to cover certain non - dod contractors working with the military overseas , some private security contractors may remain outside the jurisdiction of u.s. courts , civil or military , for improper conduct in iraq or afghanistan . as the courts begin to interpret and apply these statutes , and as the effects of the new contractual requirements are implemented , congress may be called on to review and amend the existing statutory framework . u.s. departments and agencies engaged in combat or stability operations overseas are relying on private firms to perform a wider scope of security services than was previously the case . rather than relying on the u.s. armed forces to provide protection from insurgents and other risks inherent in such an environment , the state department , usaid , and , reportedly , the central intelligence agency ( cia ) have outsourced a variety of security services . the department of defense ( dod ) also employs civilian contractors to perform certain security services . the use of private security contractors ( pscs ) to provide security for personnel and property in iraq and afghanistan has been a subject of debate in the press , in congress , and in the international community . due to a spate of high - profile incidents involving contractors allegedly shooting civilians , using excessive force , committing other crimes , or otherwise behaving in a manner that may be offensive to the local population , there is concern that the reliance on contractors may be undermining u.s. counterinsurgency efforts in iraq and afghanistan . some have questioned whether the legal framework is adequate to cover the activities of armed civilians performing roles that in previous conflicts were assigned to soldiers , or whether such activities could run counter to international law . congress has , over the past decade , enacted legislation to close jurisdictional gaps that have made prosecution of civilian employees difficult for crimes they commit overseas . as a result , there is statutory authority to subject civilian contractor personnel to prosecution in federal and sometimes military court in many cases , largely depending on the type and seriousness of the offense alleged , where the offense occurred , the nationality of the perpetrator or victim , and the nature of the contract employment and government agency ( or armed force ) affiliation .