postal service . it is my hope that 30 years from today a future postmaster general will sit at this table and report on the progress made possible by the postal accountability and enhancement act of 2006 . unfortunately , our business model remains broken , even with the positive pricing and product changes in the new law . a s tronger r egulator . should they consider congress's intent or try to ascertain the "original understanding" of the statute ? newly enacted statutes can be particularly susceptible to differing interpretations as political actors attempt to implement the statute . as described earlier , the paea made numerous significant changes to u.s. postal law . because of its length — more than 20,000 words — and complexity , it is not surprising that disagreements concerning implementation of the paea have arisen . as the words of the paea develop into governmental actions , congress may mitigate some of the possible negative effects through active oversight of the usps and the prc . to date , it is unclear if the administration of president barack obama has any concerns regarding the implementation of the paea . however , his predecessor , president george w. bush , did issue a signing statement that addressed a number of sections of paea , often in the context of the separation of powers . these include the following: section 205 permits "any interested person ( including an officer of the postal regulatory commission representing the interests of the general public ) " to "lodge a complaint" with the prc . the statement said the executive branch shall construe this portion of the statute "not to authorize an officer or agency within the executive branch to institute proceedings in federal court against the postal regulatory commission. section 404 establishes 39 u.s.c . 409 ( h ) , which limits the circumstances under which the department of justice may represent the postal service in legal cases . the signing statement declared that the executive branch "shall construe subsection 409 ( h ) of title 39 ... which relates to legal representation for an element of the executive branch , in a manner consistent with the constitutional authority of the president to supervise the unitary executive branch and to take care that the laws be faithfully executed. section 405 of the statute amends 39 u.s.c . 407 so that the "secretary of state shall be responsible for formulation , coordination , and oversight of foreign policy related to international postal services and other international delivery services," and section 405 places certain limitations on the secretary's powers to conclude treaties . section 405 also places requirements upon the secretary ( eg , the secretary must "coordinate with other agencies as appropriate" in carrying out his or her responsibilities ) . the signing statement said that the executive branch shall construe this portion of the statute "in a manner consistent with the president's constitutional authority to conduct the nation's foreign affairs , including the authority to determine which officers shall negotiate for the united states and toward what objectives , to make treaties by and with the advice and consent of the senate , and to supervise the unitary executive branch.