proposals in other divisions of h.r . 3962 may also affect american indians and alaska natives . for example , indian tribes may be eligible for grant or contract programs proposed in h.r . 3962 , may benefit from proposed medicaid reforms . this report summarizes the provisions of division d of h.r . 3962 as passed on november 7 , 2009 . the division contains two titles . 3962 is based on h.r . 3200 , america's affordable health choices act of 2009 , which was originally introduced on july 14 , 2009 , and was reported separately on october 14 , 2009 , by three house committees — education and labor , energy and commerce , and ways and means . one major difference between h.r . 3962 is the addition of division d , "indian health care improvement," which would reenact , authorize , and amend the indian health care improvement act ( ihcia ) . division d differs from much of the other divisions of h.r . 3962 in that it targets a specific population group — american indians and alaska natives , a group that , in general , has lower health status , lower life expectancy , and higher rates of a number of diseases , including diabetes , than the u.s. population as a whole . the goal of the division — to improve the health of american indians and alaska natives — is consistent with the changes proposed in other divisions that also propose to improve health care access and quality , augment the health care workforce , and increase access to mental health services . provisions to reauthorize and amend ihcia were also included in h.r . 3590 , the patient protection and affordable care act , as passed by the senate on december 24 , 2009 . on february 25 , 2010 , president obama hosted a health reform summit with congressional democrats and republicans in an effort to find common ground and revive stalled legislative activity on health reform . ahead of the summit , the president released his proposal for a health care overhaul . the president's proposal is based on the senate - passed bill , including ihcia reauthorization . it also incorporates several policies from the house - passed measure , as well as a number of the president's priorities and some provisions from republican - sponsored legislation . 5 the house is preparing to vote on h.r . 3590 , as passed by the senate , and on an accompanying reconciliation bill ( h.r . the reconciliation bill would change several controversial elements in h.r . 3590 — none of these changes would modify ihcia — and otherwise amend the underlying legislation so that its budgetary impact meets the reconciliation instructions in last year's budget resolution . if the house approves h.r . 3590 , it will be sent to the president to be signed into law . the reconciliation measure , if approved by the house , would then be taken up by the senate .