the personnel allowance component is the same for each member . 4313 et seq . and house rule x ( 1 ) ( j ) . the individual mras for the 441 members , delegates , and the resident commissioner are authorized for periods that correspond closely to the sessions of congress — from january 3 of each year through january 2 of the following year . in addition to the complexity involved in different time frames and split responsibilities — with the appropriation on a fiscal year determined by the committee on appropriations , and the authorization roughly following the calendar year as allocated by the committee on house administration — the house has indicated that the total authorized level for all mras may be more than the total appropriation due to projections on spend - out rates . the fy1997 report accompanying the legislative branch appropriations bill , for example , stated many members do not expend their full allowance . that is why the committee bill does not fully fund this account . the frugality of those members is already projected in the bill presented by the committee . since these prospective savings are already taken in the bill , they reduce the need for appropriated funds and , therefore , contribute directly to the reduction in federal spending and consequently lower the projected deficit . if the committee bill were to fully fund the members' representational allowance , the amount appropriated would have to be increased by $27 million . thus , the account is underfunded by almost 7% . a similar discussion of the use of prior spending patterns in the determination of mra appropriations levels was included in numerous other house reports , particularly in the first few years of the mra . it was also discussed during a hearing on the fy2009 legislative branch appropriations requests . pursuant to law , late - arriving bills may be paid for up to two years following the end of the mra year . the permissibility of payment for late - arriving bills does not provide flexibility in the timing of the obligation , a point emphasized in the members' congressional handbook , which states: "all expenses incurred will be charged to the allowance available on the date the services were provided or the expenses were incurred" and the "mra is not transferable between years. the mra is funded in the house "salaries and expenses" account in the annual legislative branch appropriations bills . one single line - item provides funding for all members' mras . the mra funding level peaked at $660.0 million in fy2010 . it was subsequently reduced to $613.1 million in fy2011 ( - 7.1% ) , and then to $573.9 million in fy2012 ( - 6.4% ) . the fy2012 funding level was continued in the fy2013 continuing resolution ( p.l . 113-6 ) , not including sequestration or an across - the - board rescission ( - 5.2% ) . the fy2014 level of $554.3 million was continued in the fy2015 act ( p.l . 113-235 ) and the fy2016 act ( p.l . at an april 20 , 2016 , markup of the fy2017 bill , the house appropriations committee legislative branch subcommittee recommended a continuation of this level .