appendix a . immediate individual and group market reforms under title i this appendix provides more details on the immediate private health insurance reform provisions in title i , subtitles a and b of ppaca . the ppaca term "immediate" refers to the legal effective date of the provision . the actual implementation date , however , may not be immediate due to the number of steps required to make the provision operational . for example , the administrative simplification provision is effective on enactment , but this sets in motion a series of implementation steps culminating in health plans certifying their use of the newly developed standards by december 31 , 2015 . appendix b provides detail on the required implementation steps for all of the title i private health insurance reforms . high - risk pools for individuals with a preexisting condition not later than 90 days after enactment , the secretary must establish a temporary high - risk pool program to provide health insurance coverage for eligible individuals during the period beginning on the date the program is established and ending on january 1 , 2014 . premium subsidies . immediate individual and group market reforms and consumer operated and oriented plan — health care cooperatives . ppaca requires implementation of a number of reforms in both the individual and group markets prior to the full implementation date for many other insurance reforms ( january 1 , 2014 ) . these reforms include the following , in the order in which they would become effective ( see appendix a for additional details and appendix b for a chronology of implementation deadlines ) : authorizing the secretary to award grants to states to provide information and assistance to health insurance consumers ; establishing a process for the annual review of unreasonable premium increases ; providing coverage assistance for those who are uninsured because of a preexisting condition ; creating a temporary re - insurance program to support coverage for early retirees ; establishing an internet portal to assist consumers in identifying coverage options ; prohibiting lifetime limits and restricted annual limits on essential benefits ; prohibiting rescissions of health insurance policies ; requiring coverage of preventive services and immunizations ; extending dependent coverage up to age 26 ; prohibiting discrimination based on salary with respect to eligibility for benefits ; capping insurance company non - medical , administrative expenditures ; ensuring that consumers have access to an effective appeals process ; providing coverage for preexisting health conditions for enrollees under age 19 ; ensuring patient protections regarding the choice of a primary care provider , access to emergency services and obstetrical and gynecological care , and access to medical reimbursement data ; requiring the secretary to develop uniform summary of benefits documents so consumers can make easier comparisons when shopping for health insurance ; facilitating administrative simplification to lower health system costs ; and tasking the secretary with developing requirements for quality of care .