massachusetts is one such state . while massachusetts has a legislative history full of reforms to its health care system , its most ambitious effort to date was enactment and implementation of a comprehensive health reform law that sought to provide universal health insurance coverage and reduce health care costs at the same time . this report provides background information on the main components of the state's reform law and the law's initial impact on coverage , costs , access to care , employers , and uncompensated care . in 2006 , massachusetts enacted a comprehensive health reform law that included provisions to expand eligibility for medicaid and the state children's health insurance program ( chip ) , provide premium subsidies for certain individuals with income below 300% of the federal poverty level ( fpl ) , require the purchase of insurance by adult residents who can afford it ( "individual mandate" ) , and require employers to make contributions towards health coverage ( "employer mandate" ) . to comply with the individual mandate , individuals must enroll in insurance that meets "minimum creditable coverage" ( mcc ) standards . firms with at least 11 full - time equivalent employees must ( 1 ) establish section 125 plans which allow workers to buy health insurance on a pre - tax basis , and ( 2 ) pay an assessment ( "fair share contribution" of up to $295 annually per employee ) if they do not make "fair and reasonable" contributions to employee health benefits ( "pay or play" provision ) . employers may be subject to a "free rider surcharge" if they do not establish section 125 plans but are required to , or if any one of their employees receives free care three or more times in a year or if a firm has five or more instances of employees receiving free care in a year . to make private health insurance plans more accessible , the state modified its insurance laws ( eg , merging the state's non - group and small group markets ) and created a quasi - public entity called the health insurance connector authority ( "connector" ) whose duties include facilitating the purchase of insurance primarily by individuals who are not offered subsidized insurance by a large employer and are not eligible for public coverage ( eg , medicaid ) . the connector , governed by a board of directors , serves as an intermediary to assist individuals and small groups in acquiring health insurance through private insurance carriers . in this role , the connector manages two programs: commonwealth care ( "commcare" ) , which offers public subsidies to individuals up to 300% fpl who are not otherwise eligible for traditional medicaid or other coverage ( eg , medicare , job - based coverage ) for the purchase of connector - approved plans ( plan types 1 , 2 , and 3 based on income ) offered by several health insurers ; and commonwealth choice ( "commchoice" ) , which offers an unsubsidized selection of four benefit tiers ( gold , silver , bronze , and young adult ) , from a handful of insurers , to individuals and small groups . before reform , massachusetts administered the uncompensated care pool ( ucp ) .