these trends are discussed below . as illustrated in the first section of this report , the economic challenges facing german policymakers include low economic growth , high unemployment , and a deterioration of public finances . also as shown , these problems are linked to the continuing costs of reunification , rising social welfare costs , and the dependency on export - led growth . moreover , troubling demographic trends — germany's population has been shrinking since the 1970s and its birthrate is one of europe's lowest — are further exacerbating the strain on the social market economy . german policymakers , politicians , and scholars have proposed or considered a number of reforms aimed at reinvigorating and strengthening the german economy . these include changes in social and labor policies that provide protections at the expense of a more efficient and dynamic economy , as well as reforms that would create an economy driven more by domestic demand than exports . given the significant proportion of the german public that directly benefits from the status quo , political opposition to reforms has been and continues to be significant . given weak economic growth and the rising costs of maintaining generous social security programs , germany faces budgetary constraints , as do many other industrialized countries . with dwindling economic and financial resources , germany arguably has become less willing to compromise on matters of potential economic advantage . in this regard , germany's domestic economic challenges could limit its policymaking flexibility . this has affected not only the economic and trade leadership role that germany traditionally has played in europe , but also its position on issues that directly affect u.s. interests . these include different approaches in dealing with the global economic downturn and economic sanctions . germany in the past has been a key ally of the united states on international trade issues . given its heavy export orientation and dependence on the international economy , germany traditionally has been a strong voice for trade liberalization , both within the eu and the world trading system , as well as the decisive swing vote between french and british views on trade policy . every successful multilateral trade round in the past has depended on germany to use its bilateral economic clout to influence the policies of more inward - looking countries in europe . german support for a liberal trade policy and generalized opposition to blatantly protectionist proposals , with few exceptions , has been provided by the major political parties and leading stakeholders in the private sector . yet , in recent years , german leadership of the free trade bloc within europe has weakened . it was first compromised in the 1990s' uruguay round of multilateral trade negotiations when then - chancellor helmut kohl backed restrictive agricultural trade proposals the french government was advocating in an effort to advance european integration . the trend solidified in 2002 when then - chancellor gerhard schröder agreed with france on setting parameters for agricultural liberalization within the eu . the same budget agreement on reform of the common agricultural system ( cap ) continues to serve as a constraint to achieving a breakthrough in the on - going doha round of trade negotiations under the world trade organization .