the issue of selectivity in employment ( e.g . , a religious school preferring to hire teachers of the same denomination ) may be the most controversial aspect of the faith - based funding debate . the "hiring rights" of religious organizations that participate in social programs covered under charitable choice provisions had been advanced under the bush administration's implementation of the faith - based initiative . several courts have dismissed such lawsuits , ruling that the litigants lacked standing in light of hein . in 2007 , the department of justice indicated that it would follow a broad interpretation of the legal protections for religious organizations to hire employees that would administer these programs . the obama administration does not appear to have issued guidance related to hiring rights in these programs . in november 2010 , however , president obama modified the implementation of faith - based funding programs that president bush had originally created . the amended principles and criteria clarified and expanded the protections for beneficiaries of programs offered by religious organizations with two notable changes . under the new principles , organizations receiving public funds under these programs must offer referrals to alternative providers if the beneficiary objects to an organization's religious character . the order also requires federal agencies that provide funding for social service programs to make a list of organizations receiving assistance available on the internet to increase transparency and accountability in the funding process . that , it is said , is what makes their programs distinctive and more effective . thus , given this assumption and the various possibilities for how particular subsidized programs might be implemented , it seems likely that constitutional questions will inevitably arise in the implementation of direct aid programs under charitable choice , notwithstanding its prohibitions on the use of direct aid for religious worship , instruction , and proselytization . in addition , it should be noted that mitchell involved an in - kind aid program — educational supplies and equipment — whereas charitable choice programs appear to contemplate direct grants of money to religious organizations . all of the justices in mitchell expressed doubt that direct grants of money to religious entities could pass constitutional muster even under the court's loosened standards for direct aid programs . because these doubts were not part of the holding of the case , they do not indicate with any certainty how the court might rule on a case involving a particular grant or cooperative agreement , but they do provide additional insight into possible considerations that the court may make in future cases on this issue . although the matter of selectivity in employment decisions is perhaps the most contentious of any issue associated with charitable choice , there is little case law addressing the question specifically . the leading case on the issue is a 2005 federal district court decision , lown v. salvation army , which held that selectivity by the religious provider could not be attributed as a government action . as discussed earlier , the requirements for ensuring that public funds provided to religious organizations differ depending on the manner in which the aid is distributed .