art . i , §9 , cl.2 , or under an adequate substitute for habeas review . section 7 of the military commissions act stripped all federal courts of habeas jurisdiction relating to foreign , enemy combatant detainees ; and except as provided in the detainee treatment act , it also stripped them of jurisdiction to review matters relating to such individuals and concerning their detention , treatment , transfer , trial , or conditions of detention . the court did not feel that the detainee treatment act provided an adequate substitute for detainee habeas review and consequently concluded that section 7 "effect[ed] an unconstitutional suspension of the writ. the court found it unnecessary to discuss the extent to which habeas review might include an examination of the conditions of detention . it also made it clear that its decision did not go to the merits of the detainees' habeas petitions . witnesses who submitted statements for the house judiciary committee's recent habeas hearings criticized other aspects of federal habeas law – issues which do not appear to have been the subject of legislative proposals in this congress . each of the witnesses – justice gerald kogan , retired chief justice of the florida supreme court ; professor john h. blume of cornell university law school ; and mr. stephen f. hanlon , a partner in the law firm of holland and knight and appearing on behalf of the american bar association – were critical of the impact of the one - year statute of limitations in 28 u.s.c . they expressed concern over the complexity of the provisions under which being tardy can be fatal . they also agree that the binding effect given state court determinations of federal law is unfortunate , generally . two of the witnesses were critical of the "opt in" provisions under which states gain the advantage of streamlined habeas procedures in capital cases , if they satisfy the provision of counsel standards . chief justice kogan would repeal the provisions , fearing that amendment would only introduce further "confusion , waste , and wheel - spinning. mr. hanlon urged alternatively that the role of gatekeeper – the determination of whether a state is qualified to opt in , now vested in the attorney general – be returned to the federal courts . professor blume and chief justice kogan also urged modification of the habeas "procedural default" bar under which a prisoner's federal habeas petition is barred because of his failure to comply with an applicable state procedural requirement for consideration of his claim at the state level . mr. hanlon alone recommended federal funding of capital defender organizations and suspension of "all federal executions pending a thorough data collection and analysis of racial and geographical disparities and the adequacy of legal representation in the death penalty system. chief justice kogan also had concerns not mentioned in the statements of the other witnesses , i.e . , the teague rule , harmless error , and deference to state fact finding .