grin is also administered by ars . in 1990 , congress authorized the establishment of a national genetic resources program ( ngrp ) . ngrp has the responsibility to acquire , characterize , preserve , document , and distribute to scientists germplasm of all life forms important for food and agricultural production , which , in addition to plants , includes animals , microbes , and invertebrates . the bill emphasizes the importance of agricultural research in developing countries as the primary means to increasing the productivity of smallholder farmers and seeks to strengthen the use of science and technology for agriculture in countries suffering from chronic food insecurity and poverty . at the same time , no mention is made about how any of these proposed programs might relate to the conservation and use of pgrfa , and the need for technical capacity - building in the development of pgrfa for crop improvement purposes , especially in developing countries . as of february 24 , 2010: 120 the following instruments have been deposited on the dates indicated . the national genetic resources advisory council ( ngrac ) advises and makes recommendations to the secretary and director of the ngrp . the ngrac responds to national issues pertaining to the conservation and utilization of genetic resources for food and agriculture . the international treaty on plant genetic resources for food and agriculture ( the treaty on pgrfa ) provides a general framework for conservation and sustainable use of plant genetic resources . the treaty's preamble acknowledges that the conservation , exploration , collection , characterization , evaluation , and documentation of pgrfa are essential for sustainable agriculture development and to meet the global goals of ending hunger and poverty , as stated in the rome declaration on world food security and the world food summit plan of action . the treaty sets up a multilateral system of access and benefit sharing , where all members , in exercise of their sovereignty , provide free ( or nearly free ) access to each other's plant genetic resources for research , breeding , conservation , and training . the multilateral approach allows members access to germplasm to promote food security and improve crop productivity , lowers transaction costs , and redistributes back to the governing body financial benefits derived from the commercial exploitation of the genetic resources . the treaty is unlike other international laws governing global genetic resources , such as the convention on biological diversity ( cbd ; see text box below ) , which extends private or sovereign control and limitations over genetic resources through bilateral interactions , and which many feel is inappropriate for food and agriculture . by establishing a multilateral approach that provides for a standardized protocol and framework applying to all contracting parties , the treaty deals with access and benefit - sharing of agricultural biodiversity in a different way than they are treated under the cbd . currently 120 countries are parties to the treaty ( see appendix ) . the united states signed the treaty on november 1 , 2002 ( treaty doc , 110-19 ) , but no further action was taken on it until it was submitted to the senate for advice and ratification by the bush administration on july 7 , 2008 .