u.s. responses have been varied . some of the "holdout creditors" have brought claims against argentina in the u.s. federal courts totaling $1.3 billion , resulting in judgments and attachment orders . recent court decisions have left argentine central bank assets in the united states immune from attachment , but require argentina to treat both holdout and exchange bondholders equally . in this case , the district court ordered argentina to pay litigant holdouts the full $1.3 billion of their claim . the appeals court stayed the order pending conclusion of the appeals process . a final payments offer was rejected by the holdouts , who urged the appeals court to enforce the lower court ruling against argentina . should this occur , it could prohibit banks from allowing argentina to make payments to exchange bondholders unless it also paid the holdouts , creating a conundrum for argentina: either pay all parties per the court order , or for lack of an ability to pay only the exchange bondholders , find itself in technical default . argentina may try to continue the appeals process , but could eventually have to decide whether to find a way to settle with the holdouts , or find itself in technical default of the exchanged bonds . the u.s. government has also taken action , and punitive legislation against argentina has been introduced in the last three congresses . this report reviews argentina's financial crisis , the bond exchanges of 2005 and 2010 , ongoing litigation , prospects for a final solution , related u.s. legislation , and broader policy issues . argentina's 2001 debt crisis resulted from many factors . for the most part , argentina over borrowed and fell victim to its own economic policies , but this was compounded by questionable lending and policy advice by the international monetary fund ( imf ) , a global recession , and international credit markets determined to chase high - yielding debt with inadequate regard to risk . together , these factors propelled argentina toward a position of unsustainable debt that ended in financial crisis , unprecedented default , and a controversial restructuring scheme . the financial crisis hit argentina hard . between capital flight and the large peso devaluation , much of the country's wealth evaporated nearly overnight . poverty and unemployment skyrocketed , leading to street protests and political unrest . as argentina turned to address its debt problem , it argued that bondholders would have to share in the misery that affected the whole country , and that the government had a moral duty to ensure this outcome . it was , as many argued , a matter of equity that the write - down on bonds be historically high , particularly given that continued lending from the imf , investment banks , and foreign governments at a time when it was clear that argentina faced an impending crisis had only compounded the financial problems . also , it was apparent that under these circumstances , argentina was simply in no position to repay such massive debt . a sovereign default means the government is no longer willing or able to pay the debt it has legally incurred in the international markets .