if not , what can be improved ? the following table summarizes the state department's descriptions of how current foreign terrorist organizations ( ftos ) raise funds and whether , if at all , an fto is involved in criminal activities as a source of revenue . what types of crimes are involved ? which groups and actors of both kinds pose the greatest threat to u.s. national security ? what political , social , economic , geographic , and demographic circumstances facilitate the interaction between transnational crime and international terrorism ? has the united states successfully exploited the partnering arrangements and differences in motivations and capabilities of terrorist groups and criminal organizations ? if so , what lessons learned could apply to current and future activities by such actors ? what prevents the u.s. government and international community from disrupting and dismantling current crime - terrorism threats ? which federal government entities have the lead roles for addressing various aspects of the crime - terrorism phenomenon ? is there a need to expand or adjust existing congressional authorities to combat the combined crime - terrorism threat ? this shift has resulted in extremist movements that elicit sympathy well beyond a specific country or geographic region . further , terrorist groups appear to have become more resilient , due to a combination of continued state sponsorship or support , as well as entrepreneurial expansion into profitable criminal activities . combined , these trends may suggest an increase in geographic overlap where criminals and terrorists could operate and interact . these patterns may also suggest greater blurring of distinctions between one group and the other , the adoption of activities often attributed to the other , or the ad hoc evolution of a group's objectives based on the security challenges they encounter . key nodes , where interaction is most likely , include prisons ; cyberspace , particularly online opportunities for social networking ; and ungoverned or difficult - to - govern spaces , which include regions plagued by endemic corruption , conflict or post - conflict zones where legitimate governance has yet to take root , border regions , free trade zones , and urban mega cities where pockets of poverty , violence , criminality , and impunity from national law prevails . overlap may also be facilitated by the involvement of negligent or hostile governments and kleptocratic or criminal states that may consider sponsorship or support of criminal or terrorist activity of strategic value . limited unclassified anecdotal evidence largely serves as the basis for the current understanding of criminal - terrorist connections . in the absence of comprehensive data , it is difficult to assess whether such anecdotal cases are indicative of a widespread problem , a growing trend , or isolated observation . are the available u.s. foreign policy tools sufficient to meet today's crime - terrorism concerns — and are such tools effectively implemented ? among the 51 ftos described in the state department's most recent country reports on terrorism ( from may 2013 ) , sources of funding vary . common sources of funding include , in various combination , state sponsors , private donors , other terrorist groups , legitimate business activity , proceeds of crime .