each of these enforcement mechanisms is discussed below . after cercla was enacted in 1980 , questions arose as to whether congress intended federal facilities to be subject to the cleanup authorities and liability provisions of the statute to the same extent as non - federal facilities . as originally enacted , section 101 ( 21 ) of cercla defined the term "person" for the purposes of the statute to include the federal government , meaning that the reference to persons who may be held liable under section 107 may include the federal government . however , the original enactment of the law did not otherwise explicitly address the liability of federal agencies , nor the applicability of other provisions of the statute to federal agencies . section 120 of the superfund amendments and reauthorization act of 1986 added section 120 to cercla to clarify that federal departments and agencies are subject to the requirements of cercla to the same extent as other entities , including the liability and enforcement provisions of the law . to comply with cercla , the federal agency with administrative jurisdiction over a federal facility is responsible for performing and paying for the cleanup of contamination out of its own budget , subject to appropriations by congress . section 111 ( e ) of cercla explicitly prohibits the use of superfund trust fund monies to clean up federal facilities , as these monies are dedicated to paying for the cleanup of sites where the potentially responsible parties cannot be identified or cannot pay . however , section 111 ( e ) ( 3 ) does allow the use of superfund trust fund monies at an individual federal facility to provide alternative water supplies , if groundwater contamination has migrated beyond the boundary of that facility , and there are other potentially responsible parties connected to that facility in addition to the united states . in all other instances , superfund trust fund monies are not available for the cleanup of federal facilities . congress appropriates funding to various accounts of federal agencies to pay for the performance of the cleanup of federal facilities . these funds generally are intended to fulfill the liability of the united states as the owner or operator of these facilities . however , these accounts do not constitute a cleanup liability fund in a broader sense . the funds are authorized to pay for the performance of the cleanup of the federal government's own facilities by federal agencies . however , the funds are not explicitly authorized to pay cleanup cost - recovery or contribution claims that may be submitted to the united states by other parties , either at federal facilities or at non - federal sites where a federal agency may be held liable as a generator or transporter of wastes sent to a site for disposal . the judgment fund of the u.s. treasury has been the source of payments for cleanup claims submitted to the united states to satisfy the federal share of liability under cercla , and compromise settlements for such claims . by statute , the judgment fund is a permanent , indefinite appropriation that is intended to pay monetary claims against the united states , which are not otherwise provided by congress through separate appropriations .