the conference report ( h.rept . 109-305 ) to accompany the military quality of life and veterans affairs appropriations act , 2006 ( p.l . 109-114 ) , directed the va to implement a cost - effective purchased care management program and to develop at least three objectives - oriented demonstrations ( pilot programs ) to encourage collaboration with industry and academia . according to the conference report: the conferees support expeditious action by the department to implement care management strategies that have proven valuable in the broader public and private sectors . it is essential that care purchased for enrollees from private sector providers be secured in a cost effective manner , in a way that complements the larger veterans health administration system of care , and preserves an important agency interest , such as sustaining a partnership with university affiliates . in that interest , the vha shall establish , through competitive award by the end of calendar year 2006 , at least three managed care demonstration programs designed to satisfy a set of health system objectives related to arranging and managing care . the va began developing plans based on this requirement . however , although the conference report language directed va to implement a managed care demonstration , after meetings with various stakeholders vha developed a set of objectives that led to a demonstration program to enhance the existing fee basis care program . its goals were to provide as much care for veterans within the vha system as possible ; when necessary , efficiently refer veterans to high - quality community - based care ; improve exchange of information between va and community providers ; increase veteran patient satisfaction ; foster high - quality care and patient safety ; sustain partnership with university affiliates ; and secure an accountable evaluation of demonstration results . has project hero enhanced the existing fee basis care program ? are there findings from project hero that could be applied to standardize the fee basis care program throughout the va health care system ? to provide some context to the discussion of these questions , this report first provides an overview of project hero . second , it discusses the current fee basis care process , as well as the implementation of project hero . the report concludes with a discussion of observations on the implementation of project hero based on vha and humana veterans healthcare services inc. ( hvhs ) perspectives . this report is based on information received during visits to three of the four project hero demonstration sites as well as discussions with officials from hvhs . although the provision of dental care through delta dental federal services is part of project hero , this report does not discuss this aspect of the program . as stated earlier , in 2006 , congress directed vha to implement a contracting pilot program , to better manage the fee basis care program . to implement this demonstration vha selected four veterans integrated service networks ( visns ) , based on data that showed that these four networks had the highest expenditures for community - based care relative to the number of veterans enrolled for care .