the fund expired on september 30 , 2010 . it helped states , indian tribes , and territories pay for additional costs of providing economic aid to families during the current economic downturn for fy2009 and fy2010 . a provision of the claims resolution act of 2010 ( p.l . 111-291 ) extended the basic tanf program through the end of fy2011 without the ecf . the regular tanf contingency fund provided 19 states with additional funding in fy2009 and early fy2010 . however , some states ( eg , california and florida ) experienced substantial increases in their tanf cash assistance caseloads , and met the criterion of economic need required to draw regular contingency funds , but failed to draw them because of the increased state spending requirement of the regular fund . the arra included a number of provisions related to taxes and benefit payments , designed to partially offset the declines in family income and purchasing power resulting from the increased joblessness caused by the recession . as part of this package , the arra established within tanf a $5 billion ecf for fy2009 and fy2010 . the ecf provided states , tribes , and territories with capped additional funding to help meet additional costs or create new programs to respond to the current economic downturn . subject to a cap on state grants from the ecf , the fund paid states , tribes , and territories 80% of the increased costs of expenditures in the three categories of expenditures discussed below . the tanf ecf was enacted as a temporary measure to help finance extra economic support to families to help them weather the recession . though the economy grew in the last half of 2009 and the first three quarters of 2010 , unemployment remained high . unemployment is typically considered a "lagging" indicator and falls only after an economic expansion has already been underway for some time . historically , the trend in the cash welfare caseload has sometimes followed economic conditions , but sometimes not . after the 1990-1991 recession , welfare caseloads actually peaked in march 1994 , before beginning their decline . president obama's fy2011 budget proposal sought to establish a new emergency fund for fy2011 . it would have been funded at $2.5 billion for that year . the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 ( arra ; p.l . 111-5 ) created an emergency contingency fund ( ecf ) within the temporary assistance for needy families ( tanf ) block grant . the tanf block grant provides states , indian tribes , and territories with federal funding for a wide range of benefits and services to ameliorate the effects of , or address the root causes of , economic disadvantage for families with children . the bulk of federal tanf funding is in a basic block grant of $16.5 billion . under the basic block grant , each state receives an amount that has remained the same , without adjustment , since the 1996 welfare reform law . states — taken together — are also required to contribute a minimum of $10.4 billion to tanf - funded or related programs under a maintenance of effort ( moe ) requirement .