homeland . the extent to which such failings belong solely or even significantly to nctc as opposed to other agencies is as yet undetermined . the executive branch has undertaken several overall investigations of the fort hood shooting and the december 25 airline attack . what role does the cia's counterterrorism center currently have and how do the two entities interact ? does the nctc become involved in planning covert actions ? is there beneficial or counterproductive competition between the two centers ? in general , how has nctc's strategic analysis of the overall terrorist threat evolved in recent years ? is the relationship between strategic analyses and operational planning been carefully reviewed ? what is the nctc's current role in dealing with different agency approaches to specific terrorist threats ? the senate intelligence committee reviewed the christmas bombing with specific focus on the intelligence on the alleged perpetration abdulmutallab held by various agencies . according to the published unclassified summary of the report , the committee found "systemic failures across the intelligence community. despite the responsibilities assigned to nctc , the "committee found that no one agency saw itself as being responsible for tracking and identifying all terrorism threats. specifically , the senate intelligence committee found that nctc's directorate of intelligence failed to connect reporting on abdulmutallab ; it was neither adequately organized or resourced for this effort . "like other analysts in the intelligence community , nctc's analysts were primarily focused on yemen - based aqap - related threats. furthermore , nctc's watchlisting office did not connect key intelligence reporting with other relevant reporting . the committee made a number of recommendations for nctc and other intelligence agencies to improve their performance . beyond the recommendations coming out of these investigations , there may also be a more general interest in an assessment of the role of various agencies and how they work together . in particular , congress may act to review the statutory framework that created the nctc in 2004 and how the center has functioned in the years since . in particular , congress may wish to satisfy itself that the nctc has access to all appropriate information and intelligence . it may wish to assure itself that detaillees to the nctc from other agencies are highly qualified and committed to the center's mission and do not see their role as protecting their agency's bureaucratic equities . congress may wish to assess the availability of adequate technologies at nctc for accessing and sharing information . although significant efforts have been made to remove the "wall" between law enforcement and intelligence , there may be residual barriers especially those resulting from separate bureaucratic cultures . as in the case of major hassan the natural tendency to avoid over - involvement in law enforcement or the personnel policies of a cabinet department may have influenced the handling of information relating to contacts between a u.s. person and a suspected terrorist in another country . concern has also been expressed that nctc might rely on authorities available to foreign intelligence agencies that do not encompass the restrictions on domestic intelligence gathering and law enforcement operations and that this approach may jeopardize privacy rights . congress might seek additional information on nctc policies regarding privacy rights of u.s. persons .