advance consent with conditions . a new agreement could provide advance consent for reprocessing and enrichment , but south korea would agree not to exercise that right until certain conditions were met . for example , milestones might need to be met regarding the korean peninsula denuclearization agreement . advance consent for limited activities . the united states could grant advance consent for a limited set of fuel cycle activities . an example might be the operation of kaeri's advanced conditioning pyroprocess facility , which reduces oxide spent fuel to metal form for pyroprocessing . this reduction process results in relatively little separation of plutonium and uranium . in addition to the 123 agreement , korea's ambitious plans for future reactor exports would require further doe 810 authorizations for the transfer of u.s. - based technology . under section 57b , the secretary of energy must determine that each proposed technology export "will not be inimical to the interest of the united states" with the concurrence of the department of state and after consultation with nrc and the departments of commerce and defense . such reviews would examine u.s. interests in the relevant region and throughout the world , such as controls on the re - transfer of u.s. - origin nuclear technology after it is exported by korea . future growth of south korea's nuclear energy technology export program would offer opportunities for the u.s. nuclear industry as well as significant challenges . as the kepco - uae sale makes clear , u.s. companies can directly benefit from participation in korean export projects , in this case an estimated $2 billion for westinghouse and its subcontractors . but the uae project also illustrates the potential competition that u.s. nuclear suppliers may face from korea , which overcame a ge - hitachi bid in the final round and an earlier westinghouse proposal . as the south korean nuclear industry develops more reactor components of indigenous design , the opportunities for u.s. participation in south korean export projects may diminish . lapses in 123 agreements have occurred in the past . one major example was the expiration of the u.s. agreement with the european atomic energy community ( euratom ) at the end of 1995 . a new 123 agreement had been negotiated when the old one expired , but it had been submitted for congressional review on november 29 , 1995 , too late for the required 90 days of continuous session . nrc suspended specific and general licenses for most euratom countries on january 4 , 1996 , allowing exports to continue only to four countries that had submitted bilateral nonproliferation assurances . under section 123 of the atomic energy act of 1954 ( 42 u.s.c . 2153 ) , the united states cannot conduct nuclear energy activities with another country without an agreement on nuclear cooperation , or "123 agreement. the current u.s. - korea 123 agreement was signed in 1973 and will expire on march 19 , 2014 . negotiators from the two countries are working to overcome substantial disagreements about the provisions of a new agreement so that it can take effect before the expiration date .