appendix a . background on the electric power system this appendix provides background on the components and operation of the electric power system . readers familiar with these topics may wish to skim or skip this appendix . power plants and power lines power plants , transmission systems , and distribution systems constitute the major components of the existing electric power system , as briefly described and illustrated below ( figure a - 1 ) : generating plants produce electricity , using either combustible fuels such as coal , natural gas , and biomass ; or non - combustible energy sources such as wind , solar energy , or nuclear fuel . transmission lines carry electricity from power plants to demand centers . the higher the voltage of a transmission line the more power it can carry and the fewer the line losses during transmission . current policy discussions focus on the high voltage network ( 230 kilovolts ( kv ) rating and greater ) used to move large amounts of power long distances . near customers a step - down transformer reduces voltage so the power can be carried by low voltage distribution lines for final delivery . capacity and energy capacity is the potential instantaneous output of a generating or storage unit , measured in watts . energy is the actual amount of electricity generated by a power plant or released by a storage device during a time period , measured in watt - hours . the units are usually expressed in thousands ( kilowatts and kilowatt - hours ) or millions ( megawatts and megawatt - hours ) . for example , the maximum amount of power a 1,000 megawatt ( mw ) power plant can generate in a year is 8.76 million megawatt - hours ( mwh ) , calculated as: 1,000 mw x 8,760 hours in a year = 8.76 million mwh . capacity factor capacity factor is a standard measure of how intensively a power plant is utilized . it is the ratio of how much electricity a power plant produced over a period of time , typically a year , compared to how much electricity the plant could have produced if it operated continuously at full output . for example , as shown in the prior paragraph , the maximum possible output of a 1,000 mw power plant in one year is 8.76 million mwh . assume that during a year the plant actually produced only 7.0 million mwh . in this case the plant's capacity factor would be 7.0 million mwh รท 8.76 million mwh = 81% . generation and load the demand for electricity ( "load" ) faced by an electric power system varies moment to moment with changes in business and residential activity and the weather . load begins growing in the morning as people waken , peaks in the early afternoon , and bottoms - out in the late evening and early morning . figure a - 2 shows an illustrative daily load curve . the daily load shape dictates how electric power systems are operated . as shown in figure a - 2 , there is a minimum demand for electricity that occurs throughout the day .