this appears to be the situation that has developed in mexico . policy makers , however , have expressed significant concern over the possibility of the current violence in mexico spilling over into the united states . when assessing the potential implications of increased violence in mexico as a result of the increasing tensions between the dtos located in mexico , one of the central concerns for u.s. policy makers is the potential for what has recently been termed "spillover" violence — an increase in drug trafficking - related violence in united states . given this concern , it is critical to develop an understanding of what "spillover" is , what it might look like , how it might be measured , and what potential triggers for policy action can be identified from this analysis . to date , congress has not adopted a formal definition of spillover violence . this relationship gives rise to a number of important issues for policy makers . one such matter is evaluating the relative costs and benefits of increased enforcement of the current drug policy against the potentially elevated levels of violence that such increased enforcement might engender . could the drug trafficking - related violence currently evidenced in mexico reach a level that would prompt u.s. policy makers to consider policy actions that could alter the underpinnings of the illegal drug market ? it does not appear as if the violence has reached such a level as yet . for instance , according to the dea , the interagency community has defined spillover violence in the following manner: [s]pillover violence entails deliberate , planned attacks by the cartels on u.s. assets , including civilian , military , or law enforcement officials , innocent u.s. citizens , or physical institutions such as government buildings , consulates , or businesses . this definition does not include trafficker on trafficker violence , whether perpetrated in mexico or the u.s . this definition of spillover provides a relatively narrow scope of what may constitute spillover violence . in particular , it excludes the category of violence — trafficker - on - trafficker violence — in which the vast majority of drug trafficking - related violence in mexico has occurred . if policy makers and law enforcement are concerned that the drug trafficking - related violence , as seen in mexico , may spill over into the united states , they are necessarily concerned with this predominant category of trafficker - on - trafficker violence that is excluded from the interagency community's definition of spillover violence . the boundaries of what may constitute spillover violence , as defined by the interagency community , thus makes the likelihood that the united states will experience this form of spillover violence relatively small . further , by generally constraining the definition of spillover violence to those acts that target the government and innocent civilians , the type of violence necessary to constitute spillover ( according to the interagency definition ) may begin to resemble acts of terrorism . if so , policy makers and experts may be challenged with discriminating between spillover violence and terrorism .