telephone companies were not offering video services at all . cable dominated , with 59.5 million basic cable customers in 1994 , out of a total of 94.2 million television households . the traditional business models of just about every participant in the video market are potentially challenged by these structural market changes and as a result the current environment is characterized by very contentious programmer - distributor negotiations and a multitude of novel new ways to distribute content as participants experiment with new business models . in this uncertain environment , the announced comcast - nbcu combination has generated a wide range of predictions about market and public policy effects . some of these claims are specific to comcast — how it might use its increased negotiating strength to place itself at an advantage or its competitors at a disadvantage , how it might use its vertically integrated structure to pursue innovative business models , or how its vertically integrated structure might stifle its ability to act quickly . other claims address more broadly industry - wide responses , such as whether the combination will trigger further consolidation . one of apple's potential advantages is the itunes store , which is capable of supplying a significant amount of additional content to consumers . all of these products ( including home computers and laptops ) allow consumers at home and on the road to access a potentially unlimited supply of programming available over the internet . it is not clear whether internet - based vod services will gain sufficient access to desirable programming — and particularly to the "must - have" programming that a significant portion of viewers require from their video service . nevertheless , the emergence of internet - enabled , hdtv - quality internet service could ultimately prove to be disruptive to mvpds and over - the - air broadcasters . on the content side , structural changes have been fragmenting audiences for more than two decades , but just when that fragmentation seemed to be abating , new market forces have been created to continue the trend . the initial cause of audience fragmentation was the successful entry of cable networks . as these networks proliferated they also evolved from primarily offering re - run broadcast or theatrical film programming to offering substantial amounts of original programming . today there are more than 500 cable networks , 35 of which come into more than 90 million households and another 42 that come into more than 50 million households . more than 85% of all television households in the united states subscribe to mvpd service and the average television household receives 130 television channels . they spend 4 hours and 6 minutes using the internet , but only 22 minutes of that time watching video on the internet , and just 3 minutes watching video on a mobile phone . thus , time shifted television watching , internet video watching , and mobile phone video watching still represent a very small portion of total video watching . but alternative forms of video watching are growing faster than overall video watching . the number of people who time shifted increased by 26.9% from 3q08 to 3q09 .