both issues are explored below . under current federal tax law , the owner ( s ) of a business can choose to operate either as a c corporation or some kind of passthrough entity ( i.e. , partnership , limited liability company , sole proprietorship , or s corporation ) . the decision hinges on a variety of tax and non - tax considerations . foremost among the tax considerations are the rates at which individual and corporate income are taxed , tax rates for dividends and long - term capital gains , and the length of the investment horizon . in combination , they determine the expected after - tax rate of return on investment in or by any business entity . in general , non - tax considerations appear to be of greater importance to large firms that wish to raise capital globally from a variety of investors and lenders than they are to smaller firms . in addition , current federal tax law contains several tax incentives that directly affect business investment , one of which is targeted at small firms . under section 179 of the internal revenue code ( irc ) , small firms have the option to write off ( or expense ) the cost of qualified assets in the tax year when they are placed in service , within certain limits ; an enhanced version of the expensing allowance was available in 2008 and 2009 as a stimulative measure . the same firms ( as well as all larger firms ) were allowed to expense up to 50% of the cost of qualified assets bought and placed in service in 2008 and 2009 . ( congressional leaders among the democrats and republicans and the obama administration have endorsed an extension of both the enhanced expensing allowance and the so - called bonus depreciation allowance through 2010 , as a stimulative measure. ) it is not known how many small firms took advantage of either or both special deductions , owing to a lack of tax and other data on small business investment . expensing is the most accelerated form of depreciation and can result in taxing the returns to investment at a marginal effective rate of zero . so business taxpayers facing the top individual and corporate tax rates can lower the tax burden on the returns to qualified investments by claiming current expensing allowances . a similar outcome can be achieved when a small firm invests in research that qualifies for the research tax credit under irc section 41 and has research expenditures that may be expensed under irs section 174 . in combination , the tax incentives can produce a negative marginal effective tax rate on the returns to investment in research and development . these considerations raise the possibility that those who claim that a rise in the tax rates affecting upper - income individuals would curtail small business investment may not be taking into account all the key forces shaping the domestic climate for that investment . the availability of investment tax incentives and other business tax benefits may lessen or offset the dampening effect of such a rise .