it expired in 2004 . the economic stimulus act of 2008 ( p.l . 110-185 ) included temporary bonus depreciation for 2008 , which was extended for 2009 by the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 ( arra ; p.l . the obama administration recently proposed 100% expensing for qualified capital investments through the end of 2011 . in december 2010 , p.l . 111-312 extended and expanded the business tax provisions by allowing 100% expensing in 2011 and 50% in 2012 . bonus depreciation was extended to the end of 2013 by the american taxpayer relief act of 2012 ( p.l . on september 8 , 2011 , the president proposed a fiscal stimulus that largely related to payroll taxes , but also proposed to increase expensing to 100% in 2012 . this expensing provision was also included in h.r . 3630 , the house republican proposal that also extended the payroll tax and made other revisions . this legislation was adopted by the house but not passed . a two - month extension of payroll tax relief was adopted and was extended to the end of 2012 by the middle class tax relief and job creation act of 2012 ( p.l . the extent to which these business tax breaks are a successful counter - cyclical stimulus hinges on the effectiveness of investment subsidies in inducing spending . it is difficult to determine the effect of a business tax cut and the timing of induced investment . a business tax cut is aimed at stimulating investment largely through changes in the cost ( or price ) of capital . if there is little marginal stimulus or if investment is not responsive to these price effects in the short run , then most of the cut may be saved: either used to pay down debt or paid out in dividends , although some of the latter might eventually be spent after a lag . that is , if a tax cut simply involved a cash payment to a firm , most of it might be saved , particularly in the short run . business tax cuts ( of most types ) also have effects on rates of return that increase the incentive to invest , and it is generally for that reason that investment incentives have been considered as counter - cyclical devices . investment incentives through expensing for small businesses , however , are usually phased - out . as a result , these provisions produce a disincentive to investment over the phase - out range . consequently , the overall incentive effect is ambiguous . employment and wage subsidies are designed to increase employment directly by reducing a firm's wage bill . a firm's wage bill for labor includes wages and salaries paid to employees , the cost of fringe benefits ( eg , health insurance and pensions ) , hiring costs , and taxes paid such as the employer's share of the payroll tax . these subsidies can take many forms . for example , earnings or time spent working can be subsidized . furthermore , the subsidies can be incremental or non - incremental — that is , new hires are subsidized or all workers are subsidized .