other authorities have been enacted in prior congresses . in the 112 th congress , division b , section 105 , of p.l . 112-74 authorized the corps of engineers to implement emergency measures to exclude asian carp from the great lakes , and section 1538 of p.l . 112-141 authorized expedited completion of parts of the glmris study ( see above section , " glmris study " ) . 101-646 , as amended ) and other statutes . after a live asian carp was found beyond the electric barrier in the summer of 2010 , michigan , minnesota , ohio , pennsylvania , and wisconsin sued the u.s. army corps of engineers and the metropolitan water reclamation district of greater chicago ( mwrd ) in federal district court , seeking similar remedial measures as they requested in their attempt to amend the supreme court's 1967 decree . the states sought an order compelling the corps and mwrd to abate the public nuisance created by the migration of asian carp into the great lakes , to minimize the risk of migration from the caws to lake michigan , and to implement permanent measures to separate illinois waters from lake michigan . the court rejected each of the proposed remedial measures , noting a lack of consensus on the extent of the threat and the efficacy of the proposed solutions . it held that the discovery of a live fish above the barrier did not prove that the barrier had failed and noted that the cause of the introduction of the fish to that particular section of the waterway was not known . the court emphasized "its recognition that the potential harm in a worst case scenario is great" but concluded that "the level of certainty of harm is low based on the evidence adduced to date. in july 2014 , a federal appeals court again denied unanimously the states' motion . the system of projects comprising the caws is shown in figure 5 . canals within the caws today include the chicago sanitary and ship canal ( or cssc , completed in 1900 ) , the north shore channel ( completed in 1910 ) and the cal - sag channel ( completed in 1922 ) . during construction of these canals , the flows of the chicago river and the calumet river were also permanently reversed away from lake michigan and toward the mississippi river drainage basin through structural modifications and pumping . the altered flow of the rivers prevented sewage discharge into the canals from contaminating chicago's drinking water supply intakes on lake michigan . the illinois waterway is a 327-mile channel running from chicago to st. louis . it is maintained at a minimum depth of 9 feet by the u.s. army corps of engineers ( hereinafter referred to as the corps ) . it is the only navigable link between two of the largest freshwater drainage basins in the world , the great lakes and the mississippi river . the caws portion of the illinois waterway includes modified rivers , locks , canals and other structures that control the flow of water through the chicago metropolitan area .