12866 before being promulgated . this report provides background on naaqs , the process used to establish them , the pre - existing ozone standards , and epa's proposed revisions , as well as information regarding the revisions' potential effects . as defined in section 109 of the clean air act , naaqs are standards that apply to ambient ( outdoor ) air . the act directs epa to set both primary and secondary standards . primary naaqs are standards , "the attainment and maintenance of which in the judgment of the [epa] administrator ... are requisite to protect the public health," with "an adequate margin of safety. secondary naaqs are standards necessary to protect public welfare , a broad term that includes damage to crops , vegetation , property , building materials , etc . naaqs are at the core of the clean air act , even though they do not directly regulate emissions . in essence , they are standards that define what epa considers to be clean air . once a naaqs has been set , the agency , using monitoring data and other information submitted by the states , identifies areas that exceed the standard and must , therefore , reduce pollutant concentrations to achieve it . after these "nonattainment" areas are identified , state and local governments have up to three years to produce state implementation plans which outline the measures they will implement to reduce the pollution levels and attain the standards . depending on the severity of the pollution , ozone nonattainment areas have anywhere from 3 to 20 years to actually attain the standard . epa also acts to control many of the naaqs pollutants wherever they are emitted , through national standards for products that emit them ( particularly mobile sources , such as automobiles ) and emission standards for new stationary sources , such as power plants . thus , establishment or revision of a naaqs sets in motion a long and complicated implementation process that has far - reaching impacts for public health , for sources of pollution in numerous economic sectors , and for states and local governments . the pollutants to which naaqs apply are generally referred to as "criteria" pollutants . the act defines them as pollutants that "endanger public health or welfare," and whose presence in ambient air "results from numerous or diverse mobile or stationary sources. six pollutants are currently identified as criteria pollutants: ozone , particulates , carbon monoxide , sulfur dioxide , nitrogen oxides , and lead . the epa administrator can add to this list if she determines that additional pollutants meet the act's criteria , or delete them if she concludes that they no longer do so . the act requires the agency to review each naaqs every five years . that schedule is rarely met , but it often triggers lawsuits that force the agency to undertake a review . in the case of ozone , the american lung association filed suit over epa's failure to complete a review in 2003 , and a consent decree established a schedule under which the bush administration's epa promulgated revisions to the naaqs in march 2008 .