appendix a . among others . established under the older americans act ( oaa ) , aging and disability resource centers ( adrcs ) provide information and assistance to elderly persons and individuals with physical disabilities , serious mental illness , and / or developmental / intellectual disabilities . adrcs also serve as a single point of entry for enrollment in publicly - administered ltc services , including those funded by medicaid and oaa . out of any funds in the treasury not otherwise appropriated , the bill would appropriate to the secretary , acting through the assistant secretary of aging , $10 million for each of fy2010 through fy2014 to carry out adrc initiatives . the bill would express the sense of the senate that the 111 th congress should comprehensively address long - term services and supports in a way that guarantees elderly and disabled individuals the care they need , and that would make long term services and supports available in the community as well as in institutions . some elderly and disabled individuals , referred to as dual eligibles , qualify for health insurance under both medicare and medicaid . these dual eligible individuals qualify for medicare part a and / or parts b and d and , because they meet medicare eligibility requirements , and are eligible for medicaid because they have limited income and assets . current federal law gives the secretary authority to waive selected medicaid and medicare requirements , as well as approve waivers to reach previously ineligible populations . some projects have been approved that waive both medicare and medicaid rules to implement statewide initiatives to coordinate service delivery , benefit packages , and reimbursement for dual eligibles . initially , waivers can be approved for periods ranging from two - to five - year periods and renewed for additional periods of up to five years . the bill would authorize the secretary to initially approve medicaid waivers for up to five years . this authority would apply to demonstrations as well as home - and community - based waivers for coordinating care of dual eligibles ( and for non dual eligible beneficiaries if they were included under the waiver ) . in addition , the provision would give the secretary authority to approve medicaid waiver extensions for additional five - year periods when requested by states , unless the waivers did not met the conditions for the previous period , or it was no longer cost effective , efficient , or consistent with medicaid policy . there are no specific requirements under medicare and medicaid rules for the programs to coordinate care for dual eligible individuals . under the bill , the secretary would be required to establish a federal coordinated health care office ( chco ) within cms by march 1 , 2010 . the chco director would be appointed by , and in the direct line of management to , the cms administrator . the purpose of the chco would be to bring together officers and employees of the medicare and medicaid programs at cms to ( 1 ) integrate benefits and ( 2 ) improve care coordination .