what are members tweeting about ? the use of twitter by members of congress is an evolving phenomenon . as members continue to embrace new technologies , their use of twitter and other forms of social media may increase . these mediums allow members to communicate directly with constituents ( and others ) in a potentially interactive way that is not possible through mail or e - mail . for members and their staff , the ability to collect and transmit real time information from constituents could be influential for policy or voting decisions . this report is inherently a snapshot in time of a dynamic process . as with any new technology , the number of members using twitter and the patterns of use may change rapidly in short periods of time and undoubtedly will change over longer periods of time . thus , the conclusions drawn from this data can not be easily generalized nor can these results be used to predict future behavior . members of congress have more choices and options available to communicate with constituents than they did 15 years ago . in addition to traditional modes of communication such as town - hall meetings , telephone calls , and postal mail , members can now reach their constituents via e - mail , websites , tele - town halls , online videos , social networking sites , and other electronic - based communication applications . the rise of such electronic communication has altered the traditional patterns of communication between members and constituents . although virtually all members continue to use traditional modes of constituent communication , use of new communications technology is increasing . for example , prior to 1995 , there was virtually no e - mail traffic between members and constituents . in 2008 , almost 200 million e - mails were sent to the house of representatives , and a similar number were sent from house computers . member official websites , blogs , youtube channels , and facebook pages — all non - existent several years ago — also receive significant traffic . conversely , the amount of postal mail sent to congress has dropped by more than 50% during the same time period . in addition , electronic technology has reduced the marginal cost of constituent communications ; unlike postal letters , members can reach large numbers of constituents for a relatively small fixed cost . member use of electronic communications has raised several concerns . some of these concerns are similar to those associated with traditional modes of constituent communications , such as the potential electoral advantage that the franking privilege — the ability to send official mail for free — may confer on incumbent members . other issues , such as the use of third - party communication software platforms , are unique to the new electronic mediums . in addition , existing law and chamber regulations on the use of communication media , such as the united states postal service , have proven difficult to apply directly to the new electronic technologies . created in 2006 by developer jack dorsey as a tool to keep in touch with friends , twitter is a web - based social networking service that allows users to send and read short messages .