this includes both citizens and aliens . there is no legal requirement that the census bureau collect information regarding citizenship status . the 2010 census form sent to all households did not include questions regarding citizenship status or place of birth . the commerce secretary has used his discretion to ask for such information on the american community survey ( acs ) , which is sent monthly to a sampling of households . historically , questions regarding citizenship status have not been consistently included in the census population surveys . at least two early censuses ( 1820 and 1830 ) included a category for foreigners not naturalized , and later censuses asked about place of birth . in modern times , the census questionnaire sent to all households has not included such questions , although the questionnaire sent to a sampling of households ( the "long form," which has been replaced by the acs ) has asked for such information . from time to time , congress has considered legislation that would exclude all aliens or only unauthorized aliens from being included in the census to apportion house seats among the states . this was intended to discourage former slave states from disenfranchising former slaves and other african americans . a similar proposal would have counted the "whole number of persons except those to whom civil or political rights or privileges are denied or abridged by the constitution or laws of any state on account of race or color. some versions of this type of proposal would not have excluded indians not taxed , while others kept the language excluding indians not taxed . during consideration of the civil rights amendments , an alternate type of proposal to amend the constitutional requirements for apportionment and the census would have counted only voters in each state to discourage former slave states from disenfranchising former slaves and other african americans . however , this proposal was deemed flawed because it would also penalize other states by not including aliens / non - citizens in the census count for apportionment , since generally aliens were not permitted to vote in most states . opponents also noted that this proposal would depart radically from the counting of all persons required by the original census clause . another criticism was that suffrage would be cheapened because states would reduce or eliminate legitimate conditions for voter eligibility in an attempt to increase the number of voters . some proposals to count voters or electors would have excluded citizens who had been disenfranchised as former confederate rebels , while others would have included such citizens . some voter - based apportionment census proposals were brought up for floor votes and failed . 11 proposed an amendment to the constitution so that only u.s. citizens would be counted in the apportionment calculation . specifically , it would have amended the constitution to read "representatives shall be apportioned among the several states according to their respective numbers , which shall be determined by counting the number of persons in each state who are citizens of the united states. on the other side of the issue , the every person counts act ( h.r . 3855 ) would have prohibited the census bureau from asking about u.s. citizenship or immigration status .