the cowanesque reallocation was mentioned in p.l . 99-88 , the supplemental appropriations act of 1985 , and was discussed as occurring under the corps' 1958 wsa discretionary authority in the accompanying h.rept . as previously noted , the 1958 wsa indicates that the reallocation to water supply should not be made if it seriously affects authorized purposes or results in a major operational or structural change . the corps is to evaluate these potential effects when studying whether to make or recommend to congress a reallocation . whether the studies used to support the reallocations shown in table 1 sufficiently evaluated how an m&i reallocation may affect authorized purposes or may constitute a major operational change is a general concern raised by the 2009 court order's questioning of the corps evaluations related to lake lanier operations . an evaluation of the sufficiency of corps reallocation analyses is beyond the scope of this crs report . lake lanier is not in table 1 because the july 2009 court order found that the m&i uses exceeded the 1958 wsa authority . similarly , lake cumberland ( ky ) is not included , although m&i withdrawals occur there , because these withdrawals have not been authorized . enforcement action to stop the withdrawals at lake cumberland has not been taken . 85-500 ; 72 stat . 319 ; 43 u.s.c 390b ) as follows: it is hereby declared to be the policy of the congress to recognize the primary responsibilities of the states and local interests in developing water supplies for domestic , municipal , industrial , and other purposes and that the federal government should participate and cooperate with states and local interests in developing such water supplies in connection with the construction , maintenance , and operation of federal navigation , flood control , irrigation , or multiple purpose projects . therefore , although the federal government has made significant investments in water resources infrastructure , these investments primarily have been to support flood control , navigation , irrigation , multipurpose dams ( including hydropower ) , and diversion facilities . the largest federal projects were constructed by the department of the interior's bureau of reclamation under the reclamation act of 1902 and subsequent project authorizations known as reclamation law , and by the department of defense's army corps of engineers ( hereafter referred to as the corps ) through myriad rivers and harbors , flood control , and water resources development act ( wrda ) legislation . since the 1960s , construction of large federal dams has slowed markedly , in response to their high cost , their ecological and social impacts , and the availability of appropriate sites . reservoir planning in recent decades largely has focused on balancing competing objectives in operating existing reservoirs ( as opposed to planning new projects ) , and in some cases on managing for new objectives . a total of 135 corps reservoirs have roughly 11 million acre - feet ( af ) of storage designated for m&i water . most of the m&i water stored is authorized under project - specific authorities . however , 44 reservoirs derive all or part of their m&i storage authority from the 1958 wsa ( see table 1 for a list of the reservoirs ) .