4790 reported . second , on may 6 , 2010 , the committee on house administration held a hearing on h.r . 5175 , the house version of the disclose act ( discussed below ) . the committee held a second hearing ( the third on specific legislation ) on h.r . 5175 on may 11 , 2010 . table 1 at the end of this report provides an overview of legislation that may be or has been relevant for a congressional response to citizens united . most of the bills introduced concentrate on one or two major policy issues ( eg , spending restrictions , shareholder protection , public financing , etc. ) and were introduced within a month of the court's ruling . by contrast , three bills that have been the subject of more recent attention are house and senate versions of the disclose act ( an acronym for "democracy is strengthened by casting light on spending in elections" ) , sponsored by representative van hollen and senator schumer respectively . these bills include a variety of provisions , including many that appeared in other legislation noted throughout this report . representative van hollen introduced the house measure , h.r . 5175 , on april 29 , 2010 . senator schumer introduced the senate version , s. 3295 , the next day . after the house administration committee reported an amended version of h.r . 5175 on may 25 , the house of representatives passed the bill , with additional amendments , on june 24 , 2010 , by a 219-206 vote . senator schumer introduced a revised version of his bill , s. 3628 , on july 21 , 2010 . the senate chose not to invoke cloture on july 27 , 2010 . the bill remains on the calendar . two types of provisions in the disclose act have been the subject of most legislative attention thus far . first , provisions in the bill would provide greater information to the public and the fec about certain political spending . in particular , the bill proposes additional disclosure ( i.e. one of the most fundamental questions may be whether citizen s united will , indeed , spur substantial new levels of corporate advertising surrounding elections . , reporting ) and disclaimer ( i.e. , sponsor identification ) requirements surrounding independent expenditures and electioneering communications funded by corporations , unions , and certain tax - exempt organizations . whether or how congress chooses to respond to citizens united will become clearer over time , as will the decision's impact on the political or policy environments . corporations ( and presumably unions ) now appear to be free to use their treasury funds to use political ads to call for election or defeat of federal ( or state ) candidates as often as they wish . if corporations or unions choose to do so extensively , such spending could dramatically affect the campaign environment by increasing the amount of money in politics — some argue potentially overshadowing candidates and parties . on the other hand , some potential safeguards appear to remain in effect . first , the ban on corporate contributions in federal elections remains .