4173 as a $10.4 billion reduction in the deficit in 2010 . ( the same baseline is used so that scoring will be consistent throughout the session. ) therefore , a bill financed by redirecting any tarp funds would be officially scored as being offset by a decline in overall anticipated federal spending via a smaller tarp program since the march baseline assumed all $700 billion of tarp authority would be used in the future . the offset would not be one - for - one , however , assuming money is being shifted from an income - earning investment under tarp to a use that does not earn income . section 123 of eesa specified that the cost of asset purchases under tarp be determined as provided under the federal credit reform act of 1990 with a discount rate adjusted for market risk . under these instructions , cbo reported that the federal budget would not record the gross cash disbursement for the purchase of a troubled asset ( or cash receipt for its eventual sale ) but instead would incorporate an estimate of the government's net cost ( on a present - value basis ) for the purchase . broadly speaking , the net cost is the purchase cost minus the estimated market value of the assets , which is the present value — calculated using an appropriate discount factor that reflects the riskiness of the underlying cash flows associated with the asset — of any estimated future earnings from holding the asset and the proceeds from its eventual sale . present value calculations allow one to compare costs and benefits over time . the discount rate or discount factor measures how much more present costs or benefits are valued compared to future costs or benefits . a risk adjustment is used because the expected return on tarp assets is more volatile than the government's borrowing cost . the subsidy rate under tarp can be calculated by dividing the net cost in present value terms by the government's initial expenditures . cbo has estimated that certain tarp programs , such as the capital purchase program , have lower subsidy rates , while other programs , such as the auto industry financing program , have higher subsidy rates . the wall street reform and consumer protection act of 2009 ( h.r . 4173 ) , which passed the house on december 11 , 2009 , would redirect $20.8 billion from tarp to offset $10.4 billion of the bill's various provisions . the jobs for main street act , 2010 ( h.r . 2847 ) , which passed the house on december 16 , 2009 , would redirect $150 billion of tarp funds to offset $75 billion of the bill's spending and tax provisions , which include infrastructure spending , public service jobs , an extension of expanded unemployment benefits , an extension of the higher medicaid match for doctors payments , an extension of the health insurance subsidy for unemployed workers , and an increase in the eligibility for the child tax credit . ( the difference between the amount redirected from tarp and the amount offset is discussed below. )