in the 112 th congress , h.r . first , it provides an overview of u.s. export markets for livestock and poultry products , and highlights key u.s. foreign trading partners . second , it discusses policies in selected foreign markets that may restrict or limit the use of antimicrobial drugs in food animal production , including imports of animal products grown with these drugs . third , it discusses some implications of these policies for u.s. livestock and poultry exports to selected foreign markets . world trade in livestock and poultry products totaled nearly $87 billion in 2009 , with the united states accounting for 12% ( $10.4 billion ) of all global trade ( table 1 ) . within product categories , in 2009 , the united states supplied 31% ( $3.8 billion ) of all world trade in fresh , chilled and frozen poultry products ; about 18% ( $2.6 billion ) of all fresh , chilled and frozen beef products ; and 17% ( $3.2 billion ) of fresh , chilled and frozen pork products . the united states also supplied about 4% ( $0.6 billion ) of all world trade in processed livestock and poultry products . these statistics are based on country compilations of total reported imports , as reported in the global trade atlas , and do not always comport with other country statistics , such as reported u.s. export data compiled by the u.s. census bureau . following is an overview of u.s. export markets for beef , pork , and poultry products , highlighting key u.s. foreign trading partners and recent market shares for these importing countries . growing concerns about antimicrobial resistance have caused some u.s. trading partners and competitors , including the eu , new zealand , and south korea , to implement restrictions and prohibitions on the use of certain antimicrobials for subtherapeutic or nontherapeutic purposes in animal production . as noted in the first section of this report , various aspects of antimicrobial use may complicate an understanding of the available information on country restrictions and policy objectives . these include ( 1 ) the use of certain antimicrobial drugs in producing livestock and poultry for meat consumption ; ( 2 ) residues of antimicrobial drugs remaining in meat tissues , which may exceed allowable standards , tolerance levels , or maximum residue levels ; and ( 3 ) the use of certain antimicrobial washes and pathogen reduction treatments ( prts ) for treating meat during packing and processing of food products . this report focuses on country restrictions on the use of certain antibiotics in feed for growth promotion purposes ( subtherapeutic or nontherapeutic ) in food - producing animals . the united states has had a long - standing trade dispute with the eu regarding prts since the eu first banned the use of antimicrobial rinses or prts on poultry , effectively shutting out u.s. poultry exports . in the united states , such treatments are approved by the federal government and are routinely used in u.s. chicken and turkey plants .