or even "who am i talking to ? to complicate matters further , the eu is also an entity whose institutional arrangements and governance structure remain in a state of evolution following the entrance into force of the lisbon treaty , the eu's latest institutional reform effort . in early 2010 , president obama announced that he was not planning to attend the u.s. - eu summit that was expected to be held in late may 2010 in madrid , spain . the u.s. state department indicated at the time that confusion caused by changes to the eu's leadership and governance arrangements resulting from the lisbon treaty had contributed to the decision . this episode reflected a wider lack of clarity in the united states about the implications of the lisbon treaty on eu leadership , and in particular on the status of the eu's "rotating presidency," the role of the eu's new "permanent president," and the role of other eu actors involved in representing the european union on the world stage . on december 1 , 2009 , following a lengthy process of ratification by each of the 27 member states , the eu adopted the lisbon treaty . the treaty introduces reforms intended to remedy perceived shortcomings in the eu's institutional arrangements and decision - making procedures — it aims to create a more cohesive and coherent eu capable of assuming a stronger global role ; to streamline eu decision - making ; and to increase transparency and democratic accountability . changes introduced by the lisbon treaty have a significant impact on the leadership of the european council , the council of ministers , and the eu's rotating presidency system . many of the day - to - day duties of the presidency country continue as before the lisbon treaty . the presidency country is expected to work with the new president of the european council to help prepare and arrange eu summits and summits between the eu and other countries . it is expected to continue preparing , arranging , and chairing the meetings of the council of ministers , other than in the foreign affairs configuration . this responsibility includes working in the council of ministers to forge agreement on legislative proposals . the presidency country is also expected to continue setting out a few broad policy priorities for its tenure . in the past , such priorities have often been coupled with the launch of strategic initiatives that have covered a wide range of topics such as international security and development issues , economic and trade matters , judicial affairs , social policy , and issues specific to particular regions such as the mediterranean , the baltic , or the eu's eastern neighbors . advocates of the lisbon treaty express hope that the new arrangements will have a considerable impact in this context . the president of the european council is charged with ensuring greater continuity , coherence , and consistency in eu policies . in the past , analysts have asserted that the rotating presidency system made the eu too susceptible to frequent shifts in focus , as successive presidencies chose to emphasize their own preferred initiatives and priorities .