appendix a . legislation to alter the architect of the capitol appointment process appendix b . architects of the capitol since 1793 since 1793 , 11 persons have held the position currently known as the architect of the capitol . of these , two served for more than three decades and two others served for more than two decades . as stated above , pursuant to the 1989 act , any subsequent appointments would be for a term of 10 years , with the possibility of reappointment . table b - 1 lists the individuals who have served as architect , including names , dates of service , and links to biographical information . so that is about the extent of my knowledge of that . although the list of names was reportedly transmitted to president george w. bush in summer 2007 , the identity of the candidates was not publicly released by the commission . in its activities report on the 110 th congress ( 2007-2008 ) , the committee on house administration summarized congressional actions and indicated concern about the current process: although the commission forwarded three candidates [to the president] , complex circumstances prevented final selection and confirmation of the architect . the committee anticipates completion of the appointment process in the 111 th congress , but in the meantime is reviewing whether the process is simply broken and requires new legislation . the three - year period following the retirement of the former architect was also noted in the february 3 , 2010 , debate in the house on passage of the h.r . 2843 ( 111 th congress ) , the architect of the capitol appointment act . mr. ayers was confirmed by the senate on may 12 , 2010 . the initial selection process , as well as the recent search for a successor , have raised a number of potential issues for consideration . these issues , which are discussed below , include the length of the commission's work and the potential for extended vacancies in the position ; the operation of the commission ; and what would happen in the event an incumbent seeks reappointment as architect . many of the introduced bills and congressional hearings related to appointment have addressed the fact that not all of those who have held the position of architect of the capitol have been trained architects . some proposed legislation in the 1950s and 1960s would have required all future nominees to be trained architects . alternatively , at least one bill — introduced in 1968 during a period of congressional concern over plans for the expansion of the west front of the capitol — sought to change the title of the office to "superintendent of the capitol buildings and grounds" to reflect the fact the then - architect did not have this training . when architect white announced his retirement in 1995 , concerns were voiced within congress , the media , and professional groups about the necessary qualifications for any successor . there was considerable discussion about the necessity of the new architect being a licensed architect and the type of professional management training and experience needed for the position .