va provides notice to congress . figure 2 provides time frames involved in the cboc planning and approval process . according to va , it generally takes about two years from the planning process to the time when patients start receiving treatment . it should be noted that services can vary from clinic to clinic . there are currently 783 active cbocs throughout the united states and its territories , including american samoa , guam , puerto rico , and the virgin islands . over 2.8 million patients were seen at cbocs during fy2008 . according to various studies conducted by the va , cbocs have been able to serve veterans in a more efficient and effective manner by improving access to health care services and providing high quality primary and mental health care . the next section discusses how cbocs are managed throughout the va health care system . all community - based outpatient clinics operate under the supervision and guidance of a single va hospital or medical center ( vamc ) . the parent vamc maintains administrative responsibility for its cboc ( s ) , specifically with respect to maintaining quality of care ( discussed later in this report ) . cbocs are operated by va and / or contracted staff . in general , cbocs fall into three major categories: va - owned — a cboc that is owned and staffed by va personnel . the facility space is also owned by va. leased — a cboc where the space is leased ( contracted ) but staffed by va personnel . contracted — a cboc where the space and the staff are not va personnel . this is typically a healthcare management organization ( hmo ) type provider where there can be multiple sites associated with a single station identifier . table 1 displays the number and percent distribution of cbocs by these three categories for fy2009 . in general , all veterans receiving care through va are provided a standard medical benefits package to include preventive care , inpatient and outpatient diagnostic and treatment services , and medication and medical supplies . services delivered to veterans at cbocs vary , however , primary care and mental health services are generally provided at all cbocs . primary care includes , but is not limited to , assessment , diagnosis , and medically necessary treatment ( s ) for physiological and pathological conditions not requiring referral to specialty care or inpatient hospital services . care is directed toward health promotion and disease prevention , management of acute and chronic medical conditions , and pharmacological management . many sites include at least one mental health provider , most of whom are psychologists . research has indicated that cbocs have enhanced mental health services through va - mandated routine screening for depression , problem drinking , traumatic brain injury ( tbi ) , post - traumatic stress disorder ( ptsd ) , and military sexual trauma ( mst ) . psychiatrists , social workers , and mental health nurses are also utilized and work together with primary care staff to serve the mental health needs of veterans . cboc patients requiring specialty care , inpatient hospital services , or extended medical services are often referred to the parent va medical facility .