the revenues collected from the hmt are deposited into the hmtf . the hmtf balance is expected to be over $5 billion at the end of fy2010 , as shown in figure 1 . currently , revenue deposited into the hmtf exceeds transfers out of the fund , which are approved by congress annually . interest on collections has been over $100 million in recent fiscal years . hmtf expenditures fall under the discretionary spending budget ceilings . congress appropriates funds for the usace to perform navigation operation and maintenance at individual harbors . the amounts expended in a given year at harbors that qualify for recovery from the hmtf are reimbursed to the general fund . the hmtf balance increased in fy1999 as a result of the energy and water development appropriations act of fy1999 ( p.l . 105-245 ) , which did not require the recovery of corps of engineers o&m expenditures from the fund for that year . although a decrease in international trade reduced hmt collections by about $375 million in fy2009 , the current hmtf balance , in conjunction with the revenue stream from the remaining hmt collections and interest payments , is considered sufficient to recover expenditures for the foreseeable future . because the hmtf is not a separate , or "off - budget," account within the federal budget , the "surplus" in the hmtf has in effect already been spent on general government activities . in the 111 th congress , several bills were introduced to either change the tax rate or how revenues from the tax are spent . 638 , s. 551 , and s. 1509 would repeal the tax on domestic waterborne non - bulk cargo and cargo imported from canada through the great lakes for the purported purpose of mitigating highway congestion by diverting shipments from truck to water modes . groups supporting this legislation contend that in addition to the hmt rate , the administrative burden of filing the tax discourages potential waterborne shippers , because they do not pay a separate tax when shipping by truck or rail . others question to what extent this is true , however . most truck shippers are not located on waterways and therefore would require a truck move to and from the loading and discharge ports to utilize waterborne transportation . these truck and cargo transferring costs could be a significant cost impediment for truck shippers to utilize waterborne transportation , regardless of the hmt . 3447 would do away with the requirement that hmtf spending be appropriated by congress giving the usace more autonomy over the amount spent yearly on harbor maintenance . 4844 / s. 3213 would provide a "spending guarantee" modeled after the airport and airway trust fund . economic and equity issues related to hmt expenditures and collections are the main focus of this report . the intent is to match annual spending levels with annual hmt collections . opponents of these proposals argue that they would inhibit congress' ability to adjust funding priorities from year to year . 2355 would increase the tax rate to 0.4375% ( $4.38 per $1,000 in cargo value ) and expand use of the fund for landside port improvements in addition to the waterside maintenance performed by the corps .