paraguay made some progress on counterterrorism legislation in 2009 . the paraguayan congress passed a measure in july 2009 that modifies the anti - money laundering law . counterfeit trade and smuggling are prevalent in the country's border regions . increased government enforcement of taxes and custom laws is having an impact on the underground economy as a whole , although much remains to be done . overriding a presidential veto , paraguay's congress voted to delay implementation of a personal income tax for a third successive time in june 2009 . the majority of the population is of mixed spanish and guaraní indian descent . both spanish and guaraní are the official languages , with over 90% of the population fluent in guaraní . in 2008 , paraguay's gross national income ( gni ) was $16.3 billion , with a per capita gni of $2,180 , up from $1,670 in 2007 . paraguay's small , primarily agricultural economy grew by a robust 6.8% in 2007 . it is one of the poorest countries in latin america , however , and has suffered significantly from a recent drought and the global economic downturn . the paraguayan economy is particularly dependent on its two larger neighbors , brazil and argentina , for its export markets . while gdp growth slowed to an estimated 5.8% in 2008 , it has contracted sharply in 2009 . economic growth is estimated to have contracted by 3.8% in 2009 , with a projected return to growth of 4.2% in 2010 . paraguay experienced an economic recession for several years in the aftermath of a series of bank failures from 1996-1998 that wiped out half of paraguay's locally owned banks . when inaugurated in 2003 , former president duarte inherited a government that had defaulted on $138 million in debt , primarily as a result of low tax revenue . under president duarte , the economy rebounded , due in part to the implementation of reforms that included anti - corruption initiatives , which increased revenue , strengthened institutions , and created a more favorable environment for foreign investment . the paraguayan economy remains heavily dependent on its traditional agricultural exports of soybeans , cotton and meat . approximately 20% of gdp is derived from agriculture , and agricultural activities employ approximately one - quarter of the country's workforce . other agricultural products include wheat , corn , sugarcane , sesame and other fruits and vegetables . paraguay's industrial sector is still largely underdeveloped , with much of the population still employed in subsistence agriculture . economic growth tends to be limited by paraguay's dependence on imports of manufactured goods , as well as capital goods that are necessary to supply the industrial and investment requirements of the economy . the small manufacturing sector includes agricultural goods , leather , textile , automatic data processing ( adp ) machine parts , and tobacco products . the service sector is dominated by communications , which has benefitted from strong foreign direct investment ( fdi ) and electricity production from the itaipú hydropower plant co - owned with brazil and the yacyretá plant co - owned with argentina . paraguay's informal sector is very large and may be twice the size of the formal sector .