app . 1472 ( 1988 ed. ) this is a because of the number of individual offenses in the chapter and because the air piracy statute was one of the first federal laws that addressed directly terrorism aboard commercial airlines . the early air piracy statute was used to convict omar mohammed ali rezaq . rezaq was one of several terrorists who hijacked an air egypt flight after it took off from athens and who subsequently murdered or attempted to murder several passengers including three americans . the statute was also used to prosecute fawaz yunis who participated in the seizure of a jordanian airliner in flight from beirut to cyprus . over the years , congress added other on board crimes to the section before it broke them out into the separate sections of chapter 465 . for instance , the expanded statute was used to convict mohammed rashed for placing a bomb on a pan am flight from tokyo to honolulu that killed a japanese passenger and injured several others . since the components of the original air piracy statute have been divided into the various sections of chapter 465 , they have been used to prosecute richard reid , the shoe bomber ; umar farouk abdulmutallab , the alleged christmas bomber ; zacarias moussaoui , the co - conspirator of the 9 / 11 terrorists ; and ahmed omar abu ali , convicted in connection with the activities of an al qeada cell in saudi arabia . although there is some overlap with chapter 465 , crimes committed against aircraft are the province of chapter 2 of title 18 of the united states code , principally 18 u.s.c . among other things , section 32 outlaws damaging or destroying an aircraft in the special aircraft jurisdiction of the united states by fire or destructive device ( or attempting or conspiring to do so ) . it provides similar protection for foreign flagged aircraft , when the offender is an american , when an american is aboard the aircraft which is the subject of the attack , or when the offender later comes or is brought to the united states .