passage of h.r . 1883 ( or similar legislation , s. 986 ) would result in limits on puerto rico's and the usvi's ability to finance economic development projects with this revenue source . hearing to consider s. 1685 and h.r . the legislation is likely in response to recent economic development initiatives in the usvi financed in part by rum cover - over revenue . the congressional debate on this legislation could also lead to debate on the broader issue of the cover - over program more generally . in contrast , s. 3521 would simply extend the $13.25 cover - over through 2013 . congress initiated the principles behind the rum cover - over program for puerto rico under the jones act of 1917 , even though , ironically , the same legislation prohibited the production and sale of alcohol . the act stipulated , "providing that hereafter all taxes collected under the internal revenue laws of the united states on articles produced in porto rico [sic] and transported to the united states , or consumed in the island shall be covered over into the treasury of porto rico [sic]. the house and senate report language accompanying the jones act of 1917 both stated "it is believed to be just and fair that it [puerto rico] should receive the internal - revenue taxes collected upon its products , whether those products are used in porto rico [sic] or produced in porto rico [sic] and transported to and used in the united states. importantly , there is no mention of congressional intent with regard to spending of such covered - over revenue . the revised organic act of 1954 ( p.l . 83-517 ) extended the rum cover - over program to the usvi ; following is the relevant legislative language: there shall be transferred and paid over to the government of the virgin islands from the amounts so determined a sum equal to the total amount of revenue collected by the government of the virgin islands during the fiscal year , as certified by the government comptroller of the virgin islands . the money so transferred and paid over shall constitute a separate fund in the treasury of the virgin islands and may be expended as the legislature may determine... . the next clause in the legislative language does provide that the president of the united states or his designated representative must approve of such expenditures before the cover - over revenue is obligated . in the senate report language accompanying the revised organic act of 1954 , congress expressed a desire that the usvi use the covered - over revenue to loosen the dependence of the usvi on periodic appropriations from the u.s. government . according to the report language , under a cover - over system , "the people of the virgin islands would have a far greater degree of control over their finances than under the present system. the report continues , recommending that "the people of the virgin islands bend their efforts to stimulating and increasing business in every way possible.