are all teachers responsible ? for example , through p.l . if states choose to incorporate vam within teacher evaluation systems , it is unclear at this time whether the vam analyses would be conducted with existing state assessments or whether states would choose to develop new assessments . currently , states are required by nclb to conduct assessments in reading , mathematics , and science for grades 3 through 8 and once in high school . if states choose to use existing assessments , vam can only provide an estimate of teacher effectiveness for teachers who provide instruction in tested subjects ( i.e. furthermore , if these systems are not well understood , they may not be able to serve as appropriate models as other districts and states choose to implement vam programs to estimate teacher or school effectiveness . in addition to the use of vam in states and districts , researchers also have explored the potential use of vam to estimate teacher effectiveness using data from multiple educational settings . while no federal program has specified vam as the approach that should be used to link teacher performance to student achievement , this examination of the feasibility of implementation and relevant policy implications may generate insights that are helpful in consideration of the use of vam and alternative approaches to linking student achievement to teacher performance . the first section of this report describes what constitutes a vam approach and how it estimates the so - called "teacher effect. the second section identifies the components necessary to conduct vam in education settings . third , the report discusses current applications of vam at the state and school district levels and what the research on these applications says about this method of evaluation . the fourth section of the report explains some of the implications these applications have for large - scale implementation of vam . finally , the report describes some of the federal policy options that might arise as congress considers legislative action around these issues . vam is a quasi - experimental method that uses a statistical model to establish a causal link between a variable and an outcome . the estimation of a teacher effect requires the analyst to make decisions about the specific model to be used and the covariates to be included . these decisions can affect the results and influence the level of certainty of the teacher effect . the following sections discuss common factors that can influence the calculation of the teacher effect: general issues of statistical modeling ; covariates , confounding factors , and missing data ; and the use of student assessments . there are many types of vam approaches that can estimate teacher effectiveness . models differ along at least two dimensions: ( 1 ) how student achievement is conceptualized , and ( 2 ) how teacher effectiveness is conceptualized . in terms of how student achievement is conceptualized , some models use a single score on an assessment while others use "growth" or "gain scores" from one year to the next .