house amendment no . 1 struck titles 1 through 5 , 7 , 9 , and 11 of the senate substitute and inserted five new titles , making up a "housing package," that were largely based on bills that had previously been considered by the house financial services committee . house amendment no . 2 struck titles 6 , 8 , and 10 of the senate substitute and inserted a new title consisting largely of the text of a housing assistance tax bill previously reported by the house ways and means committee . the agreement further provided that no other motions , except motions to table and reconsider , be in order during the day's consideration . ( bill ) or h.j.res . ( joint resolution ) . only one legislative vehicle , with either a senate or house designation , is sent to the president . after one chamber passes a bill , it sends it to the other chamber . the receiving chamber then typically refers the measure to committee in the same way that measures introduced in that chamber are referred . there is no requirement that one chamber act on a measure approved by the other chamber , and in each congress many measures are approved only by the originating chamber . in order for a measure to become law , however , the house and senate must pass the same vehicle with the same text . if one chamber passes a bill and the other chamber agrees to it without amendment , then the legislative process is complete , and the bill is sent to the president . this is extremely common ; more than three - quarters of all legislation that became law in recent congresses passed the second - acting chamber without amendment . many of these measures that pass this way are salient to relatively few members of congress , such as bills naming post offices or other federal buildings . when major legislation is passed without amendment by the second - acting chamber , it usually reflects extensive negotiations between the chambers prior to the passage of the bill in either chamber . in other words , interested members from the relevant committees and their staff consult beforehand to ensure that the bill that passes the first - acting chamber will be acceptable , without change , to the second - acting chamber . most major legislation is not passed by the second - acting chamber without amendment , however . in addition , on major policy topics , it is common for both the house and senate to initiate legislation , such that there is often both a senate bill ( s.___ ) and a house bill ( h.r.___ ) introduced on a topic . the requirement that the house and senate act on the same bill with the identical text means that in this situation the house and senate must ( 1 ) select a single measure — either the house or senate bill — on which they will both act ; and ( 2 ) agree on the same legislative language .