appendix a . section 252 of the 1985 balanced budget act , as amended ( 2 u.s.c . 902 ) sec . enforcing pay - as - you - go . ( a ) purpose. — the purpose of this section is to assure that any legislation enacted before october 1 , 2002 , affecting direct spending or receipts that increases the deficit will trigger an offsetting sequestration . ( b ) sequestration. — ( 1 ) timing. — not later than 15 calendar days after the date congress adjourns to end a session and on the same day as a sequestration ( if any ) under section 251 or 253 , there shall be a sequestration to offset the amount of any net deficit increase caused by all direct spending and receipts legislation enacted before october 1 , 2002 , as calculated under paragraph ( 2 ) . ( 2 ) calculation of deficit increase. — omb shall calculate the amount of deficit increase or decrease by adding — ( a ) all omb estimates for the budget year of direct spending and receipts legislation transmitted under subsection ( d ) ; ( b ) the estimated amount of savings in direct spending programs applicable to budget year 1 resulting from the prior year's sequestration under this section or section 253 , if any , as published in omb's final sequestration report for that prior year ; and ( c ) any net deficit increase or decrease in the current year resulting from all omb estimates for the current year of direct spending and receipts legislation transmitted under subsection ( d ) that were not reflected in the final omb sequestration report for the current year . ( c ) eliminating a deficit increase. — ( 1 ) the amount required to be sequestered in a fiscal year under subsection ( b ) shall be obtained from non - exempt direct spending accounts from actions taken in the following order: ( a ) first. — all reductions in automatic spending increases specified in section 256 ( a ) shall be made . ( b ) second. — if additional reductions in direct spending accounts are required to be made , the maximum reductions permissible under sections 256 ( b ) ( guaranteed and direct student loans ) and 256 ( c ) ( foster care and adoption assistance ) shall be made . ( c ) third. — ( i ) if additional reductions in direct spending accounts are required to be made , each remaining non - exempt direct spending account shall be reduced by the uniform percentage necessary to make the reductions in direct spending required by paragraph ( 1 ) 2 ; except that the medicare programs specified in section 256 ( d ) shall not be reduced by more than 4 percent and the uniform percentage applicable to all other direct spending programs under this paragraph shall be increased ( if necessary ) to a level sufficient to achieve the required reduction in direct spending .