c . § § 3835 ( f ) , 3841 ( a ) ( 1 ) ( b ) : provide additional transition options for socially disadvantaged farmers and ranchers under the agricultural resources conservation program in order to facilitate the transfer of land subject to contracts from retired or retiring owners and operators to beginning farmers or ranchers and socially disadvantaged farmers or ranchers . § § 3839aa - 2 , 3841 ( g ) ( 1 ) ( b ) : limit increases in payments for socially disadvantaged farmers and ranchers under the agricultural resources conservation program . § 3844 : allows the secretary to offer "incentives" for socially disadvantaged farmers and ranchers to participate in conservation programs . § 2497 : provides for waivers for socially disadvantaged farmers and ranchers under a supplemental agricultural disaster assistance program . § 3020e - 1 : authorizes the assistant secretary to award grants to entities that establish pension counseling and information outreach programs for "women , minorities , older individuals residing in rural areas and low income retirees , and older individuals with limited english proficiency. § 635 : establishes the powers and functions of the export - import bank . among its duties , the bank shall be responsible for advising small businesses of opportunities , with particular emphasis on conducting outreach and increasing loans to socially and economically disadvantaged small businesses , wosbs , and small businesses employing fewer than 100 employees and on liaising with the sba and other departments and agencies on matters affecting small businesses . § 635a : establishes an office whose sole function is to continue and enhance the outreach activities of the bank with respect to , and increase the total amount of loans , guarantees , and insurance provided by the bank to support , exports by socially and economically disadvantaged small businesses and wosbs within the small business division . the president of the bank must ensure , to the maximum extent practicable , that qualified minority and women applicants are considered when filling positions . § 635a - 4 : requires the board of directors of the export - import bank to attempt to ensure that a major share of any loan guarantee ultimately serves to promote exports from small , medium - size , and minority businesses or agricultural concerns . § 1441 : requires the financing corporation to ensure that minority - owned or - controlled commercial banks , investment banking firms , underwriters , and bond counsels have an opportunity to "participate to a significant degree" in any public offering of obligations it issues . § 1441a : authorizes the resolution trust corporation ( rtc ) to award minority - and women - owned businesses "an additional 10 percent of the total technical points and an additional 5 percent of the total cost preference points achievable in the technical and cost rating process" when evaluating proposals for contracts .