in addition , h.r . these proposals did not advance in congress . in its fy2014 budget request , made in advance of the 2014 farm bill , the obama administration proposed changes to the structure and intent of u.s. international food assistance , especially involving ffpa title ii resources . these changes included ( 1 ) shifting funds from the ffpa , as authorized by the farm bill , to three usaid accounts — international disaster assistance ( ida ) , development assistance ( da ) , and emergency food assistance contingency fund ( efac ) , described below — authorized in foreign assistance legislation ; ( 2 ) eliminating the monetization procedure ; ( 3 ) providing greater flexibility to procure commodities in local and regional markets overseas ; and ( 4 ) reducing the volume of commodities subject to cargo preference legislation . the administration proposed to replace funding previously requested for ffpa title ii , estimated at $1.47 billion annually , with an equivalent amount divided among the three usaid foreign assistance accounts as follows: shift $1.1 billion to ida for emergency food response . this shift would have augmented ida's emergency food security program for cash - based food security assistance . the total available for ida emergency food security assistance after such a shift would be $1.4 billion . shift $250 million to da for a community development and resilience fund ( cdrf ) . the cdrf would address chronic food insecurity in areas of recurrent crises such as in the horn of africa or the west african sahel . the cdrf also would receive $80 million of da from usaid's bureau of food security , which administers the feed the future program . total funding for this program after such a shift would be $330 million . shift $75 million to efac . the newly created efac would serve as a fund to provide emergency food assistance for unexpected and urgent food needs . according to usaid , the type of food assistance intervention — in - kind versus cash - based food assistance — depends on overall program goals , cost , and several factors related to the affected region . these factors include food insecurity causes , the severity of the food crisis , timeliness of response , the functioning of markets , security conditions , and local diet preferences . usaid argued that the proposed shifts would result in gains of flexibility , timeliness , and efficiency in the provision of emergency food aid . these gains would allow u.s. international food assistance to reach at least 2 million to 4 million more people each year with equivalent funding . rather than a commodity - only response , usaid would be able to select from a menu of options that could include local or regional procurement in countries or regions where food aid emergencies are occurring and other forms of cash - based assistance , like food vouchers or cash transfers . cdrf would continue to engage pvos as implementing partners of non - emergency development programs .