section 201 of h.r . 3377 provides federal assistance to states wishing to enhance mitigation activities . congress may wish to consider incorporating sheltering recommendations of the commission into the mitigation provisions of the bill . children are one of the most vulnerable segments of society during disasters . traditionally , they are included in broader disaster planning categories such as "special needs populations" or "at - risk populations. the increasing frequency and scale of disasters has made the needs of children a critical element of disaster planning . when assessing how to meet the needs of children in disasters , some consideration needs to be given to whether existing statutory authority provides federal agencies the flexibility to meet those needs , or whether congressional intervention is necessary to ensure that special provisions are made for children . the range of activities associated with meeting the needs of children in disasters spans multiple levels of government and the private and nonprofit sectors of society . while there is an undeniable need to prevent loss of life and provide for the quality of life for children , there remains some question about the role of various stakeholders in funding and coordinating emergency management activities . evaluating the recommendations of the commission within the context of existing statutory and regulatory provisions may also provide some insight into the gaps in funding and coordination , and the appropriate federal role , in caring for children affected by disasters . in addition to the issues above pertaining to the recommendations of the commission , congress may wish to consider policy options not addressed by the commission . these include the role of federal agencies , transitioning disaster assistance coordination to the states , and federal grants - in - aid . legislation introduced in the 111 th congress includes provisions for child safety and education continuity in disasters ( s. 2898 ) , and changes to federal programs addressing community preparedness and mitigation ( h.r . the child safety , care , and education continuity act of 2010 ( s. 2898 ) includes provisions that address many of the child care and education recommendations of the commission . however , congress may wish to consider expanding the provisions of s. 2898 to address additional recommendations pertaining to mental health , emergency medical services and pediatric transport , disaster case management , sheltering standards , and housing . section 102 of the disaster response , recovery , and mitigation enhancement act of 2009 ( h.r . 3377 ) provides for the implementation of the recommendations of a congressional committee . congress may wish to consider whether the evacuation recommendations of the commission could be incorporated into implementation of other committee recommendations . children are one of the most vulnerable segments of society during disasters . the 111 th congress is currently considering amending the robert t. stafford disaster relief and emergency assistance act ( stafford act ) . the disaster response , recovery , and mitigation enhancement act of 2009 ( h.r . 3377 ) would enhance disaster response , recovery , preparedness , and mitigation capabilities .