citizens united appealed . bcra provides that if an action is brought to challenge the constitutionality of any of its provisions , a final decision from the district court shall be reviewable only by direct appeal to the u.s. supreme court . the u.s. supreme court heard oral argument in citizens united v. fec on march 24 , 2009 , and re - argument on september 9 . for the re - argument , the court ordered the parties to file supplemental briefs addressing whether the court should overrule its earlier holdings in austin v. michigan chamber of commerce , upholding the constitutionality of a state statute prohibiting corporate campaign expenditures , and the portion of its decision in mcconnell v. fec upholding the facial validity of section 203 of bcra . in brief , before the court's ruling , corporations and labor unions were prohibited from using their general treasury funds to make expenditures for communications expressly advocating election or defeat of a clearly identified federal candidate . in addition , 30 days before a primary and 60 days before a general election , corporations and unions were prohibited from using general treasury funds to finance electioneering communications . however , corporations and labor unions were permitted to use political action committees ( pacs ) , financed with regulated contributions from employees or members , to make independent expenditures for express advocacy communications and to fund electioneering communications within the restricted time periods . as a result of the court's ruling , it appears that federal campaign finance law does not restrict corporate and , most likely , labor union use of their general treasury funds to make independent expenditures for any communication expressly advocating election or defeat of a candidate , including broadcast and cablecast communications made immediately prior to an election . corporations and unions may still establish pacs , but are only required to use pac funds in order to make contributions to candidates , parties , and other political committees . the group argued that section 203 of bcra violated the first amendment on its face and as applied to its movie and advertisements . in addition , citizens united maintained that sections 201 and 311 , requiring disclosure and identification of funding sources , were unconstitutional as applied to the television ads . in a 2003 decision , mcconnell v. fec , the supreme court upheld the constitutionality of sections 203 , 201 , and 311 in a facial challenge . in a 2007 decision , fec v. wisconsin right to life , inc. ( wrtl ii ) , the supreme court limited the applicability of section 203 by ruling that the prohibition could not constitutionally apply to advertisements that may reasonably be interpreted as something other than an appeal to vote for or against a specific candidate , and that such ads are not the functional equivalent of express advocacy . the u.s. district court for the district of columbia denied the request by citizens united for a preliminary injunction , finding that the bcra provisions in question had previously been upheld by the supreme court as regulation that does not unconstitutionally burden first amendment free speech rights .