helpful , too , is a cooperative administration . its expansion was driven by a number of factors . domestic and international crises have expanded the reach of the government . wars , for example , threaten the nation itself , and the government often accrues new and expanded prerogatives to protect the country . the intelligence community , as an example , grew rapidly during the cold war as the united states of america faced a major threat from a nuclear - armed superpower rival: the soviet union . for instance , the world war ii truman committee's ( after senator and later president harry s truman ) investigation of the war mobilization effort , including waste and fraud in defense procurement , was viewed by many as a large success . although people may disagree on what constitutes "quality" oversight , there are a number of components that appear to foster effective oversight . they include ( 1 ) a committee chair who is committed to doing oversight on a sustained basis ; ( 2 ) the involvement of committee members in an activity that might take weeks or months of time and resources ; ( 3 ) bipartisanship: more is likely to be achieved when both parties work together rather than against each other ; ( 4 ) an experienced professional staff with investigatory skills ; ( 5 ) preparation and documentation in advance of public hearings ; ( 6 ) coordination with other relevant committees of jurisdiction ; and ( 7 ) follow - through to ensure that any recommendations of the committee are acted upon . absent cooperation , committees may need to use compulsory processes ( subpoena and contempt ) to obtain pertinent reports and documents and the testimony of key witnesses . oversight is an implicit constitutional obligation of the congress . according to historian arthur schlesinger , jr. , the framers believed it was not necessary to make specific reference to "oversight" in the constitution . "[i]t was not considered necessary to make an explicit grant of such authority," wrote schlesinger . "the power to make laws implied the power to see whether they were faithfully executed. the constitution also granted congress an array of formal powers — the purse strings , lawmaking , impeachment , among others — to hold the president and the administration accountable for their actions or inactions . in short , oversight plays a key role in our system of checks and balances . there is a large number of overlapping purposes associated with oversight . this array can be divided into three basic types: programmatic , political , and institutional . p rogrammati c purposes include such objectives as making sure agencies and programs are working in a cost - effective and efficient manner ; ensuring executive compliance with legislative intent ; evaluating program performance ; improving the economy of governmental performance ; investigating waste , fraud , and abuse in governmental programs ; reviewing the agency rulemaking process ; acquiring information useful in future policymaking ; or determining whether agencies or programs are fulfilling their statutory mission .