the prohibitions on water and power projects are very broad in the wsra . the prohibitions generally limit federal agencies from recommending authorization of such projects , or appropriations to begin construction on such projects , that would have an adverse affect on the purpose of the designation . the restrictions placed on ferc and other federal agencies regarding rivers designated under the wsra extend to rivers designated as potential additions to the wild and scenic rivers system , at least to some degree . the same prohibition on licenses for construction or assistance for construction applies for a period of three complete fiscal years following any congressional action that designates a river as a potential addition . however , if , during that period , the relevant administering agency determines that the river should not be included in the wild and scenic rivers system and provides appropriate notice to congress , the project agency may proceed with project plans . the act does not prohibit "licensing of , or assistance to , developments below or above a wild , scenic or recreational river area or on any stream tributary thereto which will not invade the area or unreasonably diminish the scenic , recreational , and fish and wildlife values present in the area on the date of designation" as an addition or potential addition to the wild and scenic rivers system . a river may be included even if it had previously been developed beyond its free - flowing condition upon restoration to such condition . a river may be included in the wild and scenic rivers system even if minor structures such as low dams or diversion works already exist along the section of the river proposed for inclusion , but the act specifically states that future construction of such structures is not condoned by the act . the purpose of the wild and scenic rivers act is to preserve rivers "in free - flowing condition to protect the water quality of such rivers and to fulfill other vital national conservation purposes. to protect the flow of the river , the act provides for the assumption or creation of federal water rights sufficient to carry out the purposes of the act . in addition to using reserved water rights to protect the flows of designated rivers , the wsra provides protection for a designated river by limiting the licensing of dams , reservoirs and other water project works on , or adversely affecting , protected segments . the 112 th congress may consider legislation involving designation of certain river segments as well . furthermore , congressional interest in the protections offered by the wsra may arise from other legislative proposals , such as energy development projects that may conflict with the purposes of the wsra . the wsra created a national wild and scenic rivers system comprised of rivers meeting certain criteria outlined by the act . eligibility for inclusion in the system depends on the nature of the river itself , although other bodies of water may be protected by the act . the wsra defines river as "a flowing body of water or estuary or section , portion , or tributary thereof , including rivers , streams , creeks , runs , kills , rills , and small lakes.