patent rights do not enforce themselves . patent owners who wish to compel others to respect their rights must commence enforcement proceedings , which most commonly consist of litigation in the federal courts . although issued patents enjoy a presumption of validity , accused infringers may assert that a patent is invalid or unenforceable on a number of grounds . to that extent , congressional interest in patent reform was itself a reaction to earlier developments in the courts . this interaction between different branches of government has become a hallmark of the recent patent reform process . notably , the supreme court and federal circuit have not reacted to every proposal in the various patent reform acts in this manner . for example , congress has considered legislation that would permit interlocutory appeals of claim construction rulings . the federal circuit has not altered its general practice of disfavoring such appeals , however . it also should be appreciated that judicial opinions have worked significant changes to a number of patent principles that were not expressly the target of proposed legislative reforms . for example , some observers believe that the 2007 supreme court opinion in ksr v. teleflex resulted in significant changes to the law of nonobviousness . of course , judicial changes to one component of the patent system may have an impact upon other doctrines , including those subject to congressional scrutiny . a number of reasons may explain this pattern of judicial involvement in areas of legislative interest . first , congress considered the initial patent reform act in 2005 . during the years that legislation has been pending , many patent infringement cases have been tried and appealed . the courts have therefore had many opportunities to address core patent doctrines . second , the federal circuit hears all appeals from district courts across the united states in both patent acquisition and infringement cases . this concentration of appellate jurisdiction provides one court with the ability to change patent doctrine relatively quickly . further , although the rulings of other federal courts of appeal bind only a limited portion of the country , federal circuit patent precedent has effect throughout the united states . some additional factors suggest judicial interest in legislative scrutiny of the patent system . the federal circuit's location in washington , dc , may imply an awareness of legislative activity involving patents . that several federal circuit judges formerly served as members of congressional staff may also suggest interest in patent reform efforts on the hill . whatever the reasons for the persistent interaction between congress and the courts in the patent reform process , these circumstances raise a number of issues pertaining to institutional competence . the longstanding debate over whether legislatures or courts comprise the most appropriate body to work particular legal reforms has been renewed in this setting . law professors dan burk and mark lemley side with the courts , asserting that "congress has spent the last four years , from 2005 to 2008 , in an ultimately futile effort to reform the patent system.