, as recs ) . too many decision makers . lack of carrots and sticks to change institutional behavior . since the alliance's report , agencies have taken advantage of energy manager training and incentives such as espcs . capital budgeting still offers challenges , as discussed further below . finally , electricity represented only 1.06 quads or 17.6% of total federal energy - use in 2006 . buildings consumed the power almost exclusively . the federal government spent roughly $3.7 billion at an average cost of $78 / megawatt - hour . spending on electricity represented the equivalent of one - third of 1% of the federal discretionary budget . at that time , electricity rates ranged from 8.2¢ / kilowatt - hour for industrial users to 12.0¢ / kilowatt - hour for commercial users ( or $82 to $120 / megawatt - hours ) . eisa's 30% energy reduction goal for federal buildings could represent a $1.1 billion in savings if the reduction comes from reduced electricity use , assuming rates stayed constant . this would equate to roughly one - tenth of 1% of the 2006 discretionary budget . in the case of espcs , agencies "locked - in" the pre - improvement budget for energy in order to pay for the energy improvement , which also allows the agencies to retain the balance of their energy savings . under eisa , agencies may now combine appropriated funds with the contractor - financed portion of the improvement . doe has not yet promulgated final rules on agencies' use of appropriated funds for this purpose . in the case of the department of defense , capital construction and operating budgets are separate appropriations . under the eisa / espc provision , a dod facility could feasibly benefit from improvements under both funding mechanisms . this may not be a clear - cut case for agencies with combined capital and operating budgets . the federal government's prospect of seeing energy reduction translated into a budget reduction may be low . however , policy makers may want to weigh the direct monetary savings against the clean energy benefits of renewable energy in terms of avoided emissions of regulated pollutants and greenhouse gases to the environment . when the federal government embarked on its energy efficiency mission ( following necpa ) , the highest payback came from low cost , easily achieved improvements ; for example , replacing incandescent lights with fluorescent lights , adding insulation , and upgrading window glazing . further energy reduction came from , and most likely will continue to depend on , improved technology ; examples include energy star products , and more - efficient heating - ventilation - and - cooling ( hvac ) equipment . policy makers may wish to question whether further improvements may come in smaller increments at increasingly higher costs . two recent laws have provisions aimed at improving energy efficiency in federal facilities: the energy policy act of 2005 ( epact 2005 ) and the energy independence and security act of 2007 ( eisa ) .