a major terrorist attack may emanate from either outside or inside the united states. in addressing how the u.s. might assess whether the organization remains a viable entity the dni further stated , "until counterterrorism pressure on al qaeda's place of refuge , key lieutenants , and operative cadre outpaces the group's ability to recover , al qaeda will retain its capability to mount an attack. following azzam's death , bin laden gained control of the maktab 's funds and organizational mechanisms . abd al rahman came to the united states in 1990 from sudan and was convicted in october 1995 for terrorist plots related to the february 1993 bombing of the world trade center in new york . statements from some al qaeda leaders advocate for a phased struggle , in which the initial goal is the expulsion of u.s. and foreign military forces from "islamic lands" and proximate goals include the overthrow of "corrupt" regional leaders and the creation of governments that rule solely according sharia ( islamic law ) . references to the reestablishment of an islamic caliphate frequently appear in al qaeda propaganda but often lack detail and are rarely accompanied by practical political prescriptions for achieving such a goal . some al qaeda leaders also promote military confrontation with israel and conflict with shiite muslims . the varying appeal and compatibility of these different components of al qaeda's ideology account for the group's successes and failures in attracting support . in pursuit of their many goals , leaders of al qaeda and its regional affiliates frequently make appeals for support based on a wide range of political positions and , at times , attempt to harness nationalist sentiment or manipulate local grievances to generate support for their agendas . these differing priorities , approaches , and contexts create challenges for those al qaeda figures who have hoped to construct a unified narrative of al qaeda's goals or implement a unified strategy to achieve them . some experts note that al qaeda's "description of the enemy is confusing and inconsistent" and suggest that , overall: speaking of al - qa'ida's "strategy" is a misnomer . the jihadi movement's various operational units , whether named al - qa'ida affiliates or small cells , cull through various ideological and strategic documents to identify elements that they can achieve . that network was called the maktab al khidamat ( services office ) , also known as al khifah ; many experts consider the maktab to be the organizational forerunner of al qaeda . another major figure who utilized the maktab network to recruit for the anti - soviet jihad was umar abd al rahman ( also known as "the blind shaykh" ) , the spiritual leader of radical egyptian islamist group al jihad . bin laden apparently also made occasional forays across the border into afghanistan during the anti - soviet war ; he reportedly participated in a 1986 battle in jalalabad and an april 1987 frontal assault by foreign volunteers against afghan forces equipped with soviet armor .