appendix a . exposed population appendix b. haiti population movement appendix c. emergency shelter gap: april 19 , 2010 appendix d. u.s. earthquake assistance to haiti appendix e. the u.s. government emergency response mechanism for international disasters the united states is generally a leader and major contributor to relief efforts in response to humanitarian disasters . the president has broad authority to provide emergency assistance for foreign disasters and the u.s. government provides disaster assistance through several u.s. agencies . the very nature of humanitarian disasters — the need to respond quickly in order to save lives and provide relief — has resulted in a rather unrestricted definition of what this type of assistance consists of at both a policy and an operational level . while humanitarian assistance is assumed to provide for urgent food , shelter , and medical needs , the agencies within the u.s. government providing this support typically expand or contract the definition in response to circumstances . funds may be used for u.s. agencies to deliver services or to provide grants to international organizations ( ios ) , international governmental and non - governmental organizations ( ngos ) , and private or religious voluntary organizations ( pvos ) . the u.s. agency for international development ( usaid ) is the u.s. government agency charged with coordinating u.s. government and private sector assistance . it also coordinates with international organizations , the governments of countries suffering disasters , and other governments . the office of foreign disaster assistance ( ofda ) in usaid's bureau for democracy , conflict and humanitarian assistance ( dcha ) provides immediate relief materials and personnel , many of whom are already abroad on mission . calendar no . on march 4 , 2010 , the resolution was agreed to in senate without amendment and with a preamble by unanimous consent . the haiti empowerment , assistance , and rebuilding act of 2010 would authorize appropriations of $3.1 billion over five years in addition to amounts otherwise available for assistance for haiti . this would include authorizing $1.5 billion for fy 2010 , and $0.5 billion per year for fy2011 through fy2014 . the bill would make it u.s. policy , in partnership with the government of haiti and in coordination with the international community , to support the sustainable recovery and rebuilding of haiti . it would establish a senior coordinator for haiti within the department of state who would advise and coordinate all u.s. government policies related to haiti . it would also direct the usaid administrator , with input provided by the coordinator , to submit to congress a multi - year strategy to provide assistance in support of haiti's reconstruction . introduced and referred to senate committee on foreign relations on may 5 , 2010 . it is responsible for providing non - food humanitarian assistance and can quickly assemble disaster assistance response teams ( darts ) to assess conditions . ofda has wide authority to borrow funds , equipment , and personnel from other parts of usaid and other federal agencies . usaid has two other offices that administer u.s. humanitarian aid: food for peace ( ffp ) and the office of transition initiatives ( oti ) .