, and appropriate state officials ( 23 u.s.c . typically , these officials form a policy board in which some members have voting rights and others do not . although there has been some reduction in governmental fragmentation due to annexation of territory and consolidation of local governments , in many states , particularly in the older and more developed northeast and midwest , powers to annex and consolidate are weak . the third main way that regional governance has been enhanced is the development of special - purpose regional bodies , the most widespread of which are mpos . ยง134 ( k ) ( 3 ) ; 49 u.s.c . ยง5303 ( k ) ( 3 ) ) . in nonattainment areas "federal funds may not be advanced ... for any highway project that will result in a significant increase in the carrying capacity for single - occupant vehicles unless the project is addressed through a congestion management process" ( 23 u.s.c . the metropolitan planning process , in areas designated as tmas , must be certified by the secretary of transportation as being carried out according to federal law . working together , fhwa and fta perform certification reviews . certification is required not less often than once every four years . certification is based on the way in which the planning is carried out , not the success or failure of the projects and strategies ultimately employed . among other things , a certification review will examine the participation of interested parties in the planning process . federal law requires that at a minimum , stakeholders , including freight shippers , public transit operators , and the general public , be given reasonable opportunity to comment on the transportation plan . to that end , mpos are required to develop a public participation plan . if federal certification is not granted , the secretary may withhold 20% of highway and transit project funds attributable to the area . in addition to the activities prescribed by federal law , some mpos carry out other activities that may be given to them by state or local government . these include land - use planning , project implementation , transit operations , and environmental planning in addition to air quality emissions analysis . according to gao , 70% of mpos have some land use planning responsibilities , 37% implement projects , 21% do additional environmental planning such as water quality planning , and 16% operate transit service . in those cases , the state dot has the authority to select projects from the tip in cooperation with the mpo . mpos in small urban areas , however , have less authority than those in larger areas . this is because power to select highway projects from the tip is given to the state and power to select transit projects is given to the designated recipients of public transit funding . project selection by the state or transit system , however , must be done in cooperation with the mpo , a stronger requirement than consultation . the transportation plans of a metropolitan area must be consistent with transportation plans that are required at the state level .