those roles are: 1 . the second method is more controversial . over the last decade , the number of asia - pacific bilateral trade agreements ( btas ) has grown dramatically . according to one observer , "the result is a competitive form of liberalization . as occurred within apec itself , there are competing models of ftas that cannot be integrated. a reporter described the phenomena as follows: the trade diplomacy of east asia has become so blindingly complex that even the metaphors are getting muddled . the subtitle of one academic paper on free trade agreements ( ftas ) suggests using "spaghetti bowls as building blocks. another describes a "patchwork of bilateral hub - and - spoke ftas in a noodle bowl. according to some experts , the growth of bilateral trade agreements ( btas ) amongst apec members represents an unsystematic , but organic process that could lead to the formation of an apec - wide regional trade agreement ( rta ) much like the proposed ftaap . according to this view , the actions of apec — via the iaps , caps , model measures , and the various committee reports — form a commonality of perspective on issues , thereby permitting some members to conclude limited btas . however , there is also a view that sees asean's growing network of ftas as a more likely base than apec for the creation of a asian rta . in either case , the idea is that over time a network of btas will form the basis for the creation of an asian rta . however , other experts view the proliferation of btas as forming a barrier to trade and investment liberalization . as described by one scholar , "the resulting web of agreements and negotiations is fragmented , uncoordinated , and uneven in content and coverage. because many btas are politically ( not economically ) motivated , the emerging btas in asia generally suffer from several problems — wto - incompatibility ; narrow sector focus ; discriminatory rules of origin ( roos ) — that make future amalgamation of the btas nearly impossible . as one expert describes it: the predictable results of foreign policy - driven fta negotiations light on economic strategy are bitty , quick - fix sectoral deals . politically sensitive sectors in goods and services are carved out.... little progress is usually made in tackling domestic regulatory barriers... . finally , the sway of power politics can result in highly asymmetrical deals , especially when one of the negotiating parties is a major player . even if the merger of the various btas into an asia - pacific rta were accomplished , there are concerns that the resulting agreement would institutionalize a number of tariff and non - tariff trade barriers in the region . a u.s. trade official was quoted as saying , "bilateral ftas being pursued by china , and japan , and korea to some extent , risk falling to the lowest common denominator . as one commentator once quipped , 'they are neither f , nor t , nor a.'