appendix a . summary of nfl labor history appendix b . sports and labor - management relations the national labor relations act ( nlra ) governs labor - management relations in the private sector and applies generally to professional sports employers . under the nlra , employers and unions are required to bargain in good faith with respect to wages , hours , and other terms and conditions of employment . employers and unions are required to bargain over these mandatory subjects of bargaining to the point of impasse . the nlra does not obligate either party , however , to agree to a proposal or to make a concession . in fact , collective bargaining presupposes the availability of certain economic weapons as part of the negotiating process . for example , employees are permitted to strike if collective bargaining fails to achieve higher wages or improved working conditions . similarly , during certain work stoppages , an employer may use replacement workers to continue the operation of its business . although the nlra contemplates possible strikes by employees , it does provide for mediation and conciliation services to settle certain disputes . the nlra authorizes the federal mediation and conciliation service ( fmcs ) to provide mediation and conciliation services upon its own motion or upon the request of one or more of the parties to a dispute whenever "in its judgment such dispute threatens to cause a substantial interruption of commerce. the fmcs is directed , however , to avoid mediating disputes that would have only a minor effect on interstate commerce , if state or other conciliation services are available to the parties . where the fmcs is involved in a dispute , it is limited to providing only mediation and conciliation services , and may not issue a binding arbitration decision . as noted earlier in this report , numerous measures were introduced in congress in 1982 and 1994 to prescribe binding arbitration to resolve the nfl and mlb strikes . in general , these measures would have established a board or panel to take testimony , conduct hearings , and review relevant books and records . the board or panel would then consider various factors in conjunction with the information it received before rendering a final decision or agreement that would bind the parties and replace the expired collective bargaining agreement . some of the factors that would have been considered include the history of collective bargaining agreements between the parties , the changes in circumstances of the parties , and an owner's ability to pay . unlike recent legislation , such as the employee free choice act , that would have amended the nlra to prescribe binding arbitration if certain conditions are not met in any private labor negotiation , many of the nfl and mlb measures would have established a panel or board to resolve a specific strike . it appears that the panel or board would have ceased to operate once a decision was reached . arbitration is often favored by disputing parties because it allows generally for the selection of arbitrators who have expertise in the industry in which the dispute arises .