such funds may not be used , however , for elective abortions . under the affordable care act , individuals who receive a premium tax credit or cost - sharing subsidy will be permitted to select a qualified health plan that includes coverage for elective abortions . the issuer of a qualified health plan that provides coverage for elective abortions will be required to collect two separate payments from each enrollee in the plan: one payment that reflects an amount equal to the portion of the premium for coverage of health services other than elective abortions ; and another payment that reflects an amount equal to the actuarial value of the coverage for elective abortions . the plan issuer will be required to deposit the separate payments into separate allocation accounts that consist solely of each type of payment and that are used exclusively to pay for the specified services . state health insurance commissioners will ensure compliance with the segregation requirements in accordance with applicable provisions of generally accepted accounting requirements , office of management and budget ( "omb" ) circulars on funds management , and government accountability office guidance on accounting . to determine the actuarial value of the coverage for elective abortions , the plan issuer will estimate the basic per enrollee , per month cost , determined on an average actuarial basis , for including such coverage . the estimate may take into account the impact on overall costs of including coverage for elective abortions , but cannot take into account any cost reduction estimated to result from such services , such as prenatal care , delivery , or postnatal care . the per month cost will have to be estimated as if coverage were included for the entire population covered , but cannot be less than $1 per enrollee , per month . under the affordable care act , a qualified health plan that provides coverage for elective abortions will also be required to provide notice of such coverage to enrollees as part of a summary of benefits and coverage explanation at the time of enrollment . the notice , any plan advertising used by the issuer , any information provided by the exchange , and any other information specified by the secretary will provide information only with respect to the total amount of the combined payments for elective abortion services and other services covered by the plan . the hyde amendment and similar funding restrictions were challenged almost immediately after their adoption . in 1977 , in three related decisions , the court concluded that states have neither a statutory nor constitutional obligation to fund elective abortions or provide access to public facilities for such abortions . in beal v. doe , the court held that nothing in the language or legislative history of title xix of the social security act ( medicaid ) requires a participating state to fund every medical procedure falling within the delineated categories of medical care . the court ruled that it was not inconsistent with the act's goals to refuse to fund unnecessary medical services . the court did indicate , however , that title xix left a state free to include coverage for elective abortions should it choose to do so .