this he could not do . in the eyes of the district court , "while mr. davis's new evidence casts some additional , minimal doubt on his conviction , ... [t]he vast majority of the evidence at trial remains intact , and the new evidence is largely not credible or lacking in probative value . after careful consideration , the court finds that mr. davis has failed to make a showing of actual innocence that would entitle him to habeas relief in federal court. the district court had noted at the outset that any appeal of its conclusions would be directly to the supreme court , a position with which the circuit court agreed . the district court's conclusion that davis failed to establish his actual innocence seemed to permit the supreme court to dispose of the case summarily . what do the cases say the eighth amendment's cruel and unusual punishment clause condemns ? as the district court understood the supreme court's graham decision , it condemns punishments that offend "the evolving standards of decency that mark the progress of a maturing society. state practices , particular state legislative action , read in the light of supreme court precedents , point to the line between permissible and impermissible punishments under this standard . in the case of executing the actually innocent , all but three states have enacted statutes which allow innocent defendants to challenge their erroneous capital convictions , and in two of the remaining three states capital punishment is not a sentencing option . moreover , the supreme court's precedents make it clear that the eighth amendment permits execution of a defendant only after it has been established that he has been responsible for the death of another , and when the execution serves the penological purposes served by the death penalty ( retribution and deterrence ) . having reasoned that the eighth amendment forbids execution of the actually innocent , the district court proceeded to the question of what must a convicted defendant prove to establish that he is actually innocent . its understanding of the case law persuaded the district court to borrow the "clear and convincing evidence" standard from sawyer , which meant , "mr. davis must show by clear and convincing evidence that no reasonable juror would have convicted him in the light of the new evidence. on march 28 , 2011 , it did so without written opinion . only two thought otherwise . moreover , the transfer to district court suggests that a sufficient number of the members of the court believe that under the appropriate circumstances actual innocence might supply the grounds for habeas relief . the court in felker suggested that the statutory impediments to normal habeas review may guide , but they do not necessarily bind , a court asked to entertain an original petition ( "whether or not we are bound by these restrictions , they certainly inform our consideration of original habeas petitions" ) . a divided panel denied his application . in the eyes of the majority , he had failed to overcome either of the two requirements necessary for the presentation of a second habeas petition .