rules . each committee must adopt rules ; those rules must be published in the congressional record not later than march 1 of the first year of each congress . if a committee adopts an amendment to its rules , that change only becomes effective when it is published in the record . ( rule xxvi , paragraph 2 ) . meetings . committees and subcommittees are authorized to meet and to hold hearings when the senate is in session and when it has recessed or adjourned . a committee may not meet on any day ( 1 ) after the senate has been in session for two hours , or ( 2 ) after 2:00 p.m. when the senate is in session . a committee may adopt rules permitting proxy voting . a committee may not permit a proxy vote to be cast unless the absent senator has been notified about the question to be decided and has requested that his or her vote be cast by proxy . a committee may prohibit the use of proxy votes on votes to report . ( rule xxvi , paragraph 7 ( a ) ( 3 ) ) . investigations and subpoenas . each standing committee and its subcommittees is empowered to investigate matters within its jurisdiction and to issue subpoenas for persons and papers . ( rule xxvi , paragraph 1 ) . witnesses selected by the minority . during hearings on any measure or matter , the minority shall be allowed to select witnesses to testify on at least one day , when the chair receives such a request from a majority of the minority party members . this provision does not apply to the appropriations committee . ( rule xxvi , paragraph 4 ( d ) ) . reporting . senate committees may report original bills and resolutions , in addition to those that have been referred to the panel . as stated in the quorum requirement , a majority of the committee must be physically present for a measure or matter to be reported . also , a majority of those present are required to order a measure or matter reported . a senate committee is not required to issue a written report to accompany a measure or matter it reports ; if the committee does write such a report , senate rules specify a series of required elements that must be included in the report . ( rule xxvi , paragraph 7 ( a ) ( 3 ) ; rule xxvi , paragraph 10 ( c ) . in their rules for the 111 th congress , no senate committee uses either monday or friday for its regular meeting day , and the committees are relatively evenly spread over the remaining three days: 6 committees chose tuesdays , 7 committees selected wednesdays , and six committees picked thursdays as their regular meeting days ( see table 1 ) . the armed services committee chose both tuesday and thursday . two committees , appropriations and select aging , meet at the call of the chair . within those categories , some committees , including the armed services ; foreign relations ; indian affairs ; and judiciary provide for meeting at least once a week .