he has not , however , called for an independent judiciary . ( see text box on p . in the same period , the leadership was also shaken by revelations in the foreign media about the vast personal fortunes amassed by relatives of the outgoing premier , wen jiabao , and the incoming party general secretary , xi jinping . despite the turmoil in its top ranks , the party convened its 18 th national congress in november 2012 without public displays of discord , and immediately afterwards appointed a new leadership . xi jinping was named both general secretary of the communist party and chairman of the body that oversees the military , the party's central military commission . he added the title of state president at the first session of the 12 th national people's congress in march 2013 . the npc meeting also produced a new premier of the state council , li keqiang , and other new top state officials . many analysts , both in china and abroad , have questioned the long - term viability of china's current political system , in which the party remains above the law , leadership politics is a black box , and civil society and the right to free speech and association are severely constrained . while he was in office , china's recently retired premier , wen jiabao , called for political reform , including reform of "the leadership system of the party and the state," warning that , "without the success of political structural reform , it is impossible for us to fully institute economic structural reform . the gains we have made in reform and development may be lost , new problems that have cropped up in china's society cannot be fundamentally resolved and such historical tragedy as the cultural revolution may happen again. wen never elaborated , though , on precisely what sort of political reform he hoped to see . china's new communist party general secretary xi jinping raised hopes for a change in the communist party's relationship to the law when he called in december 2012 for full implementation of china's state constitution and declared that , "no organization or individual has the special right to overstep the constitution and law , and any violation of the constitution and the law must be investigated. xi has also repeatedly mentioned the need for the party to police itself , rather than allowing any outside body to do so , however . perhaps tellingly , in a january 2013 speech , he urged party organizations and members to abide not by the state constitution , but rather by the party's constitution , a separate document . the apparent contradictions among xi's statements make his attitude toward political reform unclear . true to its leninist roots , the chinese communist party dominates state and society in china .