hydrokinetic projects are largely in a demonstration phase . how they will perform technically , or whether they will have adverse impacts on aquatic environments or species is still being determined . most independent energy projects are decided on the merits of both a technical and a financial returns analysis . the biggest factor in favor of a hydropower project is the absence of fuel costs , a fact which is responsible for large scale hydro projects delivering some of the cheapest power when levelized costs are considered . new ideas are emerging for capturing energy from the flow of water . hydropower project developers must comply with regulatory requirements . for many small and low - head hydropower projects , the costs of meeting environmental regulations and connecting to the electric grid can constitute a considerable hurdle . given the likely smaller size of projects relative to the costs of development for small and low - head hydro , incentive rates for electricity produced over time may help make a power - based project feasible . as such , with clean energy policy as a driver , government incentives may be needed to help buttress the financial case . further development of small and low - head hydropower on a wide scale will likely come only as a result of a national policy intended to promote clean energy goals . this section will look at some of the new hydropower technologies designed for use in rivers or inland waterways . power generation from rivers and streams is not without controversy , and the capability to produce energy from these sources will have to be balanced against environmental and other public interest concerns . that balance can be aided by research into new technologies and forward - thinking regulations that encourage the development of these resources in cost - effective , environmentally friendly ways which recognize that such facilities , once built , can last for at least 50 years . hydropower project development depends largely on the characteristics of a particular site . the site will determine what type of improvements and structural works are necessary for a project . much time and effort generally goes into pre - design evaluations of locations . this is true regardless of the type of technology that will go into the site but for small and low - head hydro , the feasibility study alone may be a significant burden for a project to overcome . many small and low - head hydropower plants will be run - of - river facilities and therefore will be dependent upon river or stream flows . availability can therefore be an issue since water flow can vary at certain times due to seasonal drought or rainfall conditions . as such , a plant's capacity factor ( i.e. , the ratio of the actual output of a power plant over a period of time and its output if it had operated at full capacity the entire time ) can be diminished . power generation could conceivably stop altogether if water flows are inadequate . hydropower currently accounts for about 6% of the electricity produced in the united states .