appendix a . mortgage - backed securities like single - family mortgages , multifamily and commercial mortgages are frequently pooled into mortgage - backed securities ( mbs ) . mbs allow institutional lenders to supply mortgage money to borrowers throughout the nation , even if these lenders do not have the capability to issue or to service the mortgages . in theory , this allows for greater efficiencies through specialization and economies of scale . some businesses specialize in originating multifamily and commercial mortgages , others in servicing the mortgages , and others , such as commercial banks , life insurance companies , savings institutions , mbs issuers , and government - sponsored enterprises ( gses , i.e. , fannie mae and freddie mac ) , in supplying the funds . other businesses specialize in rating commercial mbs ( cmbs ) . cmbs , like single - family mortgage - backed securities ( commonly abbreviated as mbs ) , are typically created by sponsors that originate ( or sometimes purchase ) a mortgage and sell it to a trust that issues the cmbs . this creates a "bankruptcy remote" entity that should not be affected if the sponsor declares bankruptcy . cmbs , like mbs , can be divided into tranches or classes to better meet potential purchasers' preferences for risk , cash flow , diversification , etc . one typical cmbs prospectus sought to raise $3.3 billion divided into 12 tranches ranging in size from $13 million to $1.2 billion . the tranches had different expected lives , repayment of principal schedules , interest rates , and risk profiles . this cmbs was divided into three separate real estate mortgage investment conduits ( remics ) , which are tax pass - throughs , meaning that the holders of the cmbs classes are taxed , but the remic is not taxed . federal law and irs regulations establish the rules that an mbs servicer must follow to be a remic . for example , to maintain their status as tax pass - throughs and to avoid being taxed , remics must be "passively" managed . before the irs issued revenue procedure 2009-45 , an underlying mortgage could be modified only when "occasioned by default or a reasonably foreseeable default. irs revenue procedure 2009-45 allows servicers to modify mortgages before default if , "[b]ased on all the facts and circumstances , the holder or servicer reasonably believes that there is a significant risk of default of the pre - modification loan upon maturity of the loan or at an earlier date" without jeopardizing the remic's tax status . in addition , the contract between the mbs servicer and the investors ( called the pooling and servicing agreement or psa ) could prevent modifications that the revenue procedures allow . a typical psa prevents the servicers from modifying the underlying loans in ways that change the payment of principal or interest , impair the security of the loan , or reduce any credit enhancements . certain modifications are allowed if default is imminent , the modification could reduce losses on a mortgage , or the modification would not reduce credit enhancements . appendix b . underwriting mortgages underwriting is the process of reviewing and analyzing the risks and potential profitability of a loan application .