each of these provisions is discussed below . 2847 would provide: $500 million for youth activities under title i - b of wia , specifically summer employment programs ; and $750 million for worker training in high growth and emerging industry sectors under title i - d of wia . the workforce investment act of 1998 ( wia ; p.l . 105-220 ) provides job training and related services to unemployed and underemployed individuals . wia programs are administered by the department of labor , primarily through its employment and training administration ( doleta ) . state and local wia training and employment activities are provided through a system of one - stop career centers . authorization of appropriations under wia expired in fy2003 , but funds have continued to be provided for wia programs through annual appropriations acts . wia authorizes numerous job training programs , including state formula grants for youth , adult , and dislocated worker employment and training activities ; job corps ; and national programs , including the native american program , the migrant and seasonal farmworker program , the veterans' workforce investment program , responsible reintegration for young offenders , the prisoner reentry program , career pathways innovation fund , and youthbuild . in fy2010 , the wia programs and activities noted above are funded at $5.5 billion , including $3.0 billion for state formula grants for adult , youth , and dislocated worker activities . as described below , wia programs also received funding under the american recovery and reinvestment act ( arra ) . under the house - passed jobs for main street act , $1.25 billion would be provided for existing workforce development and related programs administered by doleta . these funds would be in addition to amounts already appropriated for fy2010 . specifically , h.r . as noted in the introduction to this report , the house - passed jobs for main street act would provide appropriations for infrastructure investments intended to save or create jobs . some of these appropriations would be made to programs administered by the departments of the interior and agriculture . these programs are not discussed in this report but include resource management activities of the bureau of land management , u.s . fish and wildlife service , national park service , and national forest service . section 1402 of h.r . 2847 directs the secretaries of the interior and agriculture , in administering these funds , to use — to the maximum extent practicable — the public land corps , youth conservation corps , student conservation association , job corps , corps network members , and other partnerships with federal , state , local , tribal , or nonprofit organizations that serve young adults , underserved and minority populations , veterans , and special needs individuals . certain overarching or general provisions included in the american recovery and reinvestment act would also apply to the jobs for main street act , as passed by the house . for example , section 1702 of h.r . 2847 would maintain arra's prohibition on the use of funds for casinos or other gambling establishments , aquariums , zoos , golf courses , or swimming pools .