postal service . the report criticized the allocation of the pension costs between the usps and the federal government for employees who had service both as employees of the post office department and later as employees of the postal service . if an employee had spent 15 years as an employee of the post office department and 15 years as an employee of the usps , for example , the federal government and the usps each would be responsible for half of the cost of that individual's csrs pension . the uspsoig's report estimated that under the current method of allocating the costs of csrs pensions , the postal service has paid $75 billion more into the civil service retirement and disability trust fund than it would have paid if costs were allocated between the federal government and the usps strictly in proportion to length of service . in 2004 , the postal service requested that the opm , which administers the civil service retirement system , reconsider the method by which it allocates csrs pension expenses between the postal service and the u.s. treasury . the opm denied the request on the ground that the allocation method it had developed was consistent with federal law . the opm cited p.l . the usps's financial challenges raise difficult questions: did the usps simply suffer from a "perfect storm" of high retiree health benefits payments and declining revenue ? or is the usps , as currently constituted , incapable of responding to a shifting , and possibly declining , market for its products and services ? answering these questions goes beyond the scope of this report . nevertheless , a number of ideas for incremental reforms have been put forth that would improve the usps's financial condition so that it might continue as a self - funding , government agency . in its annual study of the usps's compliance with federal laws , the postal regulatory commission ( prc ) reported that usps carries 10 types of mail at postage rates that are below their costs . for example , the usps's costs for processing and delivering periodicals exceeded the postage it received by $609 million in fy2011 . currently , federal law forbids the usps from increasing postage rates annually higher than the consumer price index ( 39 u.s.c . 3622 ( d ) ( 1 ) ( a ) ) absent "exceptional or extraordinary circumstances. congress may wish to further examine these disparities and provide the usps with additional pricing flexibilities that would enable it to recover more revenue . in a july 6 , 2010 , filing with the prc , the usps stated that a recent sharp decline in mail volume constituted an exceptional or extraordinary circumstance . it asked the prc to permit it to increase postage rates 5.6% , an amount much higher than the cpi . the prc denied the usps's request on september 30 , 2010 , essentially arguing that the usps failed to demonstrate that its professed need to raise rates was produced by "an exceptional or extraordinary circumstance. instead , the prc stated "postal service's cash flow problem is not a result of the recession and would have occurred whether or not the recession took place .