mrs. croll appealed . the second circuit held in croll v. croll that ne exeat rights are not "rights of custody" for purposes of the hague convention . in conducting what is the most extensive analysis of the five circuit courts to address the issue , the croll majority relied on the text of the hague convention , its drafting history , and practical considerations to reach its conclusion . the furnes court dealt with the same interpretative issue taken up by croll , but came to the contrary conclusion that a ne exeat right is a right of custody . akin to judge sotomayor's reasoning in croll , the furnes majority interpreted "place of residence" in light of the hague convention's purpose . because the object of the treaty is to deter and remedy international abduction , "the right to determine the child's place of residence" must include a right to decide the country the child lives in . but the furnes court argued that in any event a ne exeat right confers a right to determine the child's place of residence in the narrower sense as well . the court argued that a veto right encompasses an effective right to determine a specific place of residence because a parent could grant consent to the child's international relocation on the condition that the child reside in a particular city , or even a particular house . the court cemented its analysis by seizing on article 5 ( a ) 's use of "relating. even assuming a ne exeat right is not a right to "determine" the child's place of residence , the majority observed , it is at least a right relating to the care of the child's person , as well as a right relating to the determination of the child's place of residence . the briefs filed in the supreme court largely mirrored the thrusts and parries of the majority and dissenting opinions in croll and furnes . mrs. abbott argued that the "ordinary meaning" of "custody" entails the primary ability to give physical care to the child , and therefore did not encompass a ne exeat right . she further argued that a ne exeat right was not a right to "determine the place of residence," because that phrase refers to a child's "specific living quarters. mr. abbott recited the purposive argument employed in the croll dissent and the furnes majority . the hague convention was concerned with the removal of children from their home country , that argument goes , and so "place of residence" must have an international meaning rather than an in tra national one . in abbott v. abbott the u.s. supreme court will address an issue that has divided the circuit courts of appeals: whether a ne exeat right is a "right of custody" for purposes of the hague convention ? if so , parents with a ne exeat right can demand the return of their child "wrongfully" taken from the family's home country . in september 2008 , the fifth circuit ruled that a ne exeat right is not a "right of custody" and therefore the removal of a child in violation of ne exeat order is not "wrongful.