figure 1 . map of hondurassource: map resources . adapted by crs graphics . prior to the military - imposed exile of president manuel zelaya , honduras , a central american nation of 7.4 million people , enjoyed 27 years of uninterrupted elected civilian democratic rule . the liberal ( pl ) and national ( pn ) parties have been honduras' two dominant political parties since the military relinquished control of the country in 1982 . both are considered to be ideologically center - right , and there appear to be few major differences between the two . manuel zelaya of the pl was elected president in november 2005 , narrowly defeating his pn rival , porfirio lobo sosa . zelaya — a wealthy landowner with considerable investments in the timber and cattle industries — was generally regarded as a moderate when he was inaugurated to a four - year term in january 2006 . as his term progressed , however , zelaya advanced a number of populist policies , including free school enrollment , an increase in teachers' pay , and a 60% increase in the minimum wage . zelaya also forged closer relations with venezuelan president hugo chávez , joining petrocaribe and the bolivarian alternative for the americas ( alba ) in 2008 . although zelaya's populist policies allowed him to maintain considerable support among certain sectors of honduran society , they alienated many within the traditional economic and political elite . likewise , his administration's inability to achieve concrete results on a number of issues of importance — such as poverty and violent crime — significantly weakened his public standing . opinion polls indicated that zelaya's approval rating had fallen to about 30% prior to his ouster . in march 2009 , president zelaya issued an executive decree introducing a process that eventually could have led to changes to the honduran constitution . the decree called on the national statistics institute ( ine ) to hold a popular referendum on june 28 , 2009 , to determine if the country should include a fourth ballot box during the general elections in november 2009 . the fourth ballot would consult hondurans about whether the country should convoke a national constituent assembly to approve a new constitution . in may 2009 , zelaya repealed the march decree and issued a new decree — not published until june 25 , 2009 — that made the referendum non - binding and removed the reference to a new constitution . the non - binding referendum would have asked hondurans , "do you agree that in the general elections of 2009 , a fourth ballot box should be installed in which the people decide on the convocation of a national constituent assembly ? zelaya argued that the constitution — drafted in 1982 — should be amended to reflect the "substantial and significant changes" that have taken place in honduran society in recent years . on june 28 , 2009 , shortly before the polls were to open for the non - binding referendum , the honduran military surrounded the presidential residence , arrested president zelaya , and flew him to exile in costa rica . the military also confiscated all referendum materials from polling places across the country .