the employer requirements under ppaca do not depend on the funding for an employer plan . most americans with health insurance coverage obtain such coverage through the private sector . moreover , most private coverage is provided through an employer to workers and dependents of workers . such employment - based coverage may either be purchased from an insurance carrier ( fully insured health plan ) , or funded directly by the employer ( self - insured health benefits ) . health insurance , then , provides some protection against the possibility of substantial financial loss due to high health care expenses . private health insurance can be provided to groups of people that are drawn together by an employer or other organization , such as a trade union . such groups are generally formed for some purpose other than obtaining insurance , like employment . when insurance is provided to a group , it is referred to as "group coverage" or "group insurance. in the group market , the entity that purchases health insurance on behalf of a group is referred to as the plan "sponsor. consumers who are not associated with a group may be able to obtain private health coverage by purchasing it directly from an insurer in the individual ( or nongroup ) insurance market . the 111 th congress passed the patient protection and affordable care act ( "ppaca," p.l . 111-148 ) ; president obama signed it into law on march 23 , 2010 . on march 30 , 2010 , ppaca was amended by the health care and education reconciliation act of 2010 ( "reconciliation," p.l . ppaca imposes new requirements on individuals , employers , and health plans ; restructures the private health insurance market ; sets minimum standards for health coverage ; and provides financial assistance to certain individuals and , in some cases , small employers . among the provisions in ppaca are ones that would have a major impact on private health insurance coverage , including self - insured plans . under federal law , self - insured plans are considered to be a type of "group health plan. ppaca refers to this definition of group health plan and applies certain insurance reforms to such a plan . because ppaca employs a patchwork approach in specifying which type of private plan would be subject to which reform , the impact on self - insured plans depends on the provision being considered . for example , group health plans will be subject to the prohibition on coverage exclusions for preexisting health conditions , but not subject to community rating rules under ppaca . in addition , ppaca includes grandfathering provisions for existing health insurance plans . a group health plan or health insurance coverage ( either nongroup or group ) , in which a person was enrolled on the date of enactment , is grandfathered and exempt from most insurance reforms . therefore , self - insured plans that existed on date of enactment are grandfathered plans and subject only to a handful of the private insurance reforms .