denuclearization was not an announced goal of the visit . on november 17 , north korean general kim jong - gak , the first vice director of the general political bureau and an influential leader in the north korean army , visited beijing . these military exchanges reversed the split between the armies of the two countries after military - to - military ties were virtually severed in the late 1950s when kim il - sung conducted a mass purge of the so - called pro - chinese "yanan faction" in the north korean military . after the may 2009 nuclear test , it became apparent that the influence of the military on dprk policy had grown , and china apparently felt the need to re - establish communication channels with the korean people's army . it also must be apparent to pyongyang that its alliance relationship with china is not nearly as operational as the u.s. alliance with south korea and that strengthened military ties with china are crucial as it seeks to increase its security . in 2010 , kim jong - il visited china for the fifth and sixth times . kim had gone to china in 2000 , 2001 , 2004 , and 2006 , so more than three years had passed since his last visit . when chinese premier wen jiabao met with kim jong - il in october 2009 , he had invited kim to visit china again . the march 2010 sinking of the south korean naval ship , the choenan , allegedly by north korea ( that killed 46 sailors ) and the subsequent north korean shelling of yeonpyeong island on november 23 , 2010 ( that killed at least four south koreans ) placed beijing in a delicate position . anxious not to disturb the planned january 2011 hu - obama summit in washington , dc , china reportedly got north korea to back off its threats of nuclear war if south korea went ahead with live - fire exercises on december 6 , 2010 , on the disputed island . china , with its huge economy and rapid rate of growth , is the lifeline that keeps the dprk economy alive . china not only provides needed food , equipment , and consumer goods , but it stands as a model of how a backwards , command - type economy can develop without compromising its socialist ideals . for several years , beijing has been trying to induce the dprk to undertake economic reforms similar to those pursued by china over the past quarter century . the rise of markets and other "reforms" that have occurred in north korea , however , have resulted primarily from a "bottom up" process and from necessity as the central government faltered on its ability to deliver food and living essentials through its distribution system . still , inflows of consumer goods from china and an increasing number of cooperative industrial projects , primarily in the northern korean provinces , have created a market - based means of generating income and distributing goods to families . north korea's leaders have displayed mixed reactions to this chinese penetration into their economy and the concomitant spread of private markets .