what should nasa do ? rapid downsizing and abrupt redirection should be avoided because they are disruptive , can take time to recover from , and can create risk as operations experience is lost . robustness . sufficient human resources and research infrastructure should be maintained so that the nation can ramp up selected activities quickly in response to changing national needs or scientific breakthroughs . the academies report did not , however , actually employ these criteria to prioritize the goals it proposed . based on this wide variety of objectives , nasa has established programs in human spaceflight , science , aeronautics , and education . the largest and most visible effort , in human spaceflight , has faced considerable uncertainty about its proper scope and aims . the content of the science , aeronautics , and education programs is less controversial but still faces questions about scope , balance , and other issues . since its first launch in april 1981 , the space shuttle has been the only u.s. vehicle capable of carrying humans into space . after a few remaining flights during 2011 , the space shuttle program is scheduled to end . although some advocates and policy makers would like to extend the program , technical and management issues are making that ever more difficult as the scheduled termination approaches . congress's attention is increasingly on managing the transition of the shuttle workforce and facilities and on addressing the projected multi - year gap in u.s. access to space between the last shuttle flight and the first flight of its successor . the iss is composed of crew living space , laboratories , remote manipulator systems , solar arrays to generate electricity , and other elements . launched separately , these elements were assembled in space . rotating crews have occupied the iss , each for a period of four to six months , since november 2000 . when the space station was first announced , its assembly was to be complete by 1994 . in 1998 , when construction actually began , it was expected to be complete by 2002 , with operations through at least 2012 . how should these competing goals be prioritized ? in order to accomplish its broad goals , how should nasa balance its major programs in human spaceflight , robotic spaceflight , aeronautics research , and education ? in the human spaceflight program , which is larger than all the others put together , should the agency's goal be exploration of the moon , mars , or some other destination ? what should the top priorities be for nasa's science and aeronautics programs ? once these questions are decided , how should their answers be implemented ? what new space vehicles are needed ? should they be government - owned or commercial ? what should be done with existing programs , such as the space shuttle and the international space station ? this report analyzes these questions and some possible answers . it also addresses a number of cross - cutting issues , such as nasa's interactions with other federal agencies and the growing role of the commercial space industry .