appendix a . legislative history of the visa functions in the homeland security act of 2002 when the 107 th congress weighed the creation of the department of homeland security , considerable debate surfaced about whether or not any or all visa issuance functions should be located in the new department . enactment of p.l . 107-296 addressed most of these issues , but a few concerns remained after the implementation of the act . varied viewpoints are discussed below . as announced on june 6 , 2002 , the administration's proposal for a homeland security department would have included immigration and naturalization service ( ins ) among the agencies transferred to a new homeland security department . the stated goal of the administration's proposal was to consolidate into a single federal department many of the homeland security functions performed by units within various federal agencies and departments . the administration would have placed all functions of ins under the border and transportation security division of the proposed department . the narrative of the june 6 , 2002 , plan did not go into details , however , it appeared that under the plan consular affairs in the department of state would have retained its visa issuance responsibilities . this proposal precipitated considerable discussion on where the visa issuance should be located . option: locating all functions in dhs voices in support of moving consular affairs's visa issuance responsibilities to the proposed dhs asserted that consular officers emphasize the promotion of tourism , commerce , and cultural exchange and are lax in screening foreign nationals who want to come the united states . media reports of the "visa express" that dos established in saudi arabia to allow travel agents to pre - screen nonimmigrants raised considerable concern , especially reports that several of the september 11 terrorists allegedly entered through "visa express. critics argued that visa issuance was the real "front line" of homeland security against terrorists and that the responsibility for this function should be in a department that did not have competing priorities of diplomatic relations and reciprocity with foreign governments . some argued that keeping the ins adjudications and consular affairs visa issuances in different departments would perpetuate the types of mistakes and oversights that stem from inadequate coordination and competing chains of command . most importantly , they emphasized the need for immigration adjudications and visa issuances — as well as immigration law enforcement and inspections activities — to be under one central authority that has border security as its primary mission . option: locating functions in different agencies proponents of retaining visa issuances in consular affairs asserted that only consular officers in the field would have the country - specific knowledge to make decisions about whether an alien was admissible and that staffing 250 diplomatic and consular posts around the world would stretch the proposed homeland security department beyond its capacity . they also pointed out that under current law , consular decisions are not appealable and warned that transferring this adjudication to homeland security might make it subject to judicial appeals or other due process considerations . the mrv fees , as some point out , have become an important funding stream , contributing almost 10% of dos total budget .