appendix b . exception countries the following lists of countries , which are subject to change periodically , are taken from the electronic code of federal regulations ( e - cfr ) with data current as of june 1 , 2009 , and the social security administration's program operations manual system ( poms ) . the e - cfr is available at http: / / ecfr.gpoaccess.gov / . the poms are available at https: / / secure.ssa.gov / apps10 / poms.nsf / aboutpoms . social insurance or pension system countries under the alien nonpayment provision , a noncitizen's benefits are suspended if he or she remains outside the united states for more than 6 consecutive months , unless one of several broad exceptions is met . for example , an alien may receive benefits outside the united states if he or she is a citizen of a country that has a social insurance or pension system that pays benefits to eligible u.s. citizens residing outside that country . the following countries meet the social insurance or pension system exception in section 202 ( t ) ( 2 ) of the social security act: albania , antigua and barbuda , argentina , austria , bahamas , barbados , belgium , belize , bolivia , bosnia - herzegovina , brazil , burkina faso , canada , chile , colombia , costa rica , cote d'ivoire , croatia , cyprus , czech republic , denmark , dominica , dominican republic , ecuador , el salvador , finland , france , gabon , grenada , guatemala , guyana , hungary , iceland , jamaica , jordan , latvia , liechtenstein , lithuania , luxembourg , macedonia , malta , marshall islands , mexico , federated states of micronesia , monaco , montenegro , nicaragua , norway , palau , panama , peru , philippines , poland , portugal , st. kitts and nevis , st. lucia , samoa , san marino , serbia , slovakia , slovenia , south korea , spain , sweden , switzerland , the netherlands , trinidad - tobago , turkey , united kingdom , uruguay , venezuela ( ssa poms , section rs 02610.015 ( status of countries for applying exceptions based on citizenship ) , available at https: / / secure.ssa.gov / apps10 / poms.nsf / lnx / 0302610015 ! opendocument ) treaty obligation countries to receive benefits outside the united states , alien dependents and survivors must have lived in the united states previously for at least five years ( lawfully or unlawfully ) , and the family relationship to the worker must have existed during that time . the law provides several broad exceptions to the five - year u.s. residency requirement for alien dependents and survivors . for example , an alien dependent or survivor is exempt from the u.s. residency requirement if he or she is a citizen of a treaty obligation country ( i.e. , if nonpayment of benefits would be contrary to a treaty between the united states and the individual's country of citizenship ) . the following countries meet the "treaty obligation" exception in section 202 ( t ) ( 3 ) of the social security act: germany , greece , ireland , israel , italy , japan , netherlands* ( 20 c.f.r .