, a 2002 case . in swierkiewicz , a unanimous court declined to apply a heightened pleading standard to an employment discrimination suit . first , "the tenet that a court must accept as true all of the allegations contained in a complaint is inapplicable to legal conclusions. in at least some such cases , however , language from majority or dissenting opinions suggests that a dismissal might not have been warranted prior to those rulings . thus , it seems probable that at least to some extent , the decisions will decrease the quantity of civil complaints which survive a motion to dismiss . moreover , while this decrease may not be perceivable from statistics on the total number of motions to dismiss granted , its effect may be meaningful for particular subsets of claims . whether decreases will continue or are a negative result is a subject for debate . commentators who view the iqbal ruling as a positive development note that an increase in both the quantity and complexity of federal civil cases in recent decades produced delay and increased the costs of civil litigation . they may argue that the iqbal ruling will aid federal courts to weed out the weakest cases in a system in which delays and expense restrict litigants' access to the federal courts . practically , they may also argue that plaintiffs' attorneys will respond to the twombly and iqbal decisions by crafting more detailed complaints . the plaintiffs in twombly were a group of television and internet subscribers . filing a complaint in the u.s. district court for the southern district of new york , they sued four "incumbent local exchange carriers," also known as "baby bells," alleging that the defendants had engaged in a conspiracy in violation of section 1 of the sherman antitrust act , 15 u.s.c . that section prohibits "a contract , combination in the form of trust or otherwise , or conspiracy , in restraint of trade or commerce[.] to support their conspiracy allegation , the plaintiffs principally alleged facts intended to show that the defendants had engaged in "parallel conduct," that is , adjusted prices and taken other actions in a similar timeframe and manner . the defendants brought a rule 12 ( b ) ( 6 ) motion to dismiss the plaintiffs' complaint for failure to state a claim , and the district court granted the motion . it held that even if true , the facts alleging parallel conduct would constitute only one piece of evidence in the antitrust case , and would not , alone , constitute a sufficient basis on which to prove that the defendant companies had engaged in a conspiracy in violation of 15 u.s.c . the u.s. court of appeals for the second circuit reversed , but the u.s. supreme court reversed again . echoing the district court's reasoning , justice souter's opinion for the court emphasized that the plaintiffs alleged no facts other than parallel conduct that would point to the existence of an unlawful conspiracy .