reg . the caa preempts state controls on new motor vehicle emissions , but offers california , and california alone , the opportunity to request a waiver of caa preemption . epa must grant the preemption waiver if certain conditions are met . the importance of this "california waiver" is magnified by the fact that once epa grants the waiver , states that adopt motor vehicle emission standards identical to california's also partake of the preemption waiver for the same vehicles . in the present case , california sought a waiver of caa preemption for its ghg emissions limits for 2009 and later model year motor vehicles . epa denied the waiver on finding that the state did not need those emission limits to meet "compelling and extraordinary conditions," as required by the caa . ( see "july 8 , 2009" for epa's reversal of this denial. ) july 30: epa issues advance notice of proposed rulemaking regarding ghg emissions from new motor vehicles . 73 fed . reg . this document sets out epa's view of the legal implications were epa to make a positive endangerment finding for ghgs from new motor vehicles — as discussed in the introduction of this report , "option ( a ) " offered by the supreme court . it is purely an informational document , prepared after the george w. bush administration decided in late 2007 not to issue an endangerment finding for new motor vehicle ghg emissions , but rather to leave that decision to the next administration . since these standards did not take effect until january 2 , 2011 , psd and title v permitting requirements also did not go into effect until then — or later under epa's tailoring rule finalized june 3 , 2010 . the deferral , to allow epa more time to examine how to account for such emissions , was for three years . during this period , biogenic emissions were not required to be counted for determining whether a source is subject to psd and title v permitting . the deferral applied only to co 2 emissions and did not affect non - ghg pollutants or other ghgs emitted from the combustion of biomass fuel . september 15 : epa and nhtsa jointly finalize rules setting ghg emission standards and fuel economy standards for 201 4 and later model year medium - and heavy - duty vehicles . 76 fed . reg . these rules , weighing in at 958 pages ( including preamble ) , respond to a presidential memorandum of may 21 , 2010 , as well as the caa . epa's emission standards and nhtsa's fuel economy standards apply to three categories of heavy - duty vehicles: combination tractors , heavy - duty pickup trucks and vans , and vocational vehicles . the rules include separate standards for the engines that power combination tractors and vocational vehicles . certain rules are exclusive to epa , such as epa's hydrofluorocarbon standards to control leakage from air conditioning systems in combination tractors , and pickup trucks and vans . epa's emission standards began with model year 2014 . nhtsa's fuel economy standards are voluntary in model years 2014 and 2015 , becoming mandatory for most vehicle categories in model year 2016 .