what is going on ? how should this be understood ? i wish to remind you also that one of the conditions for receiving the loan was the withdrawal of the u.s. military base from kyrgyzstan. russian websites launched a number of anti - bakiyev articles in march 2010 , causing the kyrgyz government to block the websites . the russian embassy in bishkek denounced the efforts to block the websites . according to one kyrgyz analyst , immediately after bakiyev had agreed in june 2009 to permit the u.s. manas transit center to stay in place , russia began to increase contacts with kyrgyz opposition leaders . according to one u.s. analyst , russian umbrage increased after reports in march 2010 that the united states might help fund and build an anti - terrorism training center in batken in southern kyrgyzstan ( the united states already had helped kyrgyzstan open a special forces training camp in tokmok , near bishkek , in october 2009 ) , and russia stepped up its contacts with kyrgyz opposition leaders . in another move viewed by many in kyrgyrstan as retaliation against bakiyev , russia had announced in late march 2010 that it would greatly increase customs duties on gasoline and other petroleum products exported to members of the commonwealth of independent states that did not belong to a customs union ( members of the customs union include russia , belarus , and kazakhstan ) . the increased duties disrupted supplies to kyrgyzstan in early april , causing increased prices . the customs duties also may have directly reduced profits gained by kyrgyz firms linked to bakiyev that purchased fuel from russia to sell to the manas transit center . on april 8 , a russian official reportedly renewed the call for kyrgyzstan to close the manas transit center ( see below ) . on march 29 , 2010 , nikolay bordyuzha , the secretary general of the collective security treaty organization ( csto ; a russia - led military cooperation group that also includes armenia , belarus , and the central asian states , except turkmenistan ) , visited kyrgyzstan and stated that "there are no grounds to speak about any kind of chill in russian - kyrgyz relations... . the russian and kyrgyz presidents have a busy schedule working [together]. bakiyev reported that bordyuzha contacted him during the uprising , but he did not mention whether bordyuzha had offered the csto's assistance in quelling it . bordyuzha led a csto delegation to bishkek on april 9 to assess the situation and make a report to the csto collective security council . the chief of the russian general staff , nikolai makarov , reported that president medvedev had ordered that two paratroop companies comprised of 150 officers and men be deployed to russia's kant airbase east of bishkek , to a naval communication station in chu region , and to a naval test range at issyk - kul "to protect the families of [the russian] military there , if need be. the russian government stressed that the paratroopers were carrying only small arms . further troops reportedly were deployed on april 11 . on april 30 , the russian defense ministry announced that 150 more troops would be deployed to relieve troops sent earlier .