there are only 34 oecd member states . annual reporting of oda to the dac has expanded in recent years to include many non - oecd countries , but the non - oecd reporting is voluntary and irregular . furthermore , it does not include several increasingly important donors , such as brazil , china , russia , india , and south africa . these nations have been invited to participate in the dac reporting process but choose not to for political and technical reasons , as discussed in the "nontraditional donors" section of this report . oda data also exclude private aid resources , which are a rapidly growing , though inconsistent , portion of capital flows to developing countries in recent decades . while comprehensive data on private flows are elusive , private philanthropic donations from dac countries to developing countries have been estimated at about $56 billion for 2010 , and total private capital flows to developing countries that year , including remittances and private investment , are estimated at $329 billion . oda is estimated to have accounted for less than 20% of total oecd economic engagement with developing countries in recent years , prompting many development experts to call for a development coordination strategy that extends beyond official aid to include trade , migration and foreign investment policies . the primary argument for better donor coordination is that aid effectiveness is becoming increasingly undermined by fragmentation . more donors are giving oda than in decades past , and , until recently , many donors were spreading their assistance across a growing number of recipients . the united states , for example , provided oda to 81 countries in 1990 and to 134 in 2011 . almost all the top recipients of oda in 2011 hosted dozens of donors , both bilateral and multilateral . the united states and other donors in recent years have expressed the intent to concentrate their aid in fewer countries and sectors as a means of decreasing fragmentation and improving impact , but significant change is not yet reflected in the oecd data . coordination advocates argue that the profusion of donor agencies in many developing countries causes problems for donors and recipients alike . donors ineligible for oecd membership because of political and economic requirements may not want to cooperate with an organization that denies them this status . smaller donors may resist reporting oda data for fear that their assistance will look insignificant compared to larger donors or to their official rhetoric . others may be reluctant to reveal information about development partners or business models that can be gleaned from oda data and may be politically or commercially sensitive . in addition , south - south donors do not generally place governance or human rights conditions on their aid , as dac donors often do , demonstrating a sensitivity to the view that such conditions are inappropriate interference in the recipient country's internal affairs . a fuller integration into the traditional coordination and effectiveness framework may come with pressure to change this approach . non - governmental donors , such as foundations and faith - based organizations , also face obstacles to full participation on coordination efforts .