109-417 ) , and other legislation . in addition to establishing dhs , congress has created offices and agencies within other cabinet departments and assigned them specific planning activities . some claim the threat is dire and imminent . the congressionally mandated commission on the prevention of wmd proliferation and terrorism concluded that unless the world community acts decisively and with great urgency , it is more likely than not that a weapon of mass destruction will be used in a terrorist attack somewhere in the world by the end of 2013 . the commission further believes that terrorists are more likely to be able to obtain and use a biological weapon than a nuclear weapon . in contrast , other experts assert that the bioterrorism threat is less severe or pressing than that posed by more conventional terrorism or other issues facing the united states . the scientists working group on biological and chemical weapons concluded that public health in the united states faces many challenges ; bioterrorism is just one . policies need to be crafted to respond to the full range of infectious disease threats and critical public health challenges rather than be disproportionately weighted in favor of defense against an exaggerated threat of bioterrorism . stakeholders often measure federal efforts against the perceived magnitude of the threat . thus , those who believe that bioterrorism poses a relatively low threat tend to conclude that the government has done too much . in contrast , those who perceive a greater threat conclude that the federal government needs to do more , whether under existing programs or new ones . many experts come to mixed conclusions: they regard some programs as effective but identify others as insufficient . the federal government's biodefense efforts span many agencies and vary widely in their resources , scope , and approach . for example , the departments of state and defense have cooperated with foreign governments and nongovernmental organizations to engage in nonproliferation , counterproliferation , and foreign disease outbreak detection efforts . the departments of state and commerce have strengthened export controls of materials that could be used for bioterrorism . the department of health and human services ( hhs ) has made investments in public health preparedness ; response planning ; foreign disease outbreak detection ; and research , development , and procurement of medical countermeasures against biological terrorism agents ( see " medical countermeasures " below ) . the intelligence community has engaged in intelligence gathering and sharing regarding bioterrorism . the department of justice performs background checks on people who want to possess certain dangerous pathogens . the department of homeland security ( dhs ) has engaged in preparedness , response , and recovery - related activities , developed increased capabilities in environmental biosurveillance ( see " biosurveillance " below ) , and invested in expanding domestic bioforensics capabilities . the environmental protection agency ( epa ) has explored post - event infrastructure decontamination . many agencies , jointly or separately , have invested in expanded biodefense infrastructure , including public and private high - containment laboratories for research , diagnostic , and forensics purposes .