sec . 1107 of the reconciliation bill would set the utilization rate at 75% in 2011 and in subsequent years . cbo estimates that th is change to section 3135 would increase cost savings by $1.2 billion over 10 years — from - $1.1 billion over 10 years for ppaca to - $2.3 billion over 10  years for ppaca and h.r . 4872 combined . the medicare physician fee schedule is adjusted geographically for three factors to reflect differences in the cost of resources needed to produce physician services: physician work , practice expense , and medical malpractice insurance . the geographic adjustments are indices — known as geographic practice cost indices ( gpcis ) — that reflect how each area compares to the national average in a "market basket" of goods . a value of 1.00 represents an average across all areas . a series of bills set a temporary floor value of 1.00 on the physician work index beginning january 2004 ; most recently , section 134 of the mippa extended the application of this floor when calculating medicare physician reimbursement through december 2009 . section 3102 of ppaca directs the secretary to adjust the practice expense gpci for 2010 to reflect three - fourths of the difference between the relative costs of employee wages and rents in each of the different fee schedule areas and the national averages ( i.e. , a blend of three - fourths local and one - fourth national ) instead of the full difference under prior law . for 2011 , the adjustment is to reflect one - half of the difference between the relative costs of employee wages and rents in each of the different fee schedule areas and the national averages ( i.e. , a blend of one - half local and one - half national ) . the manager's amendment to the reconciliation bill  ( sec . 1108 )  modifies the adjustment for 2010 so that the pe gpci would reflect one - half of the difference for both 2010 and for 2011 . physicians are generally prohibited from referring medicare patients for certain services to facilities in which they ( or their immediate family members ) have an ownership or investment interest . however , among other exceptions , this prohibition does not apply to physicians with ownership or investment interests in a whole hospital . provisions in the ppaca ( sec . 6001 as modified by sec . 10601 ) exempt only those physician - owned hospitals meeting certain requirements from the self - referral prohibition beginning no later than 18 months after the date of enactment . specifically , hospitals that have physician ownership and a provider agreement in operation on august 1 , 2010 , and that met other specified requirements will be exempt from this self - referral ban . if a plan bid is below the benchmark , the plan is paid its bid plus a rebate equal to 75% of the difference between the bid and the benchmark . if a plan bids above the benchmark , the plan is paid the benchmark and must charge each enrollee a premium equal to the difference between the bid and the benchmark .