such years are not included in this report . table 4 presents a timeline of four particular stages of reconciliation action in the house for eight different reconciliation acts . it does not speak to the content of the response . the table also includes the date the house budget committee reported , the number of days between the final included committee submission to the house budget committee , and the date when the house budget committee reported . the data in table 2 show that directed committees have sometimes submitted reconciliation legislation before the due date , at the due date , and after the due date , and in some cases , committees never formally responded . these methods vary by chamber . the following section provides information on the timing of committee responses to reconciliation directives during the period covering 1989-2015 and offers insight on the extent to which the submission due date included in a reconciliation instruction is a predictor for the timing of committee responses . table 2 provides information on the timing of house committee responses to reconciliation directives . the table includes only reconciliation acts that involved multiple committee directives . it includes the relevant reconciliation act , the number of directives to house committees included in the budget resolution , the number of committee responses that were submitted on time , the number of responses that were submitted late , the number of house committee directives that were not formally responded to , and the number of days before or after the deadline that the last reporting committee submitted its response . further , the table shows that reconciliation legislation has been passed by the house regardless of whether committees reported late or whether some committees never formally submitted a response . further , the table shows that reconciliation legislation has been passed by the senate regardless of whether committees submitted late or whether some committees never formally submitted a response . table 3 illustrates at least three practices of the senate budget committee . first , the budget committee has sometimes delayed the reporting of a reconciliation bill to allow a committee that has missed its deadline to submit . conversely , it shows that in some cases , the budget committee has not waited for all committees to submit before reporting the omnibus reconciliation bill . lastly , it shows that once the senate budget committee has received the last submission to be included in the omnibus , it reports the legislation without substantial delay . table 2 illustrates at least three practices of the house budget committee . first , the budget committee has sometimes delayed the reporting of an omnibus reconciliation bill in order to allow a committee that has missed its directed date to submit its response . conversely , it shows that in some cases , the budget committee has not waited for all committees to submit before reporting the bill . lastly , it shows that , except for in one case , once the house budget committee has received the last submission to ultimately be included in the omnibus bill , it reports the legislation without substantial delay .