2499 was similar to h.r . 900 as introduced in the 110 th congress . a possible outcome of this process is puerto rican statehood . if puerto rico's citizens vote in favor of statehood in the series of plebiscites as outlined in h.r . 2499 , then puerto rico would , most likely , be entitled to five representatives in the house of representatives as well as two united states senators . if the size of the house remains fixed at the legally mandated 435-seat limit , then five states would likely have one fewer representative than they would have had if puerto rico had not become a state . another option that the house could choose , given the entrance of another state , is to increase the size of the house . consequently , only the total 2010 resident population for puerto rico is used in table 2 . the strong 20 th century tradition that the total number of representatives in the house of representatives should total 435 members might prevent an increase in the house size should puerto rico be admitted to statehood . the u.s. constitution ( article i , section 2 ) requires that "representatives shall be apportioned among the several states according to their respective numbers , counting the whole number of persons in each state. the requirement that districts must be apportioned among states means that district boundaries cannot cross state lines . what would the apportionment of the house of representatives look like if puerto rico were to become the 51 st state ? congress is free to choose a house size within these parameters by changing the relevant law . thus , the house size of 435 may be altered by changing statutory law rather than by enacting a constitutional amendment . based on the 2010 apportionment population of 309,183,463 from table 2 above , the house could be as large as 10,306 representatives ( based on the constitutional maximum of one representative for every 30,000 persons ) . statehood for puerto rico would raise the maximum to 10,430 members . the house size was increased in every decade except one in the 19 th century to accommodate the growth of the country's population , but the permanent increases stopped after the 1910 census , when the house reached 435 members . as noted previously , the house size was increased temporarily to 437 in 1960 , to accommodate the admission of alaska and hawaii as states , but the total went back to 435 in 1963 , with the new reapportionment following the 1960 census . although one cannot say for sure why the house size has not been permanently increased since the 1910 census , the arguments most often raised center on efficiency and cost . proponents of the status quo suggest that a larger house would work less efficiently and at greater cost , due to member and staff salaries and allowances . proponents of increasing the house size often argue that other legislative bodies seem to work well with larger memberships , and less populous districts might give minorities greater representation in congress .