appendix a . technologies used to monitor and censor web sites and web - based communications key - word list blocking this is a simple type of filtration where a government drops any internet packets featuring certain keywords , such as "protest" or "proxy. domain name system ( dns ) poisoning dns poisoning intentionally introduces errors into the internet's directory service to misdirect the original request to another ip address . ip blocking ip blocking is one of the most basic methods that governments use for censorship , as it simply prevents all packets going to or from targeted ip addresses . human rights groups have protested that yahoo ! and google censor and remove material deemed sensitive by host governments on country - specific search engines . microsoft is said to censor chinese versions of its blog platforms . human rights groups also charge that yahoo ! has provided chinese authorities personal identifying information about users that has allowed the government to identify and arrest individuals for statements made on the web . a representative of google , inc. acknowledged the problem of government involvement , noting as our ... burma experiences indicate , our products are platforms for free expression , transparency , and accountability . because of this , we often face efforts by governments throughout the world to restrict or deny access to our products . the global online freedom act of 2009 ( gofa ) ( h.r . 2271 ) , introduced by representative christopher smith , would mandate that companies selling internet technologies and services to repressive countries take actions to combat censorship and protect personally identifiable information . some believe , however , that technology can offer a complementary and , in some cases , better and more easily implemented solution to prevent government censorship . hardware and internet services , in and of themselves , are neutral elements of the internet ; it is how they are implemented by various countries that makes internet access "repressive. for example , hardware , such as routers , is needed to provide internet service everywhere . however , hardware features intended for day - to - day internet traffic management , conducted by internet service providers ( isps ) and governments for benign purposes , can be misused . repressive governments are able to use these features to censor traffic and monitor use — sometimes using them to identify specific individuals for prosecution . it is not currently feasible to remove those features from the product , even when sold to countries that use those features to repress political speech . on the other hand , internet services , such as google , are often tailored for deployment to specific countries . such tailoring is done to bring the company's products and services in line with the laws of that country , and not with the end goal of allowing the country to repress and censor its citizenry . in many cases , tailoring does not raise many questions about free speech and political repression because the country is not considered to be a repressive regime .