for more information about p.l . 111-372 , see crs report rl33508 , section 202 and other hud rental housing programs for low - income elderly residents , by [author name scrubbed] . the fy2012 hud appropriations law ( p.l . 112-55 ) contained several preservation - related provisions . as noted earlier , the law authorized a modified version of the president's rad initiative , which will be available to section 8 moderate rehabilitation properties . further , the law funds tenant protection vouchers for residents of some properties with maturing mortgages , expiring rap contracts , or expiring elihpa / lihprha use restrictions . it also authorizes the conversion of tenant protection vouchers to project - based vouchers for some residents in rap and rent supplement properties , permits hud to extend for one year expiring rap and rent supplement contracts , and extends the authority for the mark - to - market program through october 1 , 2015 . finally , the law continued provisions from previous years requiring hud to maintain project - based assistance contracts on hud - held properties and permitting the transfer of project - based assistance contracts between properties . appendix a. preservation properties at a glance appendix b. glossar . these attempts met with varying success . this report does not address the programs of the department of agriculture's rural housing service . figure 1 illustrates the universe of rental units that were created as part of the six programs discussed in this report . the large circle in the center represents the housing units that receive rental assistance through the section 8 , rent supplement , and rap programs . the circle on the left represents housing units that continue to have active financing through the section 221 ( d ) ( 3 ) bmir and section 236 mortgage insurance programs , and the circle on the right represents units that continue to have active financing through the section 202 loan program . as can be seen in the diagram , the area of overlap between the left and center circles represents section 221 ( d ) ( 3 ) bmir and section 236 units that also receive some form of rental assistance , while the overlap between the right and center circles shows section 202 units that receive some form of rental assistance . see also table a - 1 , in appendix a , which provides a summary of the properties at issue in assisted housing preservation and their characteristics . this report is divided into six main sections . the first section provides greater detail about the six programs for which housing preservation is an issue . the second section describes how affordability restrictions come to an end . in the case of financing assistance , this can occur through mortgage prepayment or maturation , and in the case of rental assistance , it can occur when contracts expire . and in cases of both financing and rental assistance , properties may become unavailable as affordable housing due to physical deterioration . the second section also discusses what happens to tenants when affordability restrictions end . in the third section , the report describes efforts by both congress and hud to extend affordability restrictions in these programs .