certain sales are exempt from this tax . aca will impose an annual fee on certain manufacturers and importers of branded prescription drugs ( including biological products and excluding orphan drugs ) . according to the jct , this limitation on executive compensation is projected to raise $600 million over a 10-year period ( see table 1 ) . according to the bureau of labor statistics ( bls ) survey , 39% of all workers in 2010 had access to a health care flexible spending account . each employer may set their limits on fsa contributions , with most employers setting the maximum contribution limit to $5,000 . beginning in 2013 , aca will limit the amount of annual fsa contributions to $2,500 per account and index for general inflation in subsequent years . given that the average annual contribution was $1,426 in 2009 , this provision will not likely affect the average contributor to fsas . however , the maximum limitation will impact those who have high out - of - pocket expenses . according to jct , this provision is projected to increase revenues by $13 billion over 10 years ( see table 1 ) . hsas are also tax - advantaged accounts that allow individuals to fund unreimbursed medical expenses ( deductibles , copayments , and services not covered by insurance ) on a pre - tax basis . eligible individuals can establish and fund accounts when they have a qualifying high deductible health plan and no other health plan ( with some exceptions ) . unlike fsas , hsas may be rolled over and the funds accumulated over time . distributions from an hsa that are used for qualified medical expenses are not included in taxable income . distributions that are not used for qualified medical expenses are taxable as ordinary income and , under current law , an additional 10% penalty tax is imposed for those under the age of 65 . aca will raised this penalty on non - qualified distributions from 10% to 20% of the disbursed amount effective in 2011 . data are not available on the share of individuals taking hsa distributions for non - qualified expenses . however , account balances overall do increase significantly with the length of time the hsa is held . for example , in 2010 , hsa balances for accounts held more than five years were $2,231 compared with $962 for those held for six months to one year . this would mean that , on average , the withdrawal penalty for non - qualified distributions for someone who held the account for more than five years would increase from $223 to $446 under aca . according to the jct , this provision will raise $1.3 billion over 10 years ( see table 1 ) . while this does not raise a significant amount of revenue , it may discourage individuals from using the funds for non - qualified medical expenses and instead accumulate the funds for use in the future . effective in 2011 , aca also modifies the definition of qualified medical expenses . under current law prior to aca , qualified medical expenses for fsas , hsas , and hras could include over - the - counter medications .