app . ยง 547 ( b ) ( 3 ) , which pertains to debts owed to the united states as a result of life insurance premiums and interest guaranteed by the united states . in 2006 , a number of the identified provisions that relate to military pay were changed to reference the repayment provisions of 37 u.s.c . ยง 303a ( e ) . this subsection reads as follows: an obligation to repay united states under this subsection is , for all purposes , a debt owed the united states . a discharge in bankruptcy under title 11 does not discharge a person from such debt if the discharge order is entered less than five years after ( a ) the date of the termination of the agreement or contract on which the debt is based ; or ( b ) in the absence of such an agreement or contract , the date of the termination of the service on which the debt is based . table 1 lists provisions that are not codified in the bankruptcy code but that nonetheless limit or prohibit discharge of debts in bankruptcy . the table was compiled through a series of searches using both lexis - nexis and westlaw . the initial search was broad , using "bankruptcy or 'title 11'" as the search parameters in the lexis - nexis version of the u.s. code . this search produced 2,235 results , the majority of which were within title 11 . initially , it appeared that all provisions outside the bankruptcy code were related to either the military or intelligence communities . titles 10 ( armed forces ) , 14 ( coast guard ) , 32 ( national guard ) , 37 ( pay and allowances of the uniformed services ) , 38 ( veterans' benefits ) , 42 ( the public health and welfare ) and 50 ( war and national defense ) were identified as the titles most likely to include such provisions ; therefore the initial results were focused to search only those titles . reviewing those results identified specific language pertaining to the effect of bankruptcy on particular types of indebtedness . three more focused searches were performed and revealed ten additional provisions outside the bankruptcy code . five were found using "bankruptcy or 'title 11' and discharge w / s 'not release'" ; four were found using "bankruptcy or 'title 11' w / s nondischarge" ; one was found using "bankruptcy or 'title 11' w / s released w / s 'no obligation.' these searches produced results in three additional titles of the u.s. code: titles 20 ( education ) , 25 ( indians ) , and 47 ( telegraphs , telephones , and radiotelegraphs ) . these search strategies revealed 53 instances outside of title 11 in which the u.s. code limits the effect of bankruptcy on discharge of indebtedness . each of these is identified in table 1 . there may be other provisions that use different terms and , therefore , were not found by the searches . generally , the provisions are listed in the numerical order of the title and section in which the provision is currently found .