appendix b . these provisions were not included in p.l . congress has enacted an increasing number of environmental laws , as well as major amendments to these statutes , over three decades following epa's creation . annual appropriations provide the funds necessary for epa to carry out its responsibilities under these laws , such as the regulation of air and water quality , use of pesticides and toxic substances , management and disposal of solid and hazardous wastes , and cleanup of environmental contamination . epa also awards grants to assist state , tribal , and local governments in controlling pollution in order to comply with federal environmental requirements . table b - 1 presents fy2007-fy2011 enacted appropriations for epa by each of the eight accounts . figure b - 1 presents a history of total discretionary budget authority for epa from fy1976 through fy2010 , and the president's fy2011 budget request , as reported by the office of management and budget ( omb ) in the "historical tables" accompanying the president's budget of the u.s. government , fiscal year 2011 . levels of agency budget authority prior to fy1976 were not reported by omb in the historical tables . in figure b - 1 , the levels of discretionary budget authority are presented in nominal dollars as reported by omb , and are adjusted for inflation by crs to reflect the trend in real dollar values over time . 149 had proposed no fy2011 funding for the diesel emission reductions grant program . table 6 below presents a comparison of fy2011 enacted appropriations , fy2010 enacted appropriations , and the president's fy2011 request for selected air quality activities within various epa appropriations accounts . much of the day - to - day operations of the nation's air pollution control programs ( i.e. , monitoring , permitting , enforcement , and developing site - specific regulations ) is done by the states , not epa . the clean air act authorizes federal grants to the states for up to 60% of the cost of running these programs ; for the last decade , however , the grant amounts have stagnated , with the federal contribution falling to as little as 23% of the total cost of state air pollution programs . in the current recession , state revenues have declined , and air programs , like other state spending , have been under severe budgetary pressures . in response , the $236.1 million fy2011 enacted appropriations for grants to the states for implementation of clean air act programs was an increase above the fy2010 enacted appropriations of $226.6 million in fy2010 , but below the $309.1 million included in the president's request for fy2011 . the requested increase was in response to an anticipated rise in state workloads . epa is in the process of reviewing air quality standards for the six most widespread ( "criteria" ) air pollutants , and has either promulgated or proposed strengthening five of the six . as these standards are finalized , the states will face a need to expand their monitoring networks , identify nonattainment areas , and develop and implement plans for bringing nonattainment areas into attainment . storage tanks are not designed for higher blends of ethanol .