, low productivity ) . in effect , long - term unemployment can stigmatize workers . firms may also be reluctant to hire the long - term unemployed because they believe the group's skills have atrophied during their lengthy time away from the workplace . ( see figure 1 . ) another way to look at the trend in long - term unemployment is to examine the number of long - term unemployed as a share of all unemployed . the long - term unemployed as a share of all unemployed was 29.6% in june 2007 , up from 17.3% in december 2007 . this measure also continued to rise after the end of the recession , rising to 46.0% in may 2010 . in october 2010 , 41.8% of unemployed workers had been looking for work for more than 26 weeks . , the extent to which additions exceed separations from employer payrolls ) and reduction in unemployment , including long - term unemployment . in the early stages of an economic recovery , increased demand for goods and services first slows the flow of workers into unemployment . while short - term unemployment consequently falls , the average duration of unemployment increases for some time after the end of a recession . once employers become confident that an economic upturn is firmly in place , they go beyond increasing the work hours of current employees to hiring more workers . but , a return to economic growth may not be sufficient to fully overcome the reemployment problems of the long - term unemployed . employers may rank job applicants by their duration of unemployment and hire from the front of the queue ( i.e. , the short - term unemployed ) because they consider lengthy unemployment to be a signal of poor worker quality ( i.e. in addition , businesses may discriminate against older workers , who are more likely than younger workers to be among the long - term unemployed . a variety of employment policies might be considered to ameliorate these labor market difficulties . offering wage subsidies to firms that hire the long - term unemployed compensates employers for the group's actual or perceived skill shortcomings . so , too , does providing a training subsidy to companies that hire workers with arguably deteriorated skills due to their lengthy bout of unemployment . passage of a temporary public jobs program early in a recession may prevent the skill erosion potentially induced by long - term unemployment . the latter was one of the rationales for enacting job creation programs during the great depression . and , employers might be discouraged from failing to hire older displaced workers through stepped up enforcement of workplace discrimination laws . a return to economic growth also may be insufficient to fully overcome the reemployment problems of the long - term unemployed given the history of structural change coinciding with cyclical downturns . before the back - to - back recessions of the early 1980s , for example , workers in the steel industry were about half as likely as the average worker to experience long - term unemployment .