these methods vary by chamber . in the house , if a committee has not responded to a reconciliation directive , it still may be possible to consider reconciliation legislation on the house floor that would satisfy the committee's directive . in the case of omnibus reconciliation legislation , the budget act states that the house rules committee may make in order amendments to a reconciliation bill to satisfy reconciliation directives if a committee has not submitted reconciliation legislation to the house budget committee . in the senate , if a committee has not responded to a reconciliation directive , it still may be possible to consider reconciliation legislation on the senate floor that would satisfy the committee's directive . this would be in order on the floor in the form of a motion to recommit the bill to that committee with instructions that it report the measure back to the senate forthwith with an amendment . unlike amendments to the reconciliation bill , the motion to recommit would not have to be germane if it were made in this situation . such a motion to recommit would allow any senator to craft legislative language within the directed committee's jurisdiction on the floor . in this situation , congress seeks to reconcile existing law with its current priorities . the reconciliation process is still a relatively new congressional process in that there have only been 23 reconciliation bills passed by congress since the first use of reconciliation in 1980 . another provision in the budget act , prohibits house consideration of any resolution providing for adjournment of more than three days during the month of july if the house has not completed action on any required reconciliation legislation . as described above , congress has the option of including reconciliation directives in its annual budget resolution . these directives trigger the reconciliation process , and without their inclusion in a budget resolution , no measure would be eligible to be considered under expedited reconciliation procedures . when reconciliation directives are included in an annual budget resolution , their purpose is to require committees to develop and report legislation that will allow congress to achieve the budgetary goals set forth in the annual budget resolution . these directives detail which committee ( s ) should report reconciliation legislation , the date by which the committee ( s ) should report , the dollar amount of budgetary change that should exist within the reconciliation legislation , and the time period over which the impact of the budgetary change should be measured . they might also include language regarding the type of budgetary change that should be reported as well as other procedural provisions , contingencies , and programmatic direction . the budget act includes a budget process timetable stating that congress is to complete action on reconciliation legislation on or before june 15 . there is no corresponding enforcement mechanism , however , for ensuring that reconciliation legislation be completed by that date , and congress has instead followed a timetable established by the committee due dates in reconciliation directives in the budget resolution . there is no procedural mechanism , such as a point of order , for enforcing the date specified in the reconciliation directive as it appears in the budget resolution .