those categories are not mutually exclusive . programs that are primarily market - focused , such as energy star and biopreferred , may also affect federal acquisitions . are there significant gaps in the various federal preferences for types of green products and services ? are there implementation methods not currently used by the federal government that should be considered ? related to that is cost savings through reduction of inputs such as energy , water , and materials . another goal could be to use procurement leverage or market - focused initiatives to actively facilitate the development of green industries and other aspects of the green economy . also , federal programs could help provide better ways to meet such goals , for example through facilitating the maturation of life cycle assessment methods and the development of standards . are the preferences and the methods of implementing them sufficiently harmonized and integrated ? is training of procurement officials sufficient ? the issues are explored and further characterized below . green procurement requirements and other initiatives can be used to help meet several policy goals . perhaps the most obvious and direct is the reduction of the environmental footprint of federal activities with respect to a set of green factors such as those described in this report . some broad goals are contained in executive orders and related policy documents . congress might find useful an integrated assessment of such goals and options for achieving them . also , some observers may question more broadly whether green procurement is an appropriate focus for federal policy . a discussion of the complex and often long - standing controversies about the desirability of green policy goals in general is beyond the scope of this report , but an assessment of green procurement policy might include an evaluation of the appropriateness of the goals congress has already established in various statutes , as well as those specifically addressed in executive orders issued by presidents clinton , george w. bush , and obama , in addition to new policy proposals . also , given the lack of a commonly accepted characterization of what green procurement involves , especially in the context of other concepts and approaches such as sustainable procurement , an examination of green procurement and other relevant concepts , including whether they should be defined in legislation , might also be considered as part of an examination of policy goals . in addition , an assessment might include examination of how green procurement policy goals interact with other goals of federal procurement policy . the particular method used by the federal government to establish a green - procurement policy or requirement can have implications both for the degree to which it will be implemented and the ease with which it may be modified or revoked . in general , statutory requirements such as those for recycled content and alternative fuels are likely to be more fully implemented than a conditional preference such as epp established by executive order but not by an enacted statute . among the various methods available , policy document s provide the most flexibility but the least potential stability , as the executive branch can modify or revoke them at any time without necessarily considering congressional input or public comments .