108-373 , 118 stat . 89-136 ( 79 stat . it will do so within the context of the more prominent policy debates regarding efforts to reduce federal spending to address growing budget deficits and the national debt ; concerns about the duplication , fragmentation , and effectiveness of federal economic development assistance ; and efforts to support economic recovery and job creation following the worst economic recession since the great depression . the pweda , whose statutory authority expired at the end of september 2008 , authorized the creation of the department of commerce's economic development administration ( eda ) . eda's primary focus is to help regions experiencing long - term economic distress or sudden economic dislocation through grants in public infrastructure , the provision of technical assistance and research , and the development and implementation of comprehensive economic development strategies . s. 782 , discussed below , would address issues identified in the previous section of this report , including those relating to eligibility factors , federal cost shares , the use of rlfs , and the conversion of the federal interest in eda projects . s. 782 was introduced on january 10 , 2011 , by senator boxer , chair of the senate committee on environment and public works , with the support of the committee's ranking member , senator inhofe . the senate committee on environment and public works considered , marked up , and approved , by voice vote , an amended version of the bill on april 14 , 2011 . the bill includes an amendment introduced by senator inhofe , and approved by voice vote , that would require the general accountability office ( gao ) to identify and submit to the committee within 90 days of passage of the act , other federal programs that duplicate eda program activities . the bill was reported on may 2 , 2011 ( s.rept . in general , the bill proposes some significant modifications to existing provisions of the pweda while including technical changes and minor modifications to other provisions . most of the substantive changes to existing law proposed by the bill are intended to increase local flexibility in the use of eda assistance . in addition to recognizing business incubators as a key strategy for developing high - skill , high - wage jobs , and fostering regional cooperation through the planning process , the bill proposes to add outmigration and job losses in specific industry sectors ( manufacturing and information technology ) to the definition of economic distress ; adjust the relative need measures used to calculate the federal - local cost share of eda - financed projects ; allow greater flexibility in the conversion and management of eaa financed rlfs ; modify the rules governing the transfer or buyout of the federal interest in property financed with eda public works or economic adjustment assistance ; target assistance to communities with the greatest need as measured by economic distressed ; encourage regional and interagency cooperation in carrying out economic development strategies ; and authorize $500 million in funding for each of the next five fiscal years for eda activities , including an annual minimum allocation for planning assistance grants .