seq. ) to implement some ghg emission reducing measures . domestic climate change legislation would not require senate approval of the accord or any other international climate change agreements . congress may enact laws that support provisions of the copenhagen accord under one or more of its enumerated powers in article i , ยง 8 of the constitution . ยง 7521 et . the unfccc entered into force for the united states in 1994 . as a framework convention , the unfccc provides a structure for international consideration of climate change but does not contain detailed obligations for achieving particular climate - related objectives in each party's territory . it recognizes that climate change is a "common concern to humankind," and , accordingly , requires parties to ( 1 ) gather and share information on ghg emissions , national policies , and best practices ; ( 2 ) launch national strategies for addressing ghg emissions and adapting to expected impacts ; and ( 3 ) cooperate in preparing for the impacts of climate change . the unfccc does not set binding targets for ghg emissions . the kyoto protocol was negotiated as a first step towards implementing the unfccc , largely by establishing quantitative emission reduction targets for the high income countries listed in its annex b . the protocol's goal is to reduce the overall emissions of those parties by at least 5% below 1990 levels by 2012 . those napas for which international support is provided , however , are also subject to international measurement , reporting , and verification requirements . the kyoto protocol was concluded on december 11 , 1997 and signed by the united states a year later ( on november 12 , 1998 ) . the kyoto protocol entered into force for parties on february 16 , 2005 , four years after the detailed rules for its implementation , the "marrakesh accords," were adopted . in addition to emission reduction targets , the kyoto protocol establishes market - based mechanisms , including emissions trading among the parties , for achieving those targets . the protocol and decisions adopted under it also create a compliance system that requires parties to gather ghg emissions data , communicate that information to the unfccc secretariat , and then subject that information to international review by expert review teams . if a party does not meet its obligations under the protocol , two penalties are available: ( 1 ) an increase in the country's emissions reduction target required during the period following the one in which the country failed to comply , and ( 2 ) exclusion of that country from the emission trading scheme . in 2001 , president george w. bush announced that the united states would not become a party to the protocol . among the reasons given for u.s. non - participation in the protocol were that it did not include ghg commitments by all large emitting countries and would cause serious harm to the u.s. economy . the protocol and decisions adopted under it also establish an elaborate compliance system .