for example , h.r . 5299 and s. 3383 , among other provisions , called on the treasury secretary to oppose any imf loans to eu member states until all eu member states had public debt levels less than or equal to 60% . these pieces of legislation did not move out of committee . greece has been at the center of the eurozone debt crisis . it has the highest levels of public debt in the eurozone , and one of the biggest budget deficits . greece was the first eurozone member to come under intense market pressures and the first to turn to other eurozone member states and the imf for financial assistance . there have been continuing concerns about how these banks would be able to absorb losses on greek bonds should greece default or restructure its debt , particularly given widespread concerns that european banks may be undercapitalized . specifically , there are concerns that the crisis could be transmitted through the european financial sector , triggering broader instability and requiring governments to recapitalize banks . european officials conducted two rounds of "stress tests" on european banks in june 2010 and july 2011 . these tests examined how well european banks could absorb losses on distressed eurozone bonds . most banks performed well under the various scenarios laid out in the tests , but some questioned whether the tests were stringent enough . third , greece's debt crisis has created new financial liabilities for other european countries . eurozone countries have extended bilateral loans to greece , and made financial commitments to the broader european financial stability facility ( efsf ) . if these financial commitments are called on , they could substantially raise the debt levels in eurozone countries , many of which are grappling with their own debt problems . for example , france's total financial commitment to the rescue packages is 8% of gdp . increasing the size of the efsf , as some argue is necessary to give it the firepower it needs to respond to a potential crisis in italy , for example , could increase france's commitments to 13% of gdp . if these commitments were called upon , france's debt level could rise to above 100% of gdp . some argue that these commitments explain , at least in part , why french bond spreads have started to widen . fourth , the greek crisis has highlighted the policy constraints on members of the eurozone . many analysts have suggested that greece would be better off if it could exit the eurozone and issue a new national currency . a new national currency , devalued against the euro , could spur greek exports and help growth return to the economy . as long as greece is a member of the eurozone , it does not have the exchange rate in its policy toolkit for responding to the crisis . others , including the papandreou government , argue that leaving the eurozone would be a terrible economic decision for greece , triggering a severe banking and financial crisis . they add that because greece's debt burden is denominated in euros , a new , devalued national currency would increase the value of its debt in terms of national currency .