new issues may be on the horizon . this trend is likely influenced by the recession and high unemployment levels following the economic downturn . it likely is associated with a longer - term trend that is linked to the various effects of international economic integration ( "globalization" ) that have made farmers , firms , and workers perceive themselves to be more vulnerable . the direction that u.s. policymakers take trade policy will have broad implications — whether that direction is toward greater trade liberalization , as envisioned by "trade liberalizers" ; conditional trade liberalization , as viewed by "fair traders" ; or a restrained , if not retrenched , trade policy , as expressed by the "trade skeptics. greater trade liberalization , whether unilateral or via trade negotiations and agreements , would promote further u.s. integration with the world economy and with it , according to many mainstream economists , a more efficient allocation of resources and economic growth . it would also encourage the development and adherence to internationally negotiated rules on trade to promote stability and to prevent the use of protectionist measures . at the same time , it would expose the already vulnerable firms and workers to increased competition , forcing them to make costly adjustments . a "fair trade" focused policy direction would address what some view as inequities in trade policy by proceeding with trade agreements that require u.s. trade partners to adhere to core labor standards , environmental protection measures , and other provisions to "level the playing field. in so doing , such trade agreements could be acceptable to larger segments of the american public and rebuild a consensus on trade . however , some trading partners have resisted what they consider to be u.s. efforts to impose its own values on them through trade policy . many economists argue that the "playing field" will always be uneven as labor will be cheaper in some countries than others , reflecting differing stages of development . a "skeptical" policy direction would require u.s. policymakers to retrench and reevaluate trade policy as a whole to ascertain whether it has benefitted or harmed u.s. interests , for example , in employment , and would reserve the opportunity to renegotiate those trade agreements if they fail to meet the criteria . this approach would aim to protect u.s. national sovereignty over matters pertaining to the health and safety of its citizens , among other issues . a number of political factors and economic conditions will influence the shape , direction , and content of u.s. trade policy in the next few years . the relative significance of each of these factors could change over time . the 112 th congress faces a number of trade issues . some of these issues were pending from the 111 th congress , while others are longer - term . the united states is at a crossroads in terms of trade policy . the obama administration has weighed in somewhat on trade with its national export initiative ( nei ) to reenergize u.s. export promotion programs to increase the role small - and medium - sized companies in exporting and to contribute to the u.s. economic recovery .