some of these issues are discussed below . u.s. funding for the mdbs may shift under president trump , who campaigned on an "america first" platform and has signaled a reorientation of u.s. foreign policy . in march 2017 , the trump administration proposed cutting $650 million over three years compared to the commitments made under the obama administration . in the fy2019 budget request , the trump administration requested a 20% cut ( $354 million ) from treasury's international programs , which includes the multilateral development banks , compared to the amount enacted in fy2017 . the bulk of the treasury international programs request ( over 90% ) would fund u.s. commitments to concessional lending facilities at the mdbs . the request would provide $1.1 billion to ida , compared to $1.2 billion in fy2017 . it would also provide funding $47 million to the asdf and $171 million to the afdf , among other funding initiatives . in april 2018 , the world bank members , including the united states , endorsed a capital increase for the ibrd , which would require congressional legislation and appropriations to implement . this commitment is not reflected in the fy2019 budget request , but would require appropriations and authorization to implement . congress sets u.s. fundi ng for the mdbs as part of the state and foreign o perations authorization and appropriations process . there is a broad debate about the effectiveness of foreign aid , including the aid provided by the mdbs . many studies of foreign aid effectiveness examine the effects of total foreign aid provided to developing countries , including both aid given directly by governments to developing countries ( bilateral aid ) and aid pooled by a multilateral institution from multiple donor countries and provided to developing countries ( multilateral aid ) . the results of these studies are mixed , with conclusions ranging from ( a ) aid is ineffective at promoting economic growth ; ( b ) aid is effective at promoting economic growth ; and ( c ) aid is effective at promoting growth in some countries under specific circumstances ( such as when developing - country policies are strong ) . the divergent results of these academic studies make it difficult to reach firm conclusions about the overall effectiveness of aid . critics of the mdbs argue that they are international bureaucracies focused on getting money "out the door" to developing countries , rather than on delivering results in developing countries ; that the mdbs emphasize short - term outputs like reports and frameworks but do not engage in long - term activities like the evaluation of projects after they are completed ; and that they put enormous administrative demands on developing - country governments . many of the mdbs were also created when developing countries had little access to private capital markets . with the globalization and the integration of capital markets across countries , some analysts have expressed concerns that mdb financing might "crowd out" private - sector financing , which developing countries now generally have readily accessible . some analysts have also raised questions about whether there is a clear division of labor among the mdbs .