these provisions are outlined above . the policy questions are as follows . what would be the impact of the investment incentives on the economy's capital stock ? does the reduced tax burden increase the supply of capital and saving , thus increasing long - run growth ? were the enacted business tax cuts effective in stimulating the economy in the short run , thus aiding recovery from the 2001 recession ? or , do planning lags and other factors make business tax cuts ineffective as a fiscal stimulus , meaning the relation between the business tax cuts and economic recovery was serendipitous ? what is the effect of the business tax cuts on the overall fairness of the tax system ? do the reductions accrue primarily to relatively high - income stockholders and corporate creditors , or will any reductions on tax progressivity be outweighed by positive employment effects ? how will the business tax cuts affect u.s. economic competitiveness ? have provisions such as the domestic production deduction helped revitalize domestic manufacturing , or do the deduction and other competitiveness provisions interfere with the efficient and flexible participation of u.s. businesses in the world economy ? after the passage of arra , the 111 th congress has continued deliberations focused on stimulating the economy . one topic of these discussions was on how the tax code — and business provisions — could aid economic conditions . given the policy goal of increasing aggregate demand , business tax cuts , such as in arra , have traditionally focused on "cash - flow" and investment measures . cash - flow provisions attempt to stimulate the economy by allowing businesses to increase their cash on hand by realizing existing tax attributes in the current period , as opposed to future years . these measures allow businesses immediate access to working capital that may be useful to maintaining business operations . an example of a cash - flow measure in arra was the extension of the net operating loss carryback period from two to five years . the gulf opportunity zone act of 2005 ( p.l . 109-135 ) enacted a similar provision for qualified losses occurring in the gulf opportunity zone ( or go zone ) . investment measures attempt to stimulate the economy by inducing investment spending , typically through measures that change the cost of capital . examples of investment measures in arra were one year extensions — through the end of 2009 — of bonus depreciation and small business expensing . the economic stimulus act of 2008 ( p.l . 110-185 ) also contained a one - year extension of these provisions , covering 2008 . the tax code contains a set of relatively narrowly applicable tax benefits ( the "extenders" ) that are temporary in nature — each were enacted for only fixed periods of time , and are scheduled to expire on various dates . the benefits tend to be tax incentives: provisions designed to encourage certain types of investment or activity thought to be economically or socially desirable . the question with each extender , then , is whether there is a market failure or socially desirable goal that makes the incentive's intervention in the market desirable .