under what circumstances may these restrictions be applied ? the laws vary in scope and duration . the most common type prohibits sex offenders from residing within a certain distance of specified places where children congregate ( eg , schools , churches , parks , and libraries ) . distance markers generally range from 1,000 to 2,000 feet from the designated place . for example , alabama's residency restriction statute prohibits adult sex offenders from living within 2,000 feet of a school or child care facility or within 1,000 feet of the victim's residence . variations also exist on the applicability of these restrictions . should juveniles be subjected to the same restrictions as adults ? these and other policy issues may be informed by judicial determinations . this report examines background and case law related to registration requirements and residency restrictions . the related issue of civil commitment was at issue in comstock . in that case , the supreme court held that a federal statute authorizing the civil commitment of "sexually dangerous persons," 18 u.s.c . ยง 4248 , is within congress's authority . for more information on united states v. comstock and other challenges to the federal civil commitment statute , see crs report r40958 , united states v. comstock: supreme court review of civil commitment under the adam walsh act , by [author name scrubbed] . although specific requirements and parameters vary , all 50 states and the district of columbia require persons convicted of sex offenses to register where they live or work . the requirements are enforced with associated state and federal criminal penalties . the obligation to register typically continues after a person has served a sentence , in some cases remaining in effect long after incarceration . registration may have dual goals of assisting law enforcement and preventing future crimes . in many states , the latter goal is facilitated by making lists of registered sex offenders available to the public . while federal laws govern mandatory registration and community notification , many states and localities have gone further by enacting residency restrictions . these laws were first implemented in 1995 in the aftermath of the highly publicized murder of nine - year - old florida resident jessica lunsford by a previously convicted sex offender . some jurisdictions impose these restrictions on those designated as sexual offenders regardless of the type of crime , age of victim , or risk of reoffending . thus , it is possible that an individual convicted of possession of child pornography or public indecency 10 years ago can be restricted in the same manner as an individual with several arguably more serious convictions for molesting young children , with one of the crimes happening relatively recently . however , in other jurisdictions restrictions are limited to offenders convicted of only the most serious offenses or deemed most likely to reoffend based on some type of risk assessment . for example , under arkansas law , it is unlawful for sex offenders assessed by the state to be level three ( high risk ) or level four ( sexually violent predator ) to live within 2,000 feet of a school or child care facility .