there are an estimated six million bangladeshis working abroad . they make bangladesh one of the world's largest sources of overseas workers . dhaka is a very active participant in international peace operations . in january 2013 , bangladesh revoked its request for financing from the world bank , objecting to conditions placed on the package , and opted to instead to seek some financial assistance from russia , which loaned $500 million to bangladesh for its nuclear power program . bangladesh is one of the countries of the world thought most likely to suffer the adverse effects of climate change . some view it as the most vulnerable country to the negative impact of climate change , due to its low - lying geography . demographic pressure and environmental problems , including those linked to climate change , are increasingly problems for bangladesh as well . bangladesh has traditionally been and continues to be one of the largest contributors of military and police contingents to united nations peace operations . as of may 2013 , 8,836 u.n. police , peacekeeping troops , and u.n. military experts were contributed to united nations peacekeeping missions . bangladesh is situated at the northern extreme of the bay of bengal and could potentially be a state of increasing interest in the evolving strategic dynamics between india and china . this importance could be accentuated by the development of bangladesh's energy reserves and by regional energy and trade routes to china and india . china has become one of bangladesh's key suppliers of military equipment . at the same time , bangladesh seeks closer ties and greater cooperation on a range of issues with india . the may 2013 bangladesh - u.s. partnership dialogue in dhaka sought to improve the ties between the two nations through governance programs , economic trade , security cooperation , and regional integration . the united states has promised assistance through usaid and president obama's global health initiative to improve medical detection of infectious diseases , environmentally sustainable initiatives , and nutritional programs to promote local agriculture and increase consumption . in addition , the united states seeks to increase assistance programs for law enforcement , promote business connections , and to transfer a coast guard vessel to the bangladesh navy . moreover , u.s. representatives "participated in a roundtable discussion with government , labor , owners and buyers on labor issues in the garment sector. as a low - income nation , bangladesh argues that it has the right to deny entry to refugees from burma , which has raised major concerns in the international community . the nation is also accused of unequal rights to women , human trafficking , as well as the lack of attention to violence against minority groups . the u.s. department of state 2012 human rights report details that "the most significant human rights problems were enforced disappearances , discrimination against marginalized groups , and poor working conditions and labor rights. discrimination of women and indigenous people as well as extrajudicial deaths have been raised as points of concern by human rights groups . the human rights report also found that , "as in the previous year , the government did not take comprehensive measures to investigate and prosecute cases of security force killings.