, the individual mandate ) . this report is primarily for reference purposes . the material in it is intended to provide context to help the reader better understand the intent of aca 's reauthorization of ihcia at the time of enactment . in general , this report does not track ongoing aca - related regulatory and other implementation activities . the indian health service ( ihs ) , an agency within the department of health and human services ( hhs ) , provides health care for approximately 2.2 million eligible american indians / alaska natives through a system of programs and facilities located on or near indian reservations , and through contractors in certain urban areas . ihs provides services in 35 states , subdivided into 12 geographic "areas" that consist of one or more states . each area is administered by an area office ; areas , in turn , are further subdivided into service units that consist of one or more facilities . ihs may provide services directly , or indian tribes ( its ) or tribal organizations ( tos ) may operate ihs facilities and programs themselves through self - determination contracts and self - governance compacts negotiated with ihs . although most ihs facilities are located on or near reservations , ihs also funds urban indian health projects ( uihps ) , through grants or contracts to urban indian organizations ( uios ) . the ihs provides an array of medical services , including inpatient , ambulatory , emergency , dental , public health nursing , and preventive health care . the ihs does not have a defined medical benefit package that excludes or includes specific conditions or types of health care . besides providing general clinical health services , the ihs also focuses on health conditions prevalent among american indians and alaska natives such as infant mortality , diabetes , and hepatitis b . in addition , ihs provides mental health and alcohol and substance abuse services because , compared to the overall u.s. population , american indians and alaska natives are more likely to die from alcoholism - related diseases or to commit suicide . in addition to health services , the ihs funds projects related to health care facilities and sanitation . specifically , the ihs funds the construction , equipping , and maintenance of hospitals , health centers , clinics , and other health care delivery facilities , both those operated by the ihs and those operated by tribes . in order to improve the health of , and reduce the incidence of disease among , american indians and alaska natives , the ihs also funds the construction of water supply and sewage facilities and solid waste disposal systems , and provides technical assistance for the operation and maintenance of such facilities . the ihs has attributed decreases in gastrointestinal disease among american indians and alaska natives to improved sanitation facilities . the indian health care improvement act , as passed in 1976 and subsequently amended , authorized many specific ihs activities , set out the national policy for health services administered to indians , and declared that it was a federal goal to improve the health status and conditions of the ihs service population .