however , the costs to industry are relatively minor . the budget proposal also seeks congressional repeal of section 365 of the energy policy act of 2005 ( p.l . section 365 prohibits the bureau of land management from charging producers for processing onshore drilling permit applications . although these fees and charges would increase the cost of exploring , developing , and operating oil and natural gas facilities under doi's management and hence are likely to reduce those activities , as suggested by opponents of the proposals , the effects are likely to be minor , as these fees represent only a fraction of a percent of revenues , profits , or other taxes and fees paid to the government . supporters of these fees might make the argument that they represent "user charges" consistent with environmentally sound management of resources on federal lands . on the one hand , the tax changes proposed in table 1 would increase tax collections from the oil and natural gas industries and may have the effect of decreasing exploration , development , and production , while increasing prices and increasing the nation's foreign oil dependence . these same proposals , from an alternate point of view , can also be considered to be the elimination of tax preferences that have favored the oil and natural gas industries over other energy sources and made oil and gas products artificially inexpensive , with consumer costs held below the true cost of consumption , when the costs associated with climate change and energy dependence , among other effects , are included . whichever view is adopted , the real effects of these proposals on oil production , consumption , and imports are likely to be small relative to both the federal deficit and the revenues of the oil and natural gas industries . these benefits helped to keep petroleum product costs low and encouraged consumption . low gasoline prices were , and are , a factor in both residential and business location decisions , holiday travel , and other aspects of american life . many of these decisions represent economic investments that might no longer be viable if the relative price of gasoline and oil increases . these two proposals could increase taxes on the oil industry , and influence its behavior . the repeal of the expensing of intangible drilling expenses , and the rescinding of the manufacturing tax deduction for the oil industry , would increase the industry's tax payments by $25 billion through 2020 . the department of interior ( doi ) budget proposal contains several changes in fees and other revenue - generating items that would affect the oil and natural gas industries . the 2011 budget proposal includes provisions to transfer part of the cost of both onshore and offshore drilling inspection fees to involved companies . the onshore fee expected to generate $10 million in revenues , or 25% of the cost of inspections .