error ! reference source not found . outlines recent u.s. financial support for multilateral environmental initiatives . congress is responsible for several activities in this regard , including ( 1 ) authorizing periodic appropriations for u.s. financial contributions to the institutions , and ( 2 ) overseeing u.s. involvement in the programs . issues of congressional interest include the overall development assistance strategy of the united states , u.s. leadership in global environmental and economic affairs , and u.s. commercial interests in trade and investment . as congress considers potential authorizations and / or appropriations for initiatives administered through the department of state , the department of the treasury , and other agencies with international programs , it may have questions concerning the direction , efficiency , and effectiveness of current bilateral and multilateral programs . this report provides an overview of one of the oldest , largest , and most comprehensive multilateral programs to date — the global environment facility ( gef ) — and analyzes its structure , funding , and objectives in light of the many challenges within the contemporary landscape of global environmental finance . the global environment facility ( gef ) is an independent and international financial organization that provides grants , promotes cooperation , and fosters actions in developing countries to protect the global environment . established in 1991 , it unites 182 member governments and partners with international institutions , nongovernmental organizations , and the private sector to assist developing countries with environmental projects related to six areas: biodiversity , climate change , international waters , the ozone layer , land degradation , and persistent organic pollutants ( pops ) . gef receives funding from multiple donor countries — including the united states — and provides grants to cover the additional or "incremental" costs associated with transforming a project with national benefits into one with global environmental benefits ( eg , choosing solar energy technology over coal technology meets the same national development goal of power generation but is more costly , excluding long - term environmental externalities ; gef grants aim to cover the difference or "increment" between a less costly , more polluting option and a costlier , more environmentally sound option ) . in this way , gef funding is structured to "supplement" base project funding and provide for the environmental components in national development agendas . since its inception , gef has allocated $11.5 billion — supplemented by more than $57 billion in co - financing — for more than 3,200 projects in over 165 countries . each year , billions of dollars in environmental aid flow from developed country governments — including the united states — to developing ones . gef is one mechanism in the larger network of international programs designed to address environmental issues . while the efficiency and the effectiveness of these programs are of concern to donor country governments , a full analysis of the purposes , intents , results , and consequences behind these financial flows has yet to be conducted . international relations , comparative politics , and developmental economics can often collide with environmental agendas .