assessments are ongoing . it remains to be seen how the needs of those affected by the tsunami may differ from those primarily affected by the earthquake and , further , how such differences might be integrated into the overall humanitarian response . selected activities of key u.s. government agencies — usaid and the department of defense ( dod ) — are described briefly below . offers of assistance by countries in the region came quickly . on march 1 , president lula of brazil was the first foreign leader to visit chile , and at a meeting with president bachelet pledged all possible brazilian assistance . brazil has sent helicopters and c - 130 planes carrying a field hospital and staff . damage to chile's power supply was widespread . because both of chile's main oil refineries were damaged , president bachelet pledged to increase gasoline , diesel and fuel oil imports . neighboring argentina quickly doubled its normal supply of natural gas to chile to 5.5 million cubic meters per day on march 3 . argentina also sent an air force hospital , food , water , medical supplies , electricity power generators and four water purification plants . many latin american countries sent in - kind donations with leaders of ecuador and bolivia explaining they were cash - strapped . for example , in the first week following the earthquake venezuela sent seven tons of food and bolivia sent 40 tons of drinking water . cuba provided a 26-member medical team and field hospital . ( for more details , see appendix b ) . these quick offers of aid are significant in light of chile's history of sometimes mistrustful relations with its neighbors due to unresolved border disputes . at the summit of the union of south american nations ( a regional cooperation body ) held in the aftermath of the haitian earthquake in early february , latin american leaders agreed to set up a $300 million fund for haiti's reconstruction and to assist one another in future natural disasters . the response by latin american countries to chile's earthquake and tsunami seems to be evidence of this commitment . following a violent coup against democratically elected marxist president salvador allende in 1973 , chile experienced 17 years of military rule under general augusto pinochet before reestablishing democratic rule in 1990 . a center - left coalition of parties known as the concertación has governed chile over the two decades since the end of the dictatorship . in addition to addressing human rights violations from the pinochet era , the coalition has enacted a number of constitutional changes designed to strengthen civilian democracy . chile made significant economic progress under the concertación's free market economic policies and moderate social programs , and produced notable economic growth and considerable reductions in poverty . on january 17 , 2010 , sebastián piñera of the center - right alianza coalition was elected president in a second - round runoff vote , defeating former president eduardo frei ( 1994-2000 ) of the concertación . piñera's election was the first for the chilean right since 1958 , and his inauguration on march 11 , 2010 , will bring an end to 20 years of concertación governance .