the fhlbank exercises no oversight over their advances once they are distributed to member banks . boston and atlanta have suspended dividends to conserve capital . table 1 provides more details on the conditions of each of the 12 banks . in the first nine months of 2009 , fhlbank system assets decreased to $1,062 billion from $1,349 billion ( 21% ) and total capital decreased to $45 billion from $50 billion ( 12% ) . for the first nine months of 2009 system net income was $1.3 billion compared to $1.9 billion for the same period in 2008 . decreasing mortgage market activity led to a reduction of bonds and notes outstanding ( used mainly to finance advances to members ) to $980 billion from $1,258 billion . appendix table a - 1 contains more detailed financial information . the fhlbanks' recent financial troubles have led to questions as to what options would be available to handle the failure of one , or all , of the regional fhlbanks . both the structure of the fhlbank system itself and federal law provide for certain procedures to stave off any system wide collapse . if necessary , however , fhfa has the same authority under hera to seize control of one or more fhlbanks as it used to take over management of fannie mae and freddie mac . the fhlbanks utilize the many benefits of their gse status to provide their member banks with access to low - cost funding . during the recession that started in 2008 and the current liquidity crunch , the fhlbanks are likely to continue to play a large role in the ongoing recovery of the national housing market . the mortgage crisis , however , has left some fhlbanks in a precarious financial situation , with billions in unprofitable mbs weakening their financial books . were an fhlbank to fail , the existing internal cooperative structure of the fhlbank may be able to stabilize the system as a whole . if internal corrections fail , however , statutory authority exists for a government intervention targeted at containing the disruption by stabilizing or liquidating the affected fhlbank . as of september 30 , 2009 the fhlbank system had assets of slightly less than $1.1 trillion , with over 70% of those assets tied up in advances or mortgage loans . a member bank is limited , however , on how much it can borrow from the fhlbank based on the amount of stock the bank has purchased and the percentage of mortgage - related assets it holds . the 12 regional banks engage in no direct lending to the public . instead , member banks turn to the fhlbank for on - demand low interest loans which the member bank can then use to issue mortgages or other loans to the general public . the 12 regional banks that make up the fhlbank system , though unfamiliar to many , have been key players throughout the financial crisis and are likely to continue to play an important role in the ongoing economic recovery .