45 into law , as p.l . in addition to an increase in the statutory limit on the public debt to $14.294 trillion , the act contains two titles dealing with budgetary matters . any costs designated as emergencies are excluded from the scorecards , and significant costs associated with four specified categories of legislation may be excluded as well . in addition , significant savings stemming from the community living assistance services and supports ( class ) act , establishing an insurance program for long - term care , are excluded from the scorecards . finally , debt service costs are excluded as well . the statutory paygo process does not address deficit increases , stemming from changes in direct spending or revenue levels , that are projected to occur under existing law . other budget enforcement procedures , such as the reconciliation process under the congressional budget act ( cba ) of 1974 , may be used to reduce deficit levels projected under existing law . further , the statutory paygo process does not apply to discretionary spending , which is provided in annual appropriations acts . the statutory paygo act consists of 13 sections , as shown in table 1 , at the end of the report . the act blends together new , freestanding law with amendments or references to sections in the cba of 1974 and the balanced budget and emergency deficit control act ( bbedca ) of 1985 . in the case of the cba of 1974 , section 3 , which sets forth definitions used in the congressional budget process , is made applicable to the new statutory paygo process , and section 308 , which pertains to cbo cost estimates and other reports on budgetary legislation , is amended . the following sections of bbedca of 1985 are made applicable to the new statutory paygo process , in some cases with modification: section 250 ( table of contents ; statement of budget enforcement through sequestration ; definitions ) ; section 255 ( exempt programs and activities ) ; section 256 ( general and special sequestration rules ) ; section 257 ( the baseline ) ; and section 274 ( judicial review ) . the core procedural elements of the statutory paygo act are set forth as new , freestanding law , particularly in section 4 ( paygo estimates and paygo scorecards ) , section 5 ( annual report and sequestration order ) , section 6 ( calculating a sequestration ) , and section 7 ( adjustment for current policies ) . the statutory paygo act defines the term paygo legislation ( and a paygo act ) as "a bill or joint resolution that affects direct spending or revenues relative to the baseline" ( section 3 ( 7 ) ) . under this definition , several types of measures fall within the purview of the statutory paygo process: ( 1 ) revenue measures ; ( 2 ) direct spending measures ; ( 3 ) hybrid measures , which combine revenue and direct spending provisions ; and ( 4 ) annual appropriations acts that include direct spending provisions ( with effects after the budget year ) , revenue provisions , or both .