the idea was again rejected by anastasiades . subsequently , lute found little basis for continuing her consultations and decided to meet with the guarantor powers . although the greek and turkish foreign ministers agreed to hold their own consultations on security , lute saw no likely breakthrough between anastasiades and akinci . history might indicate a continued "no" to these questions . at the same time , relations between turkey and the greek cypriots have become so tense over the energy exploration issue that neither side appears capable of backing down from its security demands , leaving little room for optimism that any kind of a solution can be achieved . many also wonder whether either leader could sell any agreement to his community at this point . some longtime observers of the negotiations in the international community expressed deep concern for the direction the dispute has taken since crans montana . for instance , in late 2017 , the business monitor internatio nal , part of the fitch group , downgraded its assessment of a new unification deal from slim to extremely remote . its 2018 forecast likely will not have changed . former british foreign secretary jack straw in 2017 restated a previous assessment that "from the greek cypriot point of view , conceding political equality with the turkish cypriots means giving power away . but absent a real incentive for both sides" to actually reach an agreement , "the reality is that no greek cypriot leader will ever be able to get their electorate behind a deal . the status quo for the south is simply too comfortable. at this point , and despite the effort being put forward by u.n. secretary - general guterres to restart the negotiations , a final settlement for cyprus remains elusive . nevertheless , lute agreed to return to the island on april 7 for yet another round of consultations with the two leaders . when lute returned , she apparently found both sides seemingly farther apart . aside from the long - standing disagreements between the two cypriot sides , particularly on security and troops , a big sticking point was akinci's insistence that the turkish cypriots have political equality in the new federal government rather than holding a minority status . akinci repeated his demand that if a solution would result in two equal constituent states , under a federal structure , then the turkish cypriots should hold equal power on issues taken up at the federal level that would involve both constituent states . he proposed that on all issues there must be a positive turkish cypriot vote . anastasiades again rejected that approach , claiming it would give the turkish cypriots an absolute veto over all policy issues and would subject cyprus to the demands of ankara , potentially resulting in gridlock . anastasiades , however , apparently did express a willingness to discuss akinci's proposal , but only for some issues . this military intervention had many ramifications . foremost was the physical separation of the island ; widespread dislocation of both the greek and the turkish cypriot populations and related governance , refugee , and property problems ; and what the greek cypriots refer to as the continued occupation of the island .