, massachusetts ) . 1201-1202 ) makes the following modifications to the financing portion of the eligibility provisions in ppaca: fmap rates for the cost of care provided to "newly eligible" populations for all states ( i.e. m aintenance of effort provisions . ppaca will require states to maintain current medicaid and chip coverage levels — through 2013 for adults and 2019 for children . o utreach and enrollment provisions . ppaca includes provisions to encourage states to improve outreach , streamline enrollment , and coordinate with the proposed american health benefit exchanges ( exchange ) . such mandatory benefits include premium assistance for employer - sponsored health insurance , coverage of free - standing birth clinics , and tobacco cessation services for pregnant woman . the law also authorizes states to offer new optional benefits such as preventive services for adults , health homes for persons with chronic conditions , and additional options for states to expand home - and community - based services as an alternative to institutional care . f inancing reforms . ppaca introduces measures to reduce the growth of medicaid expenditures and increases federal matching payments for the eligibility expansions . c ost control reforms . some of the ppaca's cost control measures include ( 1 ) proposed reductions in medicaid disproportionate share hospital ( dsh ) payments , ( 2 ) expenditure reductions for prescription drugs , and ( 3 ) payment reforms to reduce inappropriate hospital expenditures for health care - acquired conditions . p rogram integrity reforms . ppaca creates enforcement and monitoring tools and imposes new data reporting and oversight requirements on states and providers . states will also be required to implement initiatives used by the medicare program , such as a national correct coding initiative and a recovery audit contract program for their medicaid programs . n ursing home accountability . ppaca adds a number of requirements to improve the transparency of information within facilities and chains , as well as provides long - term care ( ltc ) consumers with information on the quality and performance of nursing homes . d emonstrations , pilot programs , and grants . ppaca will provide the secretary of the department of health and human services ( the secretary ) and state medicaid and chip programs with opportunities to test models for improving the delivery , quality , and payment of services . chi p - related provisions . ppaca requires states to maintain the current chip structure through fy2019 , but does not provide federal chip appropriations beyond fy2013 . m iscellaneous medicaid and chip reforms . ppaca adds several offices within the centers for medicare and medicaid services ( cms ) to better coordinate care across the medicare and medicaid / chip programs . one of these offices will be dedicated to improving coordination for beneficiaries eligible for both medicare and medicaid ( dual eligibles ) . another will add a medicare and medicaid innovation center to develop and test new payment and service delivery models to reduce medicare , medicaid , and chip expenditures , while preserving and enhancing quality of care for beneficiaries . the health care - related provisions in title i of the hcera modifies selected provisions in ppaca .