funds are allocated by formula . the appropriations were $44 million in each of fy2014 and fy2015 . the 1890 facilities grants program ( 7 u.s.c . ยง3222b ) provides funds to 1890 land - grant institutions , including tuskegee university and west virginia state university , for the acquisition and improvement of agricultural and food sciences facilities and equipment , including libraries . the appropriations were $20 million in each of fy2014 and fy2015 . the tribal colleges endowment fund ( 7 u.s.c . ยง301 note. ) enhances education in agricultural sciences and related disciplines for native americans by building educational capacity at tribal colleges in the areas of curricula design and materials development , faculty development and preparation for teaching , instruction delivery systems , experiential learning , equipment and instrumentation for teaching , and student recruitment and retention . it also funds facility renovation , repair , construction , and maintenance in support of these efforts . at the end of each fiscal year , the earned interest income from the endowment fund is distributed to tribal colleges according to a statutory formula . these allocations remain available for issuance . state and local governments may issue bonds that are exempt from federal taxation to finance certain qualified private activities , including qualified public educational facilities ( 26 u.s.c . indian tribal governments generally cannot issue tax - exempt private activity bonds . private activity bonds benefit state and local governments because the bond buyer is willing to accept a lower interest rate because the interest income is not subject to federal income taxes . although funds may not be used to acquire or construct facilities , minor alterations , renovations , or repairs necessary and incidental to the major purpose for which a grant is issued may be allowed with prior approval . the appropriations were $3 million in each of fy2014 and fy2015 . the tribal colleges extension program , also known as extension services at 1994 institutions ( 7 u.s.c . 301 note ; 7 u.s.c . 341 et seq .

 ) a qualified public educational facility is a public elementary or secondary school facility ( including a stadium ) constructed , rehabilitated , refurbished , or equipped through a public - private partnership agreement . bonds issued for qualified educational facilities are not counted against a state's private - activity volume cap . however , the qualified public educational facility bonds have their own volume capacity limit equal to the greater of $10 multiplied by the state population or $5 million . eligible applicants under the pa program include public and private nonprofit schools and ihes . school facilities of a church or other religious institution are also generally eligible for grant assistance , so long as the primary purpose of the damaged facilities is for secular education . eligible applicants can also apply for grants to replace certain damaged school supplies and equipment , including the possible repair and replacement of advanced laboratory and research equipment for ihes . because of the wide range of eligible uses and applicant types in the pa program , it is difficult to assess through publically available information how much money has been spent exclusively for the repair and reconstruction of school facilities .