110-432 , 122 stat . 4854 , october 16 , 2008 ) . congress enacted the statutory requirement in the wake of several serious rail accidents involving dozens of fatalities and hundreds of injuries . fra estimated that the rule would reduce deaths and injuries from this type of accident by more than 50% , valued each "statistical life" expected to be saved by the rule at $6 million , and considered each prevented injury a percentage of the value of a statistical life . the agency ultimately valued the estimated reductions in deaths over the next 20 years at between $175 million and $269 million ( in 2009 dollars ) , and valued the reductions in injuries at between $133 million and $204 million ( also in 2009 dollars ) . together , these monetized health benefits represented more than 70% of the rule's estimated total benefits . also , as osha noted in its february 2006 rule on hexavalent chromium , certain statutes prohibit the consideration of costs in setting a health standard , and such prohibitions have been upheld in court . therefore , even if the monetized estimated benefits of a rule are less than the estimated costs , the issuing agency cannot use that information in determining whether to regulate . including such information in the preamble to the rule , however , can improve the transparency of the rulemaking process . the agencies appeared to vary substantially in the degree to which they used various techniques in the monetization of health benefits . for example , some agencies discussed cost - effectiveness studies that they conducted in addition to benefit - cost analyses , while other agencies did not mention such studies . some agencies used vsls at various levels to show the effect on net benefits , while other agencies did not appear to use other vsls . some showed discounting at 3% and 7% , while others did not discuss discounting or only showed discounting at one level . these differences may reflect real variations in agency practices , or they may simply reflect differences in the degree to which the agencies disclosed their analytic procedures in the preambles to their rules or elsewhere . for example , the preamble to the nhtsa rule on air brake systems did not discuss what vsl was used to monetize the projected reductions in fatalities and serious injuries , but that information was included in the regulatory impact analysis that was located in the agency's rulemaking docket . the agencies that did not mention sensitivity analyses using different vsls may have done so but just did not discuss that effort . the information provided in this report is drawn primarily from the preambles to the rules and any retrievable final economic analyses that were retrievable from the agency's electronic docket at http: / / www.regulations.gov . also , the report provides examples of final rules published by the selected agencies from 2007 through 2009 that monetized expected health benefits , and describes how those values were used in the economic analyses for the rules . finally , the report offers some concluding observations .