, pre - tax money income ) . the subsequent lines indicate the effects on the number of poor and percent of the population of poor ( poverty rates ) when resources are added , and expenses subtracted , from income . it is used to arrive at official estimates of the number and characteristics of the poor population . in arriving at its recommendations , the panel was guided by three principles: the measure should be acceptable and understandable to the public ; the measure should be statistically defensible ; and , the measure should be feasible to implement with available or readily obtainable data . the panel's major recommendations focused on setting , updating , and adjusting poverty thresholds , and defining family resources to be counted against poverty thresholds for determining families' and individuals' poverty status . since the nas panel issued its recommendations , an extensive amount of research has been undertaken by statistical agencies , academics , and other researchers to devise and test methods , and evaluate results of implementing the panel's recommendations . a 2004 nrc - sponsored workshop by the nas committee on national statistics ( cnstat ) reviewed much of the research undertaken since the 1995 nas report was issued ; workshop members identified areas in which consensus among experts appears to have emerged , and others where experts believe more work needs to done in order to devise a new poverty measure that conforms to the nas panel recommendations . table 5 presents poverty estimates for 2008 under the official poverty definition and selected alternative poverty measures , by age and income concept , using two versions of nas - based poverty thresholds . the first set of nas - based estimates is based on poverty thresholds that do not take mortgage principal payments into account , while the second set of estimates is based on poverty thresholds that do . these thresholds are the same as those shown earlier in table 3 and table 4 , respectively . the estimates shown here illustrate the effects of selected approaches to devising a nas - based poverty measure . as discussed earlier , there is no clear consensus as to what might constitute a preferred measure , and about the precise methods that should be adopted in its construction . the table shows the sequential effects of adding specified sources to income , or subtracting specified expenses from income , in estimating individuals' poverty status based on their families' net income relative to specified poverty thresholds . the first row of the table shows poverty based on the current official income concept ( i.e. the change in number of poor relative to the "official" poverty measure ( demarcated in framed bold type ) is also shown . the effects of subtracting fica payroll and federal income taxes ( before refundable tax credits ) on poverty are shown , followed by the inclusion of federal refundable tax credits ( i.e. , the earned income tax credit ( eitc ) and the partially refundable child tax credit ( ctc ) ) . next , the effect of one - time federal stimulus payments on poverty is estimated .