table legen . the damage katrina delivered has also affected public policy expectations . hurricane katrina was an outlier in its size and impact , yet many legislative modifications meant to adapt solely to that storm and its unprecedented aftermath , are now used as rationale for suggesting identical treatment for subsequent disasters . congress may continue , after future disasters , to consider legislative adjustments to stafford act cost - share requirements , examining the need for exceptions to current regulatory waivers or expanding such waivers . congress may wish to consider if the threshold currently employed appropriately reflects state capacities and commitments toward disaster recovery . recent congressional actions demonstrate a recognition of the financial burdens caused by disaster damage , while also demonstrating a willingness to adjust cost - share amounts for events that are not of the scope and size associated with previous cost - share adjustments . this may be one reason for the higher rate of gubernatorial request approvals since 1988 . an additional reason for the increase in approvals may also rest with the increasing capacity of states to make effective requests and understand and anticipate fema's review process and what would likely constitute a request that would result in a declaration . while this discussion and these studies focused on various forms of disaster declaration decisions and overall spending , none of these studies has focused on the cost - share adjustments that have been made by the executive and legislative branches . these changes have generally comported with regulations in place or have been done within a context of overall help to a region . but some other cost - share waivers for disasters that do not approach the damage per capita threshold indicate a potential openness for increased congressionally directed spending for all disasters . in a sense , this takes the issue full circle to a time when congress legislated assistance by specific incident and proscribed the form and amount of the assistance . as one observer has noted: the u.s. congress was not entirely unmoved by these and other disasters: between 1803 and 1947 , 128 specific acts expressed sympathy and sometimes supplied token financial assistance . obviously now the assistance available is well beyond token , and in fact , the negligible contribution could conceivably be the state's share . this is the exception since most states have a clear interest in the recovery work that is reflected in their work and commitment . but regulatory cost - share waivers , if applied broadly and without the compelling support of recent congressional legislative waivers , could chip away at that commitment and complicate , rather than strengthen , the federal - state partnershi . the cost - shares for the funding of stafford act programs speak to the cooperative working relationship reflected in that legislation between the two levels of government in addressing disaster response and recovery work . just as with katrina for large events , these adjustments for lesser damage can also push public policy expectations . the resulting additional assistance provided to states and localities , through more generous cost - shares , increases the overall disaster costs to the federal government .