these issues are discussed below . the federal government faces , daily , the task of securing a portfolio comprising 446,000 buildings . accordingly , congress could address concerns , some of which are addressed in this report , to ensure effective federal agency operations and the health , well - being , and safety of federal employees and the public . other threats against judges and court facilities have not stopped . for example , in september 2009 , a plan to bomb the paul findley federal building and courthouse in springfield , il , was uncovered and an arrest was made . on january 4 , 2010 , a gunman wounded a deputy u.s. marshal and killed a court security officer at the lloyd d. george u.s . courthouse and federal building in las vegas . possible threats in the first week of 2010 included suspicious substances in letters sent to courthouses in alabama . these recent incidents may result in review and increased oversight of judicial security at court facilities to ensure that adequate protective policies , procedures , and practices are in place . in 2005 , john e. lewis , deputy assistant director of the fbi's counterterrorism division , testified before the house committee on homeland security about the fbi's coordination with other federal agencies concerning potential nuclear threats or incidents . mr. lewis stated that the fbi has developed liaison relationships with dhs , doe , and dod , and he detailed how the fbi and these departments would coordinate their response efforts if there was a nuclear threat or incident . within the department of homeland security , fps has overall responsibility for security in gsa - managed , multi - tenant federal buildings . when the buildings include court facilities , usms and fps share security responsibilities ; this is authorized by a series of memoranda of agreement and understanding ( moa and mou ) between gsa and doj . when the court is the sole tenant in a gsa - managed building , usms has primary responsibility for security , although fps may provide some support for the perimeter security , or it may delegate this responsibility to usms . the manner in which the responsibilities are shared varies case by case , depending on the differing requirements of tenants , functions , and locations of occupied space . these shared responsibilities and jurisdictions at individual court - occupied buildings are further determined by agreements ( sometimes in writing ) , and coordinated to avoid duplication . generally , usms is responsible for and controls access to judicial space , while fps is primarily responsible for perimeter security and for other interior space that is not court - related space . fps conducts risk assessments of multi - tenant buildings to deter threats and take countermeasures . uniformed fps officers and hired contract guards ( similar to court security officers ) protect the buildings and their assets , and investigate crime at the facilities . other than perimeter responsibilities , fps duties may include visitor entry processing , roving patrols , garage access control , and mail and package screening . these principal entities communicate and coordinate at the national and district levels to ensure the security of the courts .