definitions differ . forests are extensive and often inaccessible . technologies to assess forests remotely exist , but are expensive and their availability is limited . monitoring deforestation adds to the difficulty and complexity , because forest areas must be measured repeatedly , using consistent definitions and technologies . compensating landowners and / or countries for reducing deforestation requires that measuring and monitoring forests become more standardized . existing forest area data , and especially the data on forest area changes , should be used with caution , perhaps seen more as indicative than as precise , accurate measurements . the causes of tropical deforestation are manifold , and vary regionally around the globe . in some places , the drivers are commercial logging , followed by slash - and - burn agriculture that may prevent regrowth of tropical forests . why are the data discrepancies so substantial , even in relatively developed areas ( eg , the united states ) , where one might expect relatively high - quality data ? there are two principal reasons: the classification of forest lands , and the measurement and reporting systems used . nonetheless , there is a broad consensus that the highest potential for reduced deforestation is in tropical regions where forests are abundant , carbon stocks are high , and the threat of deforestation is high . table 2 presents data from two sources that cover most of the world's forests . policies and practices to reduce emissions from deforestation and degradation ( redd ) vary considerably and depend on several factors that are particular to the regions they address . some forestry practices can reduce the impacts of net deforestation , and several market approaches are evolving that could compensate landowners for not deforesting their lands . existing u.s. programs provide overseas development assistance to conserve forests , but funding levels have been modest . also , the programs are relatively narrow in their approach to forest conservation , and in some cases , require outstanding debt to the united states to generate funding . some of the challenges for implementing redd programs include accurately and effectively monitoring redd activities and projects and improving the capacity of developing countries to implement redd programs and to ensure compliance . evidence from past efforts to reduce deforestation as well as from existing data on forests and deforestation suggest this might be a significant challenge . congress is considering redd in pending climate legislation ( eg , h.r . also , redd was discussed in copenhagen in december 2009 at a conference of the parties to the united nations framework convention on climate change ( unfccc ) , and is expected to continue to be significant in future unfccc negotiations . options being discussed include funding to improve developing country capacity ( eg , inventories to establish national baselines , training for law enforcement to combat illegal logging , and improvements in governance and land tenure systems ) and mechanisms to fund national and subnational deforestation reduction activities . federal agency activities united states agency for international development the u.s. agency for international development ( usaid ) is an independent federal agency established to administer international economic and humanitarian assistance programs , in conjunction with the department of state .