regulators expressed both of these views . on november 17 , 2010 , the departments published an amendment to the interim final rules on grandfathered health plans . after review of the comments concerning the link between a change in health insurance coverage to loss of grandfathered status , the departments amended the rules to allow group health plans to "enter into a new policy , certificate , or contract of insurance" and maintain grandfathered status . this amendment would allow , for example , an employer plan that currently provides health coverage through insurance carrier a to get coverage through insurance carrier b , and still be considered a grandfathered plan ( provided that there is no other change to the plan that would cause loss of grandfathered status ) . this amendment included a comment period that ended on december 17 , 2010 . whether retiree health benefits are subject to aca depends , in part , on the population that is eligible for the health benefits . generally , retiree health benefits may be offered under a plan that is separate from health benefits offered to current employees ( retiree - only plans ) . or retiree health benefits may be offered through the same plan offered to current employees ; an example of this is what is offered through the federal employees health benefits plans ( fehbp ) , which covers both retirees and workers under the same plans . plans that cover workers must comply with the relevant aca provisions that impact employer - provided insurance ( such as the dependent coverage requirements ) . therefore , if the retiree coverage is offered through the same plan offered to current employees , then those plans , by default , must comply with the same provisions . alternatively , if the retiree coverage is offered through retiree - only plans , then such plans may ( or may not ) be subject to aca's insurance reforms . retiree - only plans may not have to comply with aca's insurance provisions: the authority to regulate employer - provided health benefits , including retiree health benefits , rests with the federal government . aca's insurance reforms are examples of the federal regulation of employer - provided health benefits . however , states are the primary enforcers of health insurance requirements , even post - aca . therefore , the states have the authority to enforce aca's insurance reforms on retiree health plans offered through state - licensed insurance companies . ( note: self - insured plans are not offered through state - licensed insurers , so they generally are not subject to state law or regulations . self - insured plans are subject to federal standards. ) each state will decide whether it will actively enforce the aca insurance reforms on retiree plans . for states that do not adequately enforce applicable health insurance requirements , the enforcement responsibility typically falls back to the federal government . however , hhs has stated that it will not enforce aca insurance reforms with respect to retiree - only coverage . this statement was made in the preamble to the interim final rules regarding grandfathered plans .