d , sec . 540 ) and the department of homeland security appropriations act , 2010 ( p.l . 111-83 , sec . after discussing the impact of p.l . 112-10 on dhs components under this title , this report will outline the administration's request , senate action on the request in the 2 nd session of the 111 th congress , and possible issues for congress . as the house position on the administration's full request was never officially ratified by the appropriations committee in 2010 , there is no data available from the house for direct comparison . title ii contains the appropriations for the bureau of customs and border protection ( cbp ) , the bureau of immigration and customs enforcement ( ice ) , the transportation security administration ( tsa ) , the u.s. coast guard , and the u.s. secret service . table 7 shows the fy2010 enacted and fy2011 appropriation action for title ii . after discussing the impact of p.l . 112-10 on dhs components under this title , this report will outline the administration's request , senate action on the request in the 2 nd session of the 111 th congress , and possible issues for congress . as the house position on the administration's full request was never officially ratified by the appropriations committee in 2010 , there is no data available from the house for direct comparison . title iii includes appropriations for the federal emergency management agency ( fema ) , the national protection and programs directorate ( nppd ) , and the office of health affairs ( oha ) . congress expanded fema's authorities and responsibilities in the post - katrina emergency reform act ( p.l . 109-295 ) and explicitly kept certain dhs functions out of the "new fema. in response to these statutory exclusions , dhs officials created the nppd to house functions not transferred to fema , and the oha was established for the office of the chief medical officer . table 13 provides account - level appropriations detail for title iii . after discussing the impact of p.l . 112-10 on dhs components under this title , this report will outline the administration's request , senate action on the request in the 2 nd session of the 111 th congress , and possible issues for congress . as the house position on the administration's full request was never officially ratified by the appropriations committee in 2010 , there is no data available from the house for direct comparison . title iv includes appropriations for u.s . citizenship and immigration services ( uscis ) , the federal law enforcement training center ( fletc ) , the science and technology directorate ( s&t ) , and the domestic nuclear detection office ( dndo ) . table 17 provides account - level details of title iv appropriations . after discussing the impact of p.l . 112-10 on dhs components under this title , this report will outline the administration's request , senate action on the request in the 2 nd session of the 111 th congress , and possible issues for congress .