work on this is ongoing . for example , los alamos national laboratory has removed two - thirds of its snm requiring the highest levels of protection . lawrence livermore national laboratory announced the removal of 90% of its snm in september 2011 . the y - 12 nuclear complex has concentrated the majority of its snm stocks at the heu materials facility . the uranium processing facility , to be built in the next decade , is to blend down the remainder of the heu stocks at y - 12 . the nuclear regulatory commission ( nrc ) is responsible for security standards at civilian sites . the senate committee on appropriations ( s.rept . 112-85 ) and house committee on appropriations ( h.rept . after the 9 / 11 attacks , security measures at nuclear power plants were improved . the energy policy act of 2005 ( p.l . 109-58 ) mandated that the nrc revise its "design based threat," which specifies the maximum severity of potential attacks that a nuclear plant's security force must be able to repel . this act also required more extensive security checks for personnel at a broad range of nuclear facilities . u.s. customs and border protection , under the department of homeland security ( dhs ) , uses handheld and portal - based radiation monitors to detect nuclear materials entering the united states . the dhs science and technology directorate conducts research and development to improve radiation detection portals . unscr 1540 called on states to enforce effective domestic controls over wmd and wmd - related materials in production , use , storage , and transport ; to maintain effective border controls ; and to develop national export and trans - shipment controls over such items , all of which should help interdiction efforts . the resolution did not , however , provide any enforcement authority , nor did it specifically mention interdiction . u.n. security council resolutions 1673 ( 2006 ) , 1810 ( 2008 ) and 1977 ( 2011 ) extended the duration of the 1540 committee . the committee is currently focused on identifying assistance projects for states in need and matching donors to improve these wmd controls . the obama administration has proposed extra - budgetary contributions to the u.n. for a trust fund to implement 1540-related projects , such as training . unscr 1540 carries the status of a mandatory legal obligation for all u.n. member states , as it was adopted under chapter vii of the u.n. charter . in addition , as mentioned above , the convention's provisions calling for information sharing and cooperation establish a basis to rally international support for efforts such as the global initiative to combat nuclear terrorism , the u.s. - led global threat reduction initiative , proliferation security initiative ( where intelligence sharing is key ) , and additional international nuclear security and counterproliferation efforts . another relevant resolution , u.n. security council resolution 1373 , adopted in september 2001 , calls on states to prevent and suppress the financing of terrorism , and to deny terrorists safe haven .