order no . this is not the case . the reason that more inter - regional transmission projects are not being built , at least in the southeast , is that they have not proven to be economic as compared to other options . as a result , those who would benefit from these projects desire to have other entities subsidize their costs by seeking to mandate the planning of these projects through restructured "top - down" planning processes and through the broad socialization of the costs of such uneconomic transmission projects . should cost allocations be static or change over time ? this question was posed by ferc as a general issue , and specifically in respect to transmission lines which are initially built with overcapacity in anticipation of demand growth . how , if at all , should non - quantifiable costs and benefits be incorporated into cost allocations ? by the end of november 2009 ferc had received 103 sets of comments . the comments manifest a wide range of opinions on how ferc should proceed . for example: american electric power , a large utility company operating within the pjm , spp , and ercot rtos , argued for interconnection - wide planning and cost allocation for extra - high voltage transmission lines , to be implemented by a ferc rulemaking . southern company , a large southeastern utility operating outside of rtos , rejected the whole notion that problems with transmission planning and cost allocation were inhibiting transmission development . southern concluded that: a significant misconception being promoted by certain aspects of the industry in the name of promoting renewable resources is that the current transmission planning processes and cost allocation methodologies are obstacles to the expansion of the transmission grid . the new england power pool participants committee ( a committee of stakeholders operating within the ne - iso ) stated that " it would be helpful for the commission to provide policy guidance on how it would treat a range of cost allocation options. [emphasis in the original] however , the committee was opposed to the establishment of interconnection - wide or national cost allocation rules , or to the notion of interconnection - wide cost allocation . the southwest power pool rto suggested that ferc implement standardized rules for inter - regional transmission planning and cost allocation . it also supported the establishment of cost allocation processes across broad areas , such as the eastern interconnection . spp stated that: attempts to precisely define benefits are misplaced . the real benefits of a major transmission project , as part of a robust ehv network , over its useful life will never be fully captured in an economic model as there are many benefits that fall outside the scope of economic modeling . while precise analysis may be desirable , the limitations of such analysis must be acknowledged . moreover , it is important to recognize that doing nothing also has a cost… . currently , spp is working to implement a cost allocation method that would even provide more cost sharing for regional projects and simplify the cost allocation .