the requirements vary . for example , the district of columbia code requires that a court give the following advisement on the record prior to accepting a plea of guilty or nolo contendere: "if you are not a citizen of the united states , you are advised that conviction of the offense for which you have been charged may have the consequences of deportation , exclusion from admission to the united states , or denial of naturalization pursuant to the laws of the united states. additionally , the court is directed to allow a defendant additional time to consider a plea upon request of the defendant after the advisement . does the client have a criminal history or other pending charges ? does the client hold government licenses , hold a government job , or collect public benefits ? further considerations might pertain to drug or sex crimes . exploring these issues , it is claimed , is "a manageable amount of basic spadework. also , judicial delineation of what consequences merit "effective assistance of counsel" during the course of a prosecution may not be as "prolonged" or "arbitrary" as justice scalia may suggest . for one thing , there may be a range of consequences that are so relatively inconsequential that they rarely will be found to have prejudiced a defendant's calculus in deciding whether to plead guilty . will failure to be informed of possibly losing the right to vote , for example , ever be found to have unreasonably prejudiced the decision of a defendant to plead guilty instead of risking many more years of imprisonment or capital punishment ? further , though not directly at issue before the trying court , some consequences might be seen as fitting more naturally into the inner orbit surrounding "direct consequences" and thus meriting advice of counsel . in addition to deportation , for example , there are the possible and easily identifiable consequences for defendants within the criminal justice system itself — for example , eligibility for parole and heightened penalties for future convictions . finally , there may be policy and legal limits on legislatures in establishing incidental effects of criminal convictions . though the constitution does not require trial courts to inform noncitizen defendants of possible deportation consequences of guilty pleas — due process requirements for knowledgeable and voluntary pleas cover only "direct" criminal consequences — many jurisdictions do . according to one amicus brief in padilla , 28 states , the district of columbia , and puerto rico have a statute , court rule , or standard plea form requiring an advisement on immigration consequences . moreover , if a court fails to give the required advisement and the plea may have one of the consequences included in the advisement , the defendant can have the judgment vacated and enter a plea of not guilty in its stead . why not "roll the dice" when exile is the alternative ? other variations require that the court direct a defendant to defense counsel for advice , or even that the court ascertain whether a defendant's attorney has discussed possible deportation consequences with the accused . not all of the statutes and rules call for automatic vacation of a plea for failure to meet pertinent requirements .