circuit . the government sought and was granted a rehearing en banc in the bahlul case to appeal the decisions . on rehearing , the d.c . circuit invalidated bahlul's convictions for solicitation and material support for terrorism on ex post facto grounds , but upheld the conspiracy charge , sending it back to the original panel to resolve additional challenges . no challenge to military commissions under the mca 2006 reached the supreme court . president obama halted the proceedings upon taking office in january 2009 in order to review whether to continue their use . the president issued an executive order requiring that the guantánamo detention facility be closed no later than a year from the date of the order . the order required specified officials to review all guantánamo detentions to assess whether the detainee should continue to be held by the united states , transferred or released to another country , or be prosecuted by the united states for criminal offenses . the secretary of defense was also required to take steps to ensure that all proceedings before military commissions and the united states court of military commission review were halted , although some pretrial proceedings continued to take place . one case was moved to a federal district court . in may 2009 , the obama administration announced that it was considering restarting the military commission system with some changes to the procedural rules . dod informed congress about modifications to the manual for military commissions , to take effect july 14 , 2009 . the senate passed the military commissions act of 2009 ( mca 2009 ) as part of the department of defense authorization act ( ndaa ) for fy2010 , s. 1391 , to provide some reforms the administration supported and to make other amendments to the military commissions act , as described below . the bill that emerged from conference ( h.r . 2647 ) contained some , but not all , of the proposals submitted by the obama administration , and was enacted october 28 , 2009 , p.l . president obama's detention policy task force issued a preliminary report july 20 , 2009 , reaffirming that the white house considers military commissions to be an appropriate forum for trying some cases involving suspected violations of the laws of the war , although federal criminal court would be the preferred forum for trials of detainees . the disposition of each case was assigned to a team composed of department of justice ( doj ) and department of defense ( dod ) personnel , including prosecutors from the office of military commissions . appended to the report was a set of criteria to govern the disposition of cases involving guantánamo detainees . this protocol identified three broad categories of factors to be taken into consideration: strength of interest , namely , the nature and gravity of offenses or underlying conduct ; identity of victims ; location of offense ; location and context in which the individual was apprehended ; and the conduct of the investigation . efficiency , namely , protection of intelligence source and methods ; venue ; number of defendants ; foreign policy concerns ; legal or evidentiary problems ; efficiency and resource concerns .