and this is the loss to retailers alone . the monetary loss , however , extends beyond the retail industry to the taxpayers and states . consumers pay for these losses in the form of higher prices on goods , and states lose the tax revenue that would otherwise be generated from the sale of these goods by legitimate retailers . in addition to the economic impact of orc , the theft and resale of stolen consumable or health and beauty products , such as infant formula , may pose safety risks to individuals purchasing such goods from orc fences . this is because such products may have been repackaged , relabeled , subjected to altered expiration dates , or stored improperly before being reentered into commerce . in addition , industry experts , law enforcement , and policy makers have expressed concern about the possibility that proceeds from orc may be used to fund terrorist activities . in particular , federal law enforcement has reputedly traced the illicit proceeds from the theft and resale of infant formula to terrorist organizations and insurgent groups , including hamas and hezbollah . combating retail theft has traditionally been handled by state law enforcement under state criminal laws . some , however , have begun to question whether state laws — which vary in the quantity of monetary losses that constitute major theft — are adequate to combat orc . while many agree that orc is a national problem , there is debate over the federal government's role in deterring orc and sanctioning various actors that may be involved in committing or aiding these crimes . one policy issue facing congress is whether criminalizing organized retail crime in the u.s. code would allow for more effective investigation and prosecution of these criminals . another related issue that congress may wish to consider is whether regulating resale marketplaces ( online markets , in particular ) , to require such entities to increase information sharing with retailers and law enforcement , would strengthen investigations and prosecutions of orc as well as decrease the prevalence of retail thieves relying on legitimate online marketplaces to fence stolen goods . this report provides an overview of organized retail crime rings , their operations , and goods targeted . it then examines the domestic impact of orc in the arenas of the economy , public health and safety , and domestic security . the report also outlines current efforts by retailers , resale markets , and the federal government to combat orc . it then analyzes various policy issues that congress may wish to consider , including whether current federal resources provided for the investigation of orc are adequate , whether to amend the u.s. code to criminalize orc , and whether to regulate resale marketplaces that may be utilized as fences for criminals to sell stolen goods . the concept of organized retail crime tends to be discussed in terms of criminal networks engaged in large - scale theft . descriptions of orc also generally entail criminals fraudulently obtaining goods in quantities beyond what would normally be intended for personal consumption ; reselling these ill - gotten goods ; receiving , concealing , transporting , or disposing of these goods ; or coordinating individuals to commit these retail crimes .