compared to h.r . 3590 , the reconciliation bill makes the premium credits in 2014 somewhat more generous for individuals between 133% fpl and 200% fpl and between 250% fpl and 400% fpl , as illustrated in figure 1 and table 1 . for years after 2014 , both h.r . 3590 and the reconciliation bill would increase the percentage of income eligible individuals would be required to pay toward premiums ( i.e. , reducing premium credits ) based on how much premium growth exceeded income growth . however , after 2018 , if the premium and cost - sharing subsidies exceeded 0.504% of gross domestic product ( gdp ) for the preceding year , then the required percentage of income paid toward premiums would also be increased by how much premium growth exceeded overall inflation for the preceding year . in addition to the senate bill's requirements and limitations when reconciling taxpayers' advanced premium tax credits to levels ultimately reported on their actual tax returns , the reconciliation bill requires exchanges to provide to the secretary of health and human services the following: each enrollee's level and length of exchange coverage ; the premium for the plan ( excluding the premium and cost - sharing subsidies ) ; the advanced payments for premium and cost - sharing subsidies ; the name , address , and taxpayer id number of each individual covered ; "any information provided to the exchange , including any change of circumstances , necessary to determine eligibility for , and the amount of , such credit" ; and any "other similar information necessary to carry out this subsection and determine whether a taxpayer has received excess advance payments. even when individuals have health insurance , they may be unable to afford the cost - sharing ( deductibles and copayments ) required to obtain health care . thus , under the senate and reconciliation bills , those eligible for premium credits would also be eligible for cost - sharing subsidies for silver plans sold through an exchange . the cost - sharing subsidies are provided to insurers so that their plans pay for a certain percentage of covered health care expenses . as illustrated in figure 2 , compared to the senate bill , the reconciliation bill increases the cost - sharing subsidies for those up to 250% fpl , to cover a higher percentage of expenses . however , these amounts are still less than those in house - passed h.r . under senate - passed h.r . 3590 , modified gross income ( mgi ) would be used for determining eligibility for premium and cost - sharing credits , as well as for medicaid and chip , beginning in 2014 . mgi was defined as gross income decreased by trade and business deductions , losses from sale of property , and alimony payments , but including tax - exempt interest and income earned in the territories and by u.s. citizens or residents living abroad . the reconciliation bill would use a different definition and term , modified adjusted gross income ( magi ) , and apply it to the premium and cost - sharing credits as well as to medicaid and chip .