appendix a . summary of past u.s. ssbn designs this appendix provides background information on the four ssbn classes that the united states has operated since 1959 . the four classes are summarized in table a - 1 . as shown in the table , the size of u.s. ssbns has grown over time , reflecting in part a growth in the size and number of slbms carried on each boat . 112-81 of december 31 , 2011 ) required dod to submit a report on the columbia - class program that includes , among other things , an assessment of various combinations of boat quantities and numbers of slbm launch tubes per boat . the text of the section is as follows: sec . report and cost assessment of options for ohio - class replacement ballistic missile submarine . ( a ) report required - not later than 180 days after the date of the enactment of this act , the secretary of the navy and the commander of the united states strategic command shall jointly submit to the congressional defense committees a report on each of the options described in subsection ( b ) to replace the ohio - class ballistic submarine program . the report shall include the following: ( 1 ) an assessment of the procurement cost and total life - cycle costs associated with each option . ( 2 ) an assessment of the ability for each option to meet — ( a ) the at - sea requirements of the commander that are in place as of the date of the enactment of this act ; and ( b ) any expected changes in such requirements . ( 3 ) an assessment of the ability for each option to meet — ( a ) the nuclear employment and planning guidance in place as of the date of the enactment of this act ; and ( b ) any expected changes in such guidance . ( 4 ) a description of the postulated threat and strategic environment used to inform the selection of a final option and how each option provides flexibility for responding to changes in the threat and strategic environment . ( b ) options considered - the options described in this subsection to replace the ohio - class ballistic submarine program are as follows: ( 1 ) a fleet of 12 submarines with 16 missile tubes each . ( 2 ) a fleet of 10 submarines with 20 missile tubes each . ( 3 ) a fleet of 10 submarines with 16 missile tubes each . ( 4 ) a fleet of eight submarines with 20 missile tubes each . ( 5 ) any other options the secretary and the commander consider appropriate . ( c ) form - the report required under subsection ( a ) shall be submitted in unclassified form , but may include a classified annex . subsection ( c ) above states the report "shall be submitted in unclassified form , but may include a classified annex.