next , current dairy policy is reviewed . finally , the report examines options for federal dairy policy being considered by the industry and / or congress . in contrast , the number of farms with 1,000 or more cows increased 20% , driven by significantly lower costs of production . in 2005 , dairy farms with 1,000 cows or more had average costs of production of $13.59 per cwt , 15% below the average for farms with 400-999 head and 35% below the cost for farms with 100-199 head . average costs were much higher for even smaller operations . in the western states , where large dairy farms dominate the industry , operating costs have been affected by high feed costs in recent years because these farms purchase much of their feed ( alfalfa and grain prices reached record levels in 2008 ) . however , per - unit overhead costs tend to be relatively low for these operations because fixed costs ( eg , buildings / equipment ) can be spread over a large number of animals . in other parts of the country , such as wisconsin , where producers feed more grain and hay that is produced on the farm , operating costs tend to be lower when grain and feed prices rise . however , these farms tend to have fewer dairy cows , so per - unit overhead costs are relatively high . in the mid - 1850s , most milk was consumed on farms by the family or fed to livestock ; some was sold for very local use . as urban areas grew , milk was sent to processors to supply these areas with both fluid and manufactured products . by the turn of the century , producers banded together into cooperative associations to bargain with milk handlers ( fluid milk processors ) as a way to offset handler market power stemming from a large number of producers facing a small number of processors . in the early 1900s , dairy farmers increasingly looked toward cooperatives as a means of marketing their milk , specifically by negotiating with milk buyers using collective bargaining . the structure of dairy farms also varies by region of the country ( table 2 ) . the average farm size in western states ( eg , california , with 850 cows per farm ) is well above the u.s. average of 133 cows per farm . in contrast , wisconsin has many small farms and an average farm size of 88 cows . when the great depression hit , demand dropped sharply and the voluntary classified pricing system broke down . federal milk marketing orders were established ( and continue to function today ) to stabilize the market and help equalize the market power of dairy farmers with dairy processors ( see " federal milk marketing orders ( fmmos ) ," below ) . another motivation for establishing fmmos was to ensure that consumers had adequate and dependable supplies of milk at reasonable prices . during this same period , legislators enacted import quotas on dairy products to protect producers from foreign competition . eventually , during world war ii , demand increased for farm commodities , including milk .