title xi of p.l . 108-173 , the medicare prescription drug and modernization act of 2003 , as signed into law by the president on december 8 , 2003 , made several changes to the original hatch - waxman act that were designed to decrease the time needed to bring generic pharmaceuticals to the marketplace . the new provisions were designed to "close some of the loopholes" critics argued that the brand name companies used to delay the introduction of generic products . the legislation permits only one automatic 30-month stay on fda approval of drugs for which patents are listed in the orange book at the time of a paragraph iv anda or 505 ( b ) ( 2 ) filing . the applicant may not amend the paragraph iv certification to include a drug different from that approved by the fda , but may amend the application if seeking marketing consent for a different strength of the same drug . modifications to the default 30-month stay are allowed based on district court judgments . the applicant for an abbreviated new drug approval containing a paragraph iv certification must provide the brand name company and any patent owners with notice of such action within 20 days of filing with the fda . upon receipt of this notice , the brand name manufacturer has 45 days within which to file an infringement suit and thereby be eligible for the automatic 30-month stay . in a situation where a patent holder does not file an infringement action within 45 days of notification of a paragraph iv anda , the anda applicant may request that a district court issue a declaratory judgment regarding the validity of the patent . in order to request a declaratory judgment , the generic manufacturer must have made available to the brand name company and the patent owners the confidential information contained in the anda application . if sued , the generic firm may file a counter claim to require the patent holder make changes in the orange book listings . the generic firm may request that certain patents be delisted because they do not claim the drug to which they are attached . no monetary damages are to be awarded . the food and drug administration may approve the anda or 505 ( b ) ( 2 ) filing containing a paragraph iv certification on the date of an appeals court decision , the date of a settlement order or consent decree , or when a district court decision is not appealed . the 180-day market exclusivity is to begin with the first commercial marketing of the generic drug ( rather than being triggered by a "court decision" as under the original legislation ) . this exclusivity can be forfeited in certain situations including failure to market under specific time constraints , withdrawal of the application , amendment of the certification , failure to obtain approval from the fda , expiration of all patents , or the determination by the federal trade commission or the assistant attorney general that an agreement between the brand name and generic firms violates antitrust laws . subsequent applicants would not be permitted the 180-day exclusivity .