sec . designation of f135 and f136 engine development and procurement programs as major subprograms . ( a ) designation as major subprograms - not later than 30 days after the date of the enactment of this act , the secretary of defense shall designate each of the engine development and procurement programs described in subsection ( b ) as a major subprogram of the f - 35 lightning ii aircraft major defense acquisition program , in accordance with section 2430a of title 10 , united states code . ( b ) description - for purposes of subsection ( a ) , the engine development and procurement programs are the following: ( 1 ) the f135 engine development and procurement program . ( 2 ) the f136 engine development and procurement program . ( c ) original baseline - for purposes of reporting requirements referred to in section 2430a ( b ) of title 10 , united states code , for the major subprograms designated under subsection ( a ) , the secretary shall use the milestone b decision for each subprogram as the original baseline for the subprogram . ( d ) actions following critical cost growth - ( 1 ) in general - subject to paragraph ( 2 ) , to the extent that the secretary elects to restructure the f - 35 lightning ii aircraft major defense acquisition program subsequent to a reassessment and actions required by subsections ( a ) and ( c ) of section 2433a of title 10 , united states code , during fiscal year 2010 , and also conducts such reassessment and actions with respect to the f135 and f136 engine development and procurement programs ( including related reporting based on the original baseline as defined in subsection ( c ) ) , the requirements of section 2433a of such title with respect to a major subprogram designated under subsection ( a ) shall be considered to be met with respect to the major subprogram . ( 2 ) limitation - actions taken in accordance with paragraph ( 1 ) shall be considered to meet the requirements of section 2433a of title 10 , united states code , with respect to a major subprogram designated under subsection ( a ) only to the extent that designation as a major subprogram would require the secretary of defense to conduct a reassessment and take actions pursuant to such section 2433a for such a subprogram upon enactment of this act . the requirements of such section 2433a shall not be considered to be met with respect to such a subprogram in the event that additional programmatic changes , following the date of the enactment of this act , cause the program acquisition unit cost or procurement unit cost of such a subprogram to increase by a percentage equal to or greater than the critical cost growth threshold ( as defined in section 2433 ( a ) ( 5 ) of such title ) for the subprogram . the report accompanying h.r . 111-491 , includes other language regarding the f - 35 alternate engine program .