global development policy . over the years , interest in diplomacy and development as foreign policy tools has crossed the political spectrum . the terrorist attacks in 2001 , however , highlighted a renewed interest in the benefits of diplomacy and development working more effectively along with defense toward u.s. national security goals . global climate change initiative ( gcci ) , which will integrate climate change considerations into foreign assistance programs . several foreign aid experts and organizations assert that before foreign aid reform can be successful , a national strategy should be in place to identify the goals for reform and to be able to determine if reform is moving aid in the direction of those goals . the help ( helping to enhance the livelihood of people around the globe ) commission , a 21-member bipartisan commission established by congress in the consolidated appropriations act , 2004 ( p.l . 108-199 ) , reported that civilian foreign affairs would be well - served by imposing the same rigor to u.s. foreign assistance planning that is required in formulating the nation's security and defense policies . these security policies are guided by long - term strategies , developed by the executive branch , and presented regularly to the legislative branch . the commission recommended requiring a national international affairs strategy to further elaborate u.s. international affairs objectives on both global and regional levels , as well as country - by - country . the proposed strategy would also outline government - wide capabilities and assistance needed to achieve these objectives . this strategy would cover all efforts funded by the international affairs ( 150 ) budget function . the government accountability office recommends that the secretary of state work with all u.s. government entities involved in the delivery of foreign assistance to develop and implement a comprehensive , government - wide foreign assistance strategy , complete with time frames and measures for successful implementation . involving other agencies in this effort could include adopting key practices that we have found to sustain and enhance interagency coordination and collaboration in addressing common goals . in may 2010 , president obama released his overall national security strategy . chapters included "invest in the capacity of strong and capable partners," "accelerate sustainable development," and "promote democracy and human rights abroad. the national security strategy emphasized a whole - of - government approach to integrating and coordinating agencies and tools , including those of development and diplomacy , to advance our 21 st century interests and security . while this was not the same as a national strategy on development , it gave a sense of some development priorities of this administration , including working more effectively with aid recipients as partners , encouraging greater burden sharing among u.s. allies , investing in long - term development , and advancing democracy and human rights . many in the 111 th congress believed that mandating clear objectives for foreign aid , assessing whether or not aid is meeting those objectives , and then reporting on the findings are essential requirements for effective foreign aid reform . establishing criteria and anticipated results for a more effective foreign aid program would result in elevating the status of development as a foreign policy tool , experts asserted .