the acta requires ratification in the mexican congress . on july 4 , 2012 , the european parliament voted against the acta , meaning that neither the eu nor its individual member states can join the agreement in its current form . what follows is a discussion of some of the building blocks for the acta found in u.s. trade policy . the acta negotiation has spurred debates among various stakeholder groups within and among the various countries on both process and substance . certain stakeholders have voiced concerns about the negotiation's scope , transparency , and inclusiveness . members of the u.s. business community , such as the entertainment , pharmaceutical , luxury goods , and high technology industries , largely have been supportive of the acta . they assert that stronger international ipr protection and enforcement through the acta are critical for their competitiveness . other business groups , including internet service providers , have expressed concerns about the digital enforcement provisions of the proposed agreement . in addition , various civil society groups , such as public health and consumer rights advocates , have voiced concerns about the implications of the acta for trade in legitimate goods , consumer privacy , and free flow of information . with the existence of the wto trips agreement and other international agreements on ipr , some question the rationale behind creating a new agreement to combat counterfeiting and piracy . the following section discusses in greater detail some of these key points of debate . the 112 th congress may examine the role of congress in the acta approval process beyond oversight . congress may choose to examine whether implementation of the acta without congressional approval could raise constitutional issues , given that u.s. approval of international agreements concerning foreign commerce and intellectual property rights falls under the article 1 , section 8 powers of congress in the u.s. constitution . the acta may raise a range of questions for congress: what is the role of congress in the acta approval process ? will congressional activity regarding the acta extend beyond oversight ? how would the acta affect congressional action in areas covered by the agreement ? and would a country's fulfillment of acta commitments affect ustr determinations for its special 301 watch lists ? given the european parliament's rejection of the acta , what are the prospects for the acta entering into force ? countries have from may 1 , 2011 , until may 1 , 2013 , to sign the agreement . all negotiating parties , except mexico and switzerland , have signed the agreement . acta signatories are to proceed with domestic ratification procedures . among these numerous concerns , what forms of infringement should be given priority if resources are limited ? what implications does the proposed acta have for the allocation of federal funds ? would implementation of the acta require the appropriation of federal funds , even though changes in federal laws are not necessarily required ? what implications does the proposed acta have for the future of u.s. trade policy ? does the acta set a precedent for conducting future efforts on ipr protection and enforcement primarily or increasingly outside of multilateral frameworks ?