the military chaplaincy raises other issues of accommodation of religious practices in the military . the chaplaincy is a fairly unique institution in the context of religious freedom analysis because it is a government - funded program with the specific purpose of providing religious services to members of the u.s. military . religious exercise is protected by a number of different laws and regulations . primarily , the protections and limitations on religion are based upon the establishment clause and free exercise clause of the first amendment . in addition to the first amendment's religion clauses , the religious freedom restoration act ( rfra ) supplements the standard of review of burdens on individuals' religious exercise to provide heightened protection not offered by the constitutional standard . furthermore , the department of defense ( dod ) has promulgated regulations addressing religious exercise in the military . although courts have not invalidated the chaplaincy as a violation of religious freedoms so far , there have been indications that some specific operations of the chaplaincy may raise constitutional concerns . further , applicants for appointment as chaplains must affirm that they will "abide by applicable laws , and all applicable regulations , directives , and instructions of the department of defense , and of the military department that grades the appointment. of particular note , in 2007 , the dod implemented a change to the instruction concerning the potential nexus between religion and terrorism . any individual or religious organization may be removed from or rejected from participating in the chaplain program if "the individual is under indictment or has been convicted of a terrorism related offense , or other offense threatening national or economic security" ; or "the religious organization appears on the annual state department list of foreign terror organizations. the instruction provides procedures for the removal of chaplains from the service for loss of ecclesiastical endorsement ; however , the instruction does not state if those procedures , rather than the standard administrative separation procedures , would apply to an individual removed from the chaplaincy due to indictment or conviction of terrorism related offense . the armed forces chaplains board , established by the dod instruction 5120.08 , serves the purpose of making recommendations on "religious , ethical , and moral matters" for the military services to the secretary of defense . the board consists of the chief and active deputy chief of chaplains from each of the three military departments: army , navy , and air force . in addition to making recommendations on the "[p]rocurement , professional standards , requirements , training , and assignment of military chaplains," the board advises the secretary of defense on the "[p]rotection of the free exercise of religion according to amendment i to the constitution of the united states. the report analyzes efforts by congress and the department of defense to address the constitutional concerns that are raised by these issues . in 1985 , the u.s. court of appeals for the second circuit decided the only direct constitutional challenge to the military chaplaincy , katcoff v. marsh . although later cases have challenged how the chaplaincy is administered , katcoff considered whether the mere existence of the military chaplaincy violated the establishment clause .