policy a . it is the policy of the united states to: 1 . meet national security and homeland security needs relevant to the arctic region ; 2 . protect the arctic environment and conserve its biological resources ; 3 . ensure that natural resource management and economic development in the region are environmentally sustainable ; 4 . strengthen institutions for cooperation among the eight arctic nations ( the united states , canada , denmark , finland , iceland , norway , the russian federation , and sweden ) ; 5 . involve the arctic's indigenous communities in decisions that affect them ; and 6 . enhance scientific monitoring and research into local , regional , and global environmental issues . b . national security and homeland security interests in the arctic 1 . the united states has broad and fundamental national security interests in the arctic region and is prepared to operate either independently or in conjunction with other states to safeguard these interests . this directive shall be implemented in a manner consistent with the constitution and laws of the united states , with the obligations of the united states under the treaties and other international agreements to which the united states is a party , and with customary international law as recognized by the united states , including with respect to the law of the sea . ii . background a . the united states is an arctic nation , with varied and compelling interests in that region . this directive takes into account several developments , including , among others: 1 . altered national policies on homeland security and defense ; 2 . the effects of climate change and increasing human activity in the arctic region ; 3 . the establishment and ongoing work of the arctic council ; and 4 . a growing awareness that the arctic region is both fragile and rich in resources . iii . b . these interests include such matters as missile defense and early warning ; deployment of sea and air systems for strategic sealift , strategic deterrence , maritime presence , and maritime security operations ; and ensuring freedom of navigation and overflight . the united states also has fundamental homeland security interests in preventing terrorist attacks and mitigating those criminal or hostile acts that could increase the united states vulnerability to terrorism in the arctic region . the arctic region is primarily a maritime domain ; as such , existing policies and authorities relating to maritime areas continue to apply , including those relating to law enforcement . [1] human activity in the arctic region is increasing and is projected to increase further in coming years . this requires the united states to assert a more active and influential national presence to protect its arctic interests and to project sea power throughout the region . the united states exercises authority in accordance with lawful claims of united states sovereignty , sovereign rights , and jurisdiction in the arctic region , including sovereignty within the territorial sea , sovereign rights and jurisdiction within the united states exclusive economic zone and on the continental shelf , and appropriate control in the united states contiguous zone . freedom of the seas is a top national priority .