such credits are not provided through the shop exchanges . the premium credit is an advanceable , refundable tax credit , meaning taxfilers need not wait until the end of the tax year in order to benefit from the credit , and may claim the full credit amount even if they have little or no federal income tax liability . for example , a person with income at 150% fpl may be required to pay a maximum of 4% of household income toward exchange coverage . instead of the incremental change discussed above , the contribution amount jumps when you compare income just below 133% fpl with income at 133% fpl . in certain instances , the credit amount may cover the entire premium and the taxfiler pays nothing toward the premium . in other instances , the taxfiler may pay part ( or all ) of the premium . the calculation of the credit amount is based on a comparison of two amounts that result from two different scenarios . the first scenario ( and amount ) is straightforward: the premium for the exchange plan in which the person / family enrolls . the second scenario is more complicated , involving a formula that considers the premium for a standard plan in the local area in which the person / family resides , and an amount that the person / family may be required to contribute toward the premium . based on a comparison of the amounts resulting from each scenario , the premium credit will be the lesser amount . the following text box , "calculation of the premium credit amount," discusses these two scenarios in more detail . under scenario b , the amount that a taxfiler who receives a premium credit is required to contribute toward the premium ( for the reference plan ) is capped as a percent of household income ; that is , the maximum premium contribution is the product of the taxfiler's household income and the "applicable percentage," as specified in aca . in general , the applicable percentage is less for those with lower incomes compared with those with higher incomes ; where income is measured relative to the federal poverty level . under scenario b , the amount that taxfilers with income between 100% fpl and 133% fpl may be required to contribute toward the reference plan's premium is capped at 2% of household income . for taxfilers with income 300% - 400% fpl , their premium contribution is capped at 9.5% of income . aca further specifies the applicable percentages that taxfilers , whose incomes are between those two income bands , may be required to pay toward the cost of exchange coverage under scenario b ( see figure 1 ) . the line graph shows the "applicable percentage" used to calculate the taxfiler's required premium contribution at each income level , as measured relative to the federal poverty level . the aca statute specifies the applicable percentage at certain incomes ( income at 100% fpl , 133% fpl , 150% fpl , etc. ) at each of those incomes , the line changes slope . specifically , at and above 133% fpl up to 300% fpl , the applicable percentage increases incrementally as income increases .