appendix b . funding for programs authorized under wi . grants are allotted to the states via formula . states are required to match their grants so that no more than 78.7% of their vr funds are from federal sources . if a state is not able to match its entire grant , unmatched funds are made available to other states to match . vr state grants are mandatory spending and the authorization status of the vr state grants program is different from most other programs that were created or amended by wia . the rehabilitation act specifies that if authorization for appropriations expires and congress has not acted to reauthorize the program , it will automatically be reauthorized for one year and the annual appropriation will equal the prior year's appropriation plus an increase equal to inflation . most workforce development occurs in the workplace during the course of doing business . the federal government provides workforce development activities through wia's programs and other programs designed to increase the employment and earnings of workers . workforce development may include activities such as job search assistance , career counseling , occupational skill training , classroom training , or on - the - job training . the focus of this report is on title i of wia , which authorizes programs to provide job search , education , and training activities for individuals seeking to gain or improve their employment prospects and which establishes the one - stop delivery system . the programs and services in title i are covered in detail in this report , while the programs and services in titles ii , iii , and iv are discussed briefly . title ii of wia provides funding for adult education and literacy activities . title iii of wia amends the wagner - peyser act of 1933 , which establishes the employment service ( es ) , to make the es an integral part of the one - stop system created by wia . because the es is a critical part of the one - stop system , it is discussed briefly in this report even though it is authorized by separate legislation ( wagner - peyser act of 1933 ) . title iv of wia authorizes funding for vocational rehabilitation services for individuals with disabilities . following a brief history of federal workforce development programs , there is a discussion of the provisions and characteristics of wia title i programs and services . next , there is a description of the one - stop delivery system and workforce investment boards ( wibs ) . this section includes an overview of the employment service , whose authorizing legislation ( wagner - peyser act of 1933 ) was amended by title iii of wia . following that , the report covers the services provided by the state formula grant programs and the national programs authorized under title i of wia . the section on title i concludes with a discussion of funding and performance accountability . the report then provides a description of the services , funding , and performance accountability provisions of wia titles ii and iv . appendix a provides a glossary of selected key terms in wia .