appendix b . exceptions to the visa requirements not all aliens are required to have a visa to visit the united states . indeed , most visitors enter the united states without nonimmigrant visas through the visa waiver program ( vwp ) . the other approach analyzes the top grounds for exclusion over a 15-year period . as in the discussions above , the immigrant determinations are treated separately from the nonimmigrant determinations . all of these analyses are based on the initial decision and do not take into account initial refusals that might have been overcome with subsequent information . the rise and fall of the public charge ground is the most striking feature of the 15-year trend analysis . foremost , many applicants filed affidavits of support that were insufficient in the first few years after iirira went into effect . as the legal community and the prospective lprs gained a better understanding of the requirement that the affidavit of support must demonstrate the ability to maintain an annual income of at least 125% of the federal poverty line , they may have submitted more complete financial data to support the affidavit . the statutory change in iirira that made the affidavits of support legally binding may have changed behavior over time as well . potential sponsors may have become less likely to petition for family members if they lacked adequate resources to support them . the steady rise in exclusions based on past illegal presence and prior removal is likewise largely due to the statutory change in iirira . since 1996 , foreign nationals who were unlawfully present in the united states for longer than 180 days but less than a year are inadmissible for three years after their departure . foreign nationals who were unlawfully present for at least a year are inadmissible for 10 years after their departure . when these changes were coupled with database improvements and access to databases across agencies , consular officers became better able to identify visa applicants who are inadmissible on these grounds . the improvements in immigration - related databases as well as the expansion of access to law enforcement databases offer similar explanations for the uptick in criminal grounds of exclusion . finally , the increase in immigrant exclusions based upon labor market protections may reflect the growth in demand for foreign workers and the competition for these scarce visas . as of november 1 , 2009 , there were 3,499,964 employment - based lprs visa applications pending . appendix a. consular databases for screening consular officers use the consular consolidated database ( ccd ) to screen visa applicants . records of all visa applications are now automated in the ccd , with some records dating back to the mid - 1990s . since february 2001 , the ccd has stored photographs of all visa applicants in electronic form , and more recently the ccd has begun storing 10-finger scans . in addition to indicating the outcome of any prior visa application of the alien in the ccd and comments by consular officers , the system links with other databases to flag problems that may have an impact on the issuance of the visa .