these provisions are highlighted below . extension of the period available for the obligation and expenditure of appropriation funds ( section 421 ) . automatic extension of the authorization of an applicable program for one additional fiscal year ( section 422 ) . prohibition on using funds for transportation of students or teachers to overcome a racial imbalance or to carry out a desegregation plan ( section 426 ) . prohibition on federal control of education ( section 438 ) . privacy provisions that require educational agencies that receive federal funds to provide parents with access to children's educational records and that prohibit such agencies from releasing such records without written consent ( section 444 ) . general prohibition on the use of funds provided to ed or to an applicable program to support a national test unless it is explicitly authorized in statutory language ( section 447 ) . gepa includes multiple sections , primarily organized under four parts: part a — functions of the department of education ; part b — appropriations and evaluations ; part c — general requirements and conditions concerning the operation and administration of education programs: general authority of the secretary ; and part d — enforcement . the act begins with a section that includes provisions related to the applicability of the gepa provisions to education programs . a summary of each section of gepa is provided below . the summary is not intended to be a comprehensive examination of gepa , but rather an overview of the contents of this act . this section discusses the practical application of several gepa provisions and issues related to these provisions . most appropriations are available for obligation during the federal fiscal year of the appropriations bill . for example , most fy2010 appropriations will be available for obligation from october 1 , 2009 , through september 30 , 2010 . several applicable programs have authorization or appropriations provisions that allow funding flexibility for program years that differ from the federal fiscal year . for example , many of the elementary and secondary education formula grant programs receive appropriations that become available for obligation to the states on july 1 of the same year as the appropriations , and remain available for 15 months through the end of the following fiscal year . that is , fy2010 appropriations for some programs will become available for obligation to the states on july 1 , 2010 , and will remain available until september 30 , 2011 . this budgetary procedure is popularly known as "forward" or "multi - year" funding , and is accomplished through funding provisions in the annual labor , health and human services , and education , and related agencies ( l - hhs - ed ) appropriations bill . forward funding in the case of elementary and secondary education programs was designed to allow additional time for school officials to develop budgets in advance of the beginning of the school year . for pell grants for undergraduates , however , aggregate program costs for individual students applying for postsecondary educational assistance cannot be known with certainty ahead of time .