it is funded primarily by states parties . the statute of the international criminal court ( the "rome statute" or "statute" ) , which created the icc , established icc jurisdiction over persons who , following the statute's entry into force on july 1 , 2002 , commit certain offenses . the prosecutor is elected by secret ballot by an absolute majority of the members of the assembly of states parties . the prosecutor must have "high moral character," competence and extensive practical experience in prosecuting or trying criminal cases , and fluency in one of the six working languages of the court ( arabic , chinese , english , french , russian , and spanish ) . the prosecutor holds office for a term of nine years and is not eligible for re - election . the office of the prosecutor is required to act as an independent and separate organ of the court . it is responsible for ( 1 ) receiving referrals about alleged war crimes and any substantiated information on crimes within the jurisdiction of the court ; ( 2 ) examining these referrals and conducting investigations ; and ( 3 ) conducting prosecutions before the court . the prosecutor must not participate in any matter in which his impartiality might reasonably be doubted , and he is disqualified from a case if he has previously been involved either in that case before the court or in a case at the national level involving the person being investigated or prosecuted . subsection ( b ) also provided for a presidential determination justifying a waiver of the prohibition , but it required prior notice to congress , included "such other country as he may determine" along with nato members , mnnas , and taiwan as eligible to receive the waiver , and changed the standard from a determination of national security interest to one of national interest . subsection ( c ) of the fy2006 act provision is similar to that of fy2005 , allowing the president to waive if a country entered an article 98 agreement , except this waiver also became dependent on prior notice to congress . subsection ( d ) contained the identical exemption from the prohibition for mca - eligible countries . subsection ( e ) exempted democracy and rule of law programs and activities from the fy2005 nethercutt amendment's prohibition on esf funds to icc states parties . if the icc prosecutor decides to prosecute someone , article 89 of the rome statute permits the court to request the arrest and surrender of that person from any country where that person may be found . however , a country that is not a party to the rome statute is not mandated to comply with such a request . in addition , article 98 precludes the icc from making a request for the surrender of a person when doing so would require the requested country to act inconsistently with its obligations under international law or international agreements .