for some programs , the administration requests a reduction in funding . for fy2011 , the administration proposed a total appropriation of $4.0 billion for state and local homeland security programs , which is $164 million less than congress appropriated in fy2010 . this proposed reduction in the total appropriation is a combination of reducing funding to some programs , such as the assistance to firefighters program , and eliminating selected programs . these proposed reductions and elimination of certain programs are partially offset by proposed increases in funding for some programs , such as the state homeland security grant program and the urban area security initiative . two of these issues include the elimination of seven programs and the reduction of funding for the assistance to firefighters program . table 1 provides information on the fy2010 enacted amounts and the fy2011 budget request for dhs's state and local programs . this option might ensure that numerous homeland security projects receive baseline funding ; however , this approach might result in less funding for larger programs such as the state homeland security grant program and the urban area security initiative . as congress begins its appropriation process , members may opt to consider issues associated with the administration's proposed budget request for state and local homeland security assistance programs . this option , however , might result in some grantees being unable to fund a number of projects they deem as needed . for fy2011 , the administration proposed $610 million for firefighter assistance programs , which is $200 million less than the fy2010 appropriation . specifically , the administration's fy2011 budget proposed $305 million for the assistance to firefighters assistance program ( afg ) — a decrease of $95 million from the fy2010 level — and $305 million for the staffing for adequate fire & emergency response grant program ( safer ) — a decrease of $105 million . the fy2011 request for afg would be , if approved , the lowest amount appropriated since fy2001 , the initial year of the program . the administration's budget request does not provide information on why it has proposed to reduce afg funding . unlike many dhs grant programs , afg employs a competitive grant process that awards funding directly to applying fire departments and emergency medical service organizations . in recent years , the amount of total afg funding requested in applications has continued to rise , from $2.3 billion in fy2006 to $3.2 billion in fy2009 . thus , the reduction of available funding in the assistance to firefighter programs could potentially heighten competition among fire departments for federal grant money . ultimately , more fire departments would not receive federal grants for equipment , training , hiring , recruitment / retention , and other purposes , and would thus either rely more on local government budgets or go without . as it did in fy2010 , congress could choose to increase fy2011 funding for firefighter assistance over the level recommended by the administration . such a scenario would prevent a significant drop in the number of fire departments and ems organizations receiving funding in fy2011 .