details are as follows . siegfried hecker , co - director , center for international security and cooperation , stanford university , and director emeritus of los alamos national laboratory , reported on a visit to north korea's nuclear complex at yongbyon . north korean officials showed him and other u.s. visitors "a new facility that contained a modern , small industrial - scale uranium enrichment facility with 2,000 centrifuges that was recently completed. further , "we were told that they began construction in april 2009 and completed the operations a few days ago. hecker reported that the chief process engineer told him that the centrifuges were not of a first - generation p - 1 design , and inferred that they were most likely of the more advanced p - 2 design . for example , the may 2009 event might have been a large conventional explosion conducted to inflate the appearance of progress in north korea's weapons program . the treaty's supporters might respond that the ability of the ims seismic component to pick out signals characteristic of an explosion originating in the area of the suspected test from the many seismic signals occurring each day shows the capability of the ims . as another example , the ims detected the 2009 event seismically , and identified it as an explosion , before north korea announced it . more generally , the 2009 test shows that an attempt to evade detection would also have to contain radionuclides and suppress other signatures , a more difficult task than suppressing only one signature . opponents might counter that osis could not happen unless the treaty entered into force , and that north korea is unlikely to ratify the treaty , thereby preventing entry into force , as long as it has any interest in future nuclear tests . even if north korea ratified the treaty , it could bar inspections of its territory , and if it allowed them , inspectors might not find proof that a test occurred . while the case could be referred to the united nations , ctbt opponents would see only a slim likelihood of that body taking effective action . supporters recognize that osis could not be conducted under the treaty without entry into force , and see that as a benefit of entry into force . they believe that osis have a good chance of finding a "smoking gun," and that the u.n. would adopt stringent sanctions on north korea in response to nuclear tests conducted after the treaty had entered into force . they see a refusal by a state party to permit inspections as prima facie evidence of a violation . one generally - accepted means of evading detection of nuclear tests , especially low - yield tests , is "decoupling," testing in a large underground cavity to muffle the seismic signal . opponents could argue that a decoupled test conducted in a manner that prevented release of radionuclides , such as deep under a mountain , might go undetected by radionuclide sensors as well as seismographs , and that the other two ims technologies , infrasound and hydroacoustic , would not be expected to detect a test of this sort , so all ims technologies might be circumvented simultaneously .