sec . 2 would require the secretary of the treasury to oppose any activation of the expanded new arrangements to borrow ( nab ) facility that would fund directly or indirectly an imf loan to a member country of the european union if it or any other member of the eu has a public debt - to - gdp ratio greater than 60% . sec . 3 would direct the secretary to instruct the used at the imf to oppose any assistance directly or indirectly to an eu member if any other eu member had a debt - to - gdp ratio above that level . the bills state in their heading that the provisions are temporary , but no time limitation is provided . because of the size of its share , the united states can block activation of the expanded nab facility by withholding support , if and when the expanded nab comes into effect . this legislation would require the united states to oppose use of the nab facility for any loans to european countries that have substantial public debts . some suggest , however , that the legislation might also have unintended effects . for example , if this legislation had been in effect last year , the united states would have had to oppose all imf loans to post - communist countries of central and eastern europe that are members of the eu , even though most analysts agree that excessive levels of public indebtedness were not the source of their difficulties . the bills seem to presume that the expanded nab resources will be activated on a country - by - country basis and therefore loans to european countries can be blocked while loans to other countries may be approved . imf member countries agreed in april 2010 , however , that the expanded nab will be activated for a set period of time ( up to 6 months ) and would be used to finance any applicable loans during that period . the united states has the power to prevent the nab from being activated but it cannot veto specific borrowers . under this legislation , the secretary of the treasury would need to keep the nab shut indefinitely or risk the possibility that an eu country might unexpectedly seek to borrow during a period when the nab has been activated . this legislation might also prevent the existing bilateral lines of credit provided by some countries from being folded into the expanded nab , since this would be done by reimbursing countries from the nab for money the imf had previously drawn from their bilateral credits . bilateral credits were used to help fund the recent loan to greece . thus , if this legislation were in effect , the united states might have to oppose activation of the nab for the purpose of reimbursing bilateral creditors for their share in the greek loan . congress has taken no action on this legislation . however , the granger amendment to the pending fiscal 2011 senate - foreign operations appropriations bill uses the 60% threshold . it might also be interpreted as requiring u.s. opposition to many proposed imf loans , though the effect would not be limited solely to loans for european union countries .