an additional 28 have begun service as a delegate or resident commissioner . during th e same period , 844 individuals began their first terms in the senate . first - term membership is divided into two broad categories in each chamber: members chosen prior to the convening of a congress , and those chosen after a congress convenes . the "pre - convening" category includes members who were elected in the general election , and in any special elections held prior to the convening of a congress . the 64 th congress was chosen as the starting point for data collection because it was the first congress for which senators were chosen by direct popular election . this provides a single date upon which most members in both chambers are chosen to serve prior to the convening of a congress . in the senate , the pre - convening category also includes any senators who were appointed to the senate prior to the convening of a new congress . the "post - convening" category includes members who joined either chamber after the convening of a congress . means by which seats may be filled by a post - convening member in either chamber include special elections held after a congress convenes or electoral challenges that result in a new member being seated . in the senate , a first - term member may also join the chamber through appointment or special election . members whose congressional service in one chamber is not consecutive are counted as first - term members in the first instance of their service as a member , if that term occurred between the 64 th and 114 th congresses . for example , a representative who served in the 87 th congress ( 1961-1962 ) , and 89 th congress ( 1965-1966 ) , but not the 88 th congress ( 1963-1964 ) , would be counted as a first - term representative only for the 87 th congress . members with service in the house and senate are listed in each capacity in which they served a first term , if those terms occurred between the 64 th and 114 th congresses . the resulting data , combining pre - convening and post - convening first - term members , provide a count of all members who served a first term in the house or senate . data on pre - convening first - term members provide partial insight into the extent of membership turnover in the house and senate since 1915 , and are discussed in greater detail below . post - convening first - term member data do not reveal clear patterns within individual congresses , or over time . this is due in part to the wide range of reasons that a seat in the house and senate may become vacant in the course of a congress , and the circumstances under which it may be filled . data describing the number and partisan breakdown of first - term membership in the senate are provided in the " data tables " section in table 6 . data describing first - term representatives are available in table 7 .