® , to procure goods and services off the schedules . certain such initiatives have prompted controversy , however . how are existing provisions authorizing agencies to consider environmental factors implemented ? this report provides an overview , answering these and related questions . it does not address green building initiatives , energy - savings performance contracts , policy documents , agency - specific laws , or environmental laws of general applicability that effectively shape the products available for purchase . beginning with president obama's 2009 executive order on "federal leadership in environmental , energy , and economic performance," the obama administration has taken steps to promote consideration of environmental factors in federal procurement . recently , for example , the general services administration ( gsa ) reported on plans to incorporate consideration of greenhouse gas emissions inventories into federal procurement decisions , and the federal acquisition regulation was amended to require that contractors report on their purchases of biobased products under service and construction contracts . some members of congress sought to restrict the department of defense's purchase of biofuels as part of the national defense authorization act for fy2013 , and some commentators have objected to gsa's use of the leadership in energy and environmental design ( leed ) rating system for buildings . fundamentally , federal procurement involves agencies acquiring the goods and services they need to carry out their missions . the vision for federal acquisition , as presented in the far , is "to deliver on a timely basis the best value product or service to the customer , while maintaining the public's trust and fulfilling public policy objectives. environmental objectives have historically constituted one of the "public policy objectives" to be furthered by federal procurement , and environmental interests were among the "competing interests" in the federal procurement system . however , they were arguably one among many , sometimes competing , policy objectives until the may 2011 amendments to the far articulated a "sustainable acquisition policy," which generally requires that agencies shall advance sustainable acquisition by ensuring that 95 percent of new contract actions for the supply of products and for the acquisition of services ( including construction ) require that the products are — ( 1 ) energy - efficient ( energy star® or federal energy management program ( femp ) - designated ) ; ( 2 ) water - efficient ; ( 3 ) biobased ; ( 4 ) environmentally preferable ( eg , epeat - registered , or non - toxic or less toxic alternatives ) ; ( 5 ) non - ozone depleting ; or ( 6 ) made with recovered materials . while many of the products to be purchased under this policy ( eg , energy - efficient , biobased ) were previously "preferred" in federal procurements , as discussed below , the policy could be said to create increased impetus for their purchase by requiring federal agencies to ensure that 95% of their new "contract actions" entail the acquisition of such products .