in the latter , the presumption works the other way . this new form of administrative control includes two parts . first , the use of "directive authority," which kagan defines as "commands to executive branch officials to take specified actions within their statutorily delegated discretion. the second component is what professor kagan termed "presidential ownership," and includes , for example , the public announcement of many regulatory decisions and accomplishments directly by the white house rather than by the responsible agency officials . the combination of these two concepts as well as the changed relationship between the president and the administrative agencies under professor kagan's theory of "presidential administration," raise significant legal questions , as conceptually these notions do not fit into either of the existing models of separation of powers and presidential authority analysis . professor kagan addresses these legal issues by employing the very same analytical framework as both the traditionalists and unitarians . according to professor kagan , at the core of the legal framework for "presidential administration" is a re - conceptualization of how congressional delegations are to be interpreted . specifically , under her theory of "presidential administration," delegations by congress granting discretion to executive branch officials should be read and interpreted as leaving ultimate decision - making authority with the president . similar delegations to independent agencies , however , are not to be interpreted in the same manner , and , thus , congress can retain oversight and control over the decisions of those entities . the first legal hurdle that such a theory must overcome is that it seems to run directly contrary to justice black's majority opinion in youngstown sheet & tube , as it would appear that the president , by asserting decision - making authority where congress has expressly delegated it elsewhere , is acting as a "lawmaker. professor kagan , however , distinguishes her concept of presidential administration from president truman's steel seizure order by noting that in youngstown , congress had specifically reserved the decision regarding seizures to itself . conversely , according to professor kagan , president clinton's directives were always issued in situations where congress had expressly delegated authority to an entity other than itself . thus , the court in youngstown never reached the question of the president's authority in these types of contexts , much less rendered a decision . thus , while youngstown establishes that the president cannot encroach into decisions that congress has reserved for itself , it says nothing about the president's ability to assume the decision - making function from a subordinate agency official that congress has specifically authorized to act . next , professor kagan addresses her theory in correlation with the removal line of cases previously discussed . accepting the removal cases as "certain to remain the law," kagan turns to a statutory construction argument to support her claim of broad presidential authority over agency decision making . according to professor kagan , delegation statutes can , and should , be read to "assume that the delegation runs to the agency official specified , rather than to any other agency official , but still subject to the ultimate control of the president.