a landmark case , atkins v . virginia highlights two key aspects of justice stevens's death penalty jurisprudence . in atkin s , the court considered the constitutionality of imposing the death penalty on the mentally retarded . from casting a vote that resurrected the use of the death penalty to becoming the only justice thus far on the roberts court to formally question the death penalty's per se constitutionality , justice stevens's position on capital punishment has undergone significant changes during his tenure on the court . the mentally retarded defendant in the case had been found guilty of abduction , armed robbery , and capital murder and sentenced to death by a jury under virginia law . writing for the majority , justice stevens overturned the sentence on the grounds that the punishment was disproportionate to the crime and therefore in violation of the prohibition on cruel and unusual punishment of the eighth amendment . justice stevens began by summarizing the court's eighth amendment jurisprudence , noting that at its core , the amendment's prohibition on excessive punishment demands that "punishment for crime should be graduated and proportioned to the offense. known as the proportionality principle , whether a punishment is excessive in relation to the crime is judged not by the views that prevailed when the bill of rights was adopted , but by the "evolving standards of decency that mark the progress of a maturing society. stevens went on to cite long - standing court precedent in concluding that the "clearest and most reliable objective evidence of contemporary values is the legislation enacted by the country's legislature. the court , both before and after atkins , has utilized the actions of the state legislatures as a barometer of society's acceptance of the death penalty in a given scenario . in considering how state legislatures have approached the issue of imposing the death penalty on the mentally retarded , justice stevens identified a clear trend towards prohibiting the practice . although a majority of states had not yet prohibited the use of capital punishment on the mentally retarded , stevens noted "it is not so much the number of these states that is significant , but the consistency of the direction of change. after showing the clear trend among the states towards prohibiting the practice over the previous decade , stevens concluded that imposing the death penalty on the mentally retarded had "become truly unusual , and it is fair to say that a national consensus has developed against it. as a justice , stevens typically placed greater weight on current trends , rather than simply deferring to the position adopted by a majority of state legislatures . stevens's opinion also determined that the social purposes served by the death penalty — retribution and deterrence — were not adequate to justify the execution of a mentally retarded criminal . retribution , argued stevens , is directly associated with culpability . as the "severity of the appropriate punishment necessarily depends on the culpability of the defendant," the court has reserved the imposition of the death penalty for only the most serious crimes and the most culpable defendants .