to $5.00 / gal . range compared with petroleum diesel wholesale prices of $3.05 / gallon during that period . as a result , the biodiesel industry has depended on federal support — especially the production tax credit and the rfs for biomass - based diesel — for its economic survival . a key determinant of the demand for biofuels as a transportation fuel is the size and fuel economy of the u.s. vehicle fleet , and the adequacy of the infrastructure ( eg , pipelines , storage tanks , service pumps ) that delivers transportation fuel to consumers at the retail level . according to the department of energy ( doe ) , 73% of u.s. transportation fuel is consumed as gasoline or gasoline blends ( figure 1 ) , with the remainder consumed as diesel fuel . gasoline blends and diesel fuel , for the most part , require different infrastructure for delivery to the retail market . in addition , vehicle motors are designed to operate with either gasoline or diesel , but not both . most of the federal biofuels tax credit provisions , as well as the import tariff on foreign - produced ethanol , have short legislative lives and require frequent extension . the primary energy - related issue for the next farm bill is the expiration of program authority at the end of fy2013 and the current lack of mandatory funding going forward for all major energy - related provisions of title ix . in addition , the appearance of substantial redundancy across renewable energy programs at usda and doe , the slow development of the u.s. cellulosic biofuels sector , and concerns about the emerging spillover effects of increasing corn use for ethanol production are issues that are likely to emerge during the next farm bill debate . many provisions of the 2008 farm bill expired at the end of fy2012 , but were extended through fy2013 by the american taxpayer relief act ( atra ; p.l . authority for title ix biofuels policy provisions contained in the 2008 farm bill ( p.l . 110-246 ) also were extended through fy2013 , and are expected to be reviewed as part of the next farm bill debate . however , all major bioenergy provisions of title ix — with the exception of the feedstock flexibility program for bioenergy producers — have no new mandatory funding in fy2013 under the atra farm bill extension . although most of the bioenergy programs are reauthorized for fy2013 , their mandatory funding expired at the end of fy2012 . if policymakers want to continue these programs under either the 2008 farm bill extension or in the next farm bill , they will need to pay for the program with offsets . the 2008 farm bill authorized $1.1 billion in mandatory funding for energy programs , including $320 million for the biorefinery assistance program , $300 million for the bioenergy program for advanced biofuels , and $255 million for the rural energy for america program ( reap ) . the biomass crop assistance program ( bcap ) was authorized to receive such sums as necessary ( i.e.