the sherman act ( 15 u.s.c . §§ 1-8 ) prohibits concerted activity that actually restrains trade ; an agreement among separate firms not to compete with each other would likely violate section 1 of the sherman act . the act also prohibits unilateral conduct ; section 2 prohibits monopolization or attempted monopolization ( merely having a monopoly or being a monopolist does not , by itself , violate section 2 ) . violation of either provision is a felony subject to fines of up to $1 million for individuals and $100 million for corporations , or imprisonment of up to 10 years , or both . consolidation has been a long - term trend in agriculture . across the industry , including the dairy sector , rising productivity has led to fewer and larger operations along the production and marketing chain , including farms , cooperatives , processors , and retailers . larger operations tend to have lower per - unit costs . the act specifically states: "persons engaged in the production of agricultural products as farmers , planters , ranchmen , dairymen , nut or fruit growers may act together in associations , corporate or otherwise , with or without capital stock , in collectively processing , preparing for market , handling , and marketing in interstate and foreign commerce , such products of persons so engaged. from an economic and legal standpoint , determining the net effect of concentration — namely , the potentially offsetting effects of market power ( negative for some participants ) and efficiency gains ( neutral or positive for all participants ) — is complicated by the presence of many other factors that influence prices and the marketplace in general . market power can be affected by such factors as product differentiation , ease of entering a market , or the structure of contracts between farmers and processors . likewise , efficiency gains can stem from a variety of sources , including technology changes and business practices . finally , economic events and government policies can certainly influence commodity prices , making it difficult to pinpoint effects of concentration on the dairy industry . however , concentration may also result in efficiency gains , whereby cost savings are passed on to consumers through lower retail prices , which in turn can result in additional demand for commodities and benefit farmers . in summarizing research findings for several agricultural industries , the government accountability office ( gao ) concluded that the economic literature has not established that "concentration in the processing segment of the beef , pork , or dairy sectors , or the retail sector overall has adversely affected agricultural commodity or retail food prices. gao concluded that most of the studies it reviewed found either no evidence of market power , or efficiency effects that were larger than the market power effects of concentration . however , the agency said , experts generally agreed that concentration is likely to increase in the future , potentially raising greater concerns about market power and the manipulation of commodity or food prices . the report also cited an expert who said that further increases in concentration would continue to generate efficiency gains and be beneficial .