the federal requirements are a floor . that is , they provide a minimum requirement . states that already impose requirements beyond attaining age 26 may continue to do so . for example , new jersey requires dependent coverage to be available up to the age of 31 , as long as the adult child is unmarried and has no dependents . to the extent that the state law is more restrictive than the federal law ( eg , new jersey's requires that the individual not be married ) , the federal statute would apply , therefore covering the married adult child under the age of 26 . as part of the interim final rules for dependent coverage of children under age 26 , the departments of the treasury , labor , and health and human services estimated the impact of the regulation on the health insurance coverage for this group . in order to estimate the number of individuals potentially affected , they examined several criteria including whether or not the parents of these adult children had existing employer - sponsored insurance ( esi ) or individual insurance , and whether the adult children themselves were insured . using this information , they estimated the take - up rates , that is , the number of individuals who are likely to accept coverage if offered it . the departments estimated that in 2010 there were approximately 29.5 million individuals between the ages of 19 and 25 . of those , 9.3 million such individuals were estimated to have no access to dependent coverage , because their parents did not have esi or non - group coverage . that left 20.2 million adult children whose parents were covered either by esi or by non - group insurance . the 20.2 million are further broken down , as follows: 3.42 million were uninsured , 2.42 million were covered by their own non - group coverage , 5.55 million were covered by their own esi , 5.73 million were already on their parent's or spouse's esi , and 3.01 million had other coverage , such as medicaid . the departments assumed that the initial group of potential individuals for dependent coverage would only include those who were either uninsured or those who were covered by individual insurance ( 3.44 million + 2.42 million , for a total of 5.86 million ) . of the 5.86 million , the departments estimated that 3.49 million would choose not to enroll in their parent's plan , because ( 1 ) they are already allowed to enroll in their parent's plan under their state's existing laws , but have chosen not to do so ; ( 2 ) they have their own offer of esi and their parent's plan will not extend coverage to them ; or ( 3 ) their parent's coverage in the nongroup market is underwritten ( based on health status and other factors ) , so that there is no financial benefit for the adult child to enroll in the parent's plan . subtracting out these 3.49 million individuals leaves a potential pool of 2.37 million . however , as they noted in the regulation , it is difficult to estimate how many of these 2.37 million individuals would likely take up the insurance .