most aspects of the isr program are necessarily secret . historically , the "national" systems were overseen by the intelligence committees , whereas the tactical systems were usually overseen by the armed services committees ( although the house intelligence committee had jurisdiction over both tactical and national systems ) . public statements by some members indicate , however , that important differences among committees exist in regard to current plans for satellite programs , and there have been considerable differences in regard to uas programs , as well . at one point there were plans to issue an interim report that would detail current posture and programs . the fy2009 defense authorization act , section 144 , also required the secretary of defense in consultation with the chairman of the joint chiefs of staff establish a policy and an acquisition strategy for intelligence , surveillance , and reconnaissance payloads and ground stations for manned and unmanned aerial vehicle systems . the policy and acquisition strategy shall be applicable throughout the department of defense and shall achieve integrated research , development , test , and evaluation , and procurement commonality . many consider the desirability of a long - range plan or architecture for the deployment of surveillance assets is a given , but suspect it is almost unobtainable . future intelligence requirements may change from those recently indicated by secretary gates . the policies and military capabilities of sophisticated nation states may again become the highest collection priorities of the intelligence community , rather than terrorist groups that are currently the chief concern . similarly , there are no indications that technological capabilities of isr systems have reached a stable plateau , and basing future plans on current technologies may prove to be shortsighted . there is widespread frustration about cost growth of isr systems , unnecessary duplication of effort , and the possibility of inadequate collection . a significant factor has been the absence of intelligence authorization legislation for over five years . congress can , however , alter the roles and missions of the organizations involved in isr programs acquisition , as well as authorize and appropriate funds for isr systems acquisition . the lack of expertise was criticized as contributing to delays and costly changes in specifications . more broadly , the report noted declining numbers of students pursuing engineering degrees and a reluctance of some to seek careers in the satellite area , where work can be repetitive and sporadic . the tendency in recent years to focus on satellites that can fulfill current missions may discourage students who are most interested in "cutting - edge" r&d . the government accountability office ( gao ) has assessed ongoing space systems acquisitions issues over a number of years . in a may 2009 report it recommended that a formal space plan based on a national security space strategy is essential for managing the acquisition and deployment of space systems . without a strategy ( and a plan to implement it ) "the defense and intelligence communities may continue to make independent decisions and use resources that are not necessarily based on national priorities , which could lead to gaps in some areas of space operations and redundancies in others.