appendix a . data tables table a - 1 provides data from a sample of cross sections used to create figure 2 . additional data regarding revenue losses associated with a specific tax provisions are available from the author upon request . table a - 2 presents the estimated revenue losses associated with various tax provisions presented in table a - 1 , adjusted for inflation . this information was used in creating figure 3 and figure 5 . again , additional data regarding revenue losses associated with a specific tax provisions are available from the author upon request . table a - 3 presents estimated revenue losses associated with various energy tax provisions . the provisions are categorized as those that benefit fossil fuels , those that benefit renewables ( both electricity and fuels ) , and those that promote efficiency . fuels excise tax preferences include excise tax provisions for alcohol fuels , biodiesel , and renewable diesel . appendix b . cumulative revenue losses associated with various tax preferences this appendix presents data on the revenue losses over time associated with various energy tax preferences . specifically , the sections below present historical revenue losses associated with tax provisions that benefit the oil and gas sector , those that benefit renewable energy , and revenue losses associated with the excise tax credits for alcohol fuels . cumulative revenue losses: oil and gas tax preferences over time , the primary tax incentives for oil and gas were the percentage depletion allowance and the ability to expense intangible drilling costs ( idcs ) . before the 1980s , these were the only tax incentives designed specifically to promote investment in oil and gas . tax preferences for oil and gas introduced in the 1980s and 1990s , such as expensing allowance for tertiary injectants and the tax credit for enhanced oil recovery , sought to encourage domestic production by providing tax incentives for difficult to extract domestic oil resources . table b - 1 provides an estimate of the cumulative revenue losses associated with these tax provisions , through the year 2000 , in constant 2000 dollars . table b - 2 presents historical revenue losses over the 2000 through 2010 period . as was the case in the earlier time period referenced above , the percentage depletion allowance and ability to expense idcs continues to make up the majority of oil and gas related federal revenue losses . cumulative revenue losses , combining the data from table b - 1 and table b - 2 , are presented in table b - 3 . since 1968 , the percentage depletion allowance has resulted in an estimated $111 billion in federal revenue loss . the ability to expense idcs has resulted in an estimated $78 billion over the same time period . the majority of historical revenue losses associated with targeted tax incentives for oil and gas are attributable to these two provisions . from 1968 through 2010 , estimated revenue losses associated with targeted tax incentives for the oil and gas sector sum to $193.4 billion . cumulative revenue losses: renewables historically , the primary tax incentives for renewable energy have been the investment tax credit ( itc ) and production tax credit ( ptc ) .