111-148 , as modified by p.l . 111-152 , the health care and education reconciliation act of 2010 ) contains a number of provisions that generally combine to expand the reach of federal mental health parity requirements as established by the mental health parity act of 1996 ( mhpa ) and the mental health parity and addiction equity act of 2008 ( mhpaea ) . in addition , while the aca does not create an explicit federal - level mandated benefit for mental health and substance abuse disorder services , it does create one for certain health plan types . this report provides a brief background on mental health parity and the policy discussion around parity in health insurance coverage ; an overview of federal mental health parity law prior to the enactment of the aca ; and an analysis of the impact of the aca on federal mental health parity law . generally , the effect of the mental health parity provisions in the aca is to extend the applicability of the federal mental health parity requirements , and to mandate coverage of certain ( to be specified ) mental health services by specific plan types ( see table 1 ) . in particular , several questions are raised by the expansion of the applicability of the federal mental health parity requirements . specifically , the aca expands the reach of federal mental health parity law to three main types of plans: qualified health plans ( qhps ) , as established by the aca ; medicaid non - managed care benchmark and benchmark - equivalent plans ; and plans offered through the individual market . the aca modifies existing parity law to require compliance with the federal mental health parity requirements by plans offered through the individual market . it appears , however , that the small employer exemption in federal parity law remains in effect , and in fact , that the definition of small employer was expanded , per the aca . beginning in 2014 , qhps purchased through an exchange must cover mental health services ( to be determined through rulemaking ) , and must offer these services in compliance with the federal mental health parity requirements . the interaction between this requirement , and the apparent continued existence of the small employer exemption , raises considerations that may need to be reconciled through rulemaking . medicaid benchmark and benchmark - equivalent plans , that are not managed care plans and that offer mental health services , must do so in compliance with the federal mental health parity requirements for financial requirements and treatment limitations . the aca did not alter the applicability of parity requirements with respect to the children's health insurance program ( chip ) , but the application of federal mental health parity requirements to chip plans , as required in law prior to the aca , is explained here in detail . in addition , the aca mandates coverage of certain mental health services specifically for qhps ; medicaid benchmark and benchmark - equivalent plans ; and new plans in the individual and small group markets . in sum , the changes made by the aca represent an expansion of the application of the federal mental health parity requirements established by mhpa and mhpaea .