appendix a . 911 legislation and policy this section provides further detail and documentation about 911 requirements enacted by congress and related administrative activities . equality of service and access to 911 many of the fcc's regulatory efforts have supported this principle by requiring that different providers of voice communications services be able to provide 911 facilities with basic information about a caller , specifically call - back number ( automatic number information , ani ) and location ( automatic location identification , ali ) . equality of access devices the 911 act assured that wireless carriers would have similar obligations and protections in transmitting 911 calls as the wireline common carriers . the net 911 improvement act of 2008 extended these obligations and protections to include voice over internet protocol ( voip ) . the federal communications commission ( fcc ) is responsible for promulgating and enforcing regulations to assure that cell phone and voip calls , as well as those from wireline phones , convey required information to the appropriate public safety answering point ( psap ) . providing position information that locates cell phone or voip callers in a manner comparable to wireline information is one of the challenges for parity among devices . another challenge is presented by connections to third - party service providers . for example , telematics systems installed in cars , such as onstar ; direct emergency calls automatically to a customer service operator who then places the call to 911 , usually identifying the appropriate call center from a database . video relay service for the hearing impaired is another example of an intermediary placing the call to a psap . access to psap contact information for third - party service providers continues to be an issue of concern to companies that provide services that include contacting 911 for assistance . to address this concern , the national emergency number association ( nena ) maintains a registry of psap information that it makes available to validated call centers as well as psaps . the net 911 improvement act of 2008 specifically authorized , but did not require , the fcc to compile a list of contact information of public safety answering points and make the information available where releasing it would benefit public safety . the net 911 improvement act of 2008 also extended parity of protection to duly authorized emergency communications service providers that voluntarily offer these services . equality of coverage the location of a caller often determines the level of response from a psap . the likelihood of a 911 call being completed with accurate information depends on two essential components: the capacity of the network and systems to capture and deliver the needed information and the capability of the psap to receive it . providing location information in rural areas , for example , can be difficult for wireless carriers , partly because of inadequate infrastructure . reflecting concerns that some carriers would stop serving remote areas rather than invest in improving location identification capabilities , the enhance 911 act of 2004 directed the fcc to grant waivers to tier iii wireless carriers in situations where strict enforcement would decrease access to emergency services .