the constitution also provides for two vice presidents . the president and two vice presidents are selected by the parliament as a whole after each chamber of the parliament separately nominates one candidate , and the members of the national parliament appointed by the commander - in - chief of burma's defence services nominate a third candidate . the terms of office for the president and vice presidents are five years ; they are limited to two terms in office . each chamber is to select a speaker from amongst its members . the constitution also creates regional and state hluttaws . in each of the hluttaws , a quarter of the seats are to be appointed by the commander - in - chief of burma's defence services . burma's president is the head of the executive branch . the president's two main powers are to enforce the law and to promulgate ordinances , subject to the approval of the national parliament . the president can also designate ministries , enter into treaties , and take military action ( including declaring war or making peace ) , subject to the assent of the national parliament . within the executive branch , the constitution also establishes the "national defence and security council" ( ndsc ) , consisting of the president ; the two vice presidents ; the speakers of each chamber of the national parliament ; the commander - in - chief and deputy commander - in - chief of the defence services ; and the ministers of border affairs , defence , foreign affairs , and home affairs . according to the constitution , the four ministers on the ndsc must be active military personnel . chapter xi of the constitution gives the president the authority , after coordinating with the ndsc , to declare a state of emergency in all or part of burma , and transfer all legislative , executive , and judicial authority to the commander - in - chief of defence services . burma's judicial branch is to consist of a supreme court , high courts for each of the 14 states or regions , and lower level courts . justices of the supreme court are nominated by the president and approved by the parliament as a whole . burma's constitution provides for a separate constitutional tribunal of the union to adjudicate cases interpreting the constitution or determining the constitutionality of laws passed by the parliament . the 2008 constitution sets a number of conditions on persons holding public office in all three branches of the government . these include age requirements , natural citizenship for any person and both of her / his parents , and minimum residency requirements . it also bars a person who has dual citizenship , or has a close relative who is a foreign national from holding public office , effectively preventing opposition leader aung san suu kyi from running for office because she was married to a british citizen and has two sons who are british nationals .