copperweld … , 467 u.s. 752 , 771 … . originally , the licenses granted by nflp were non - exclusive ( i.e. , granted simultaneously to several parties ) ; american needle , a headwear manufacturer , was one of the non - exclusive licensees for several years . in 2000 , the teams authorized nflp to solicit bids for , and then grant , a single , exclusive license for the manufacture of headwear ; when the license was awarded to reebok , american needle , one of the non - renewed , non - exclusive licensees , sued the nfl , nflp , the individual teams , and reebok , alleging , in pertinent part , that the teams' actions in creating nflp violated section 1 of the sherman act . a unanimous supreme court , per justice stevens , defined the issue: as the case comes to us , we have only a narrow issue to decide: whether the nfl respondents are capable of engaging in a "contract , combination … or conspiracy" as defined by § 1 of the sherman act … , or , as we have sometimes phrased it , whether the alleged activity by the nfl respondents "must be viewed as that of a single enterprise for purposes of § 1. . the ruling answered "yes" to the first "whether" and "no" to the second , deciding against the successful - in - the - lower - federal - courts nfl and in favor of the position taken by american needle . summarizing the cases — ending with copperweld — in which the court had addressed the "now - defunct doctrine known as the 'intraenterprise conspiracy doctrine,'" justice stevens noted that the court had previously concluded that the doctrine "was inconsistent with the 'basic distinction between concerted and independent action.' but he also noted that the court has always looked at the functional ( as opposed to the formal , legal ) relationships among the entities litigating before it in order to determine whether competition had been , unlawfully , adversely affected: we have long held that concerted action under § 1 does not turn simply on whether the parties involved are legally distinct entities . instead , we have eschewed such formalistic distinctions in favor of a functional consideration of how the parties involved in the alleged anticompetitive conduct actually operate . as a result , we have repeatedly found instances in which members of a legally single entity violated § 1 when the entity was controlled by a group of competitors and served , in essence , as a vehicle for ongoing concerted activity . accordingly , the opinion proceeded to look at the "competitive reality" existing in the nfl and its member teams , and to the purpose of section 1 to determine whether their concerted actions are of the kind that the provision was enacted to deter and punish . the teams , albeit related by virtue of their status in the nfl , "compete with one another , not only on the playing field , but to attract fans , for gate receipts and for contracts with managerial and playing personnel.