supporters of s.b . 1070 argue that federal enforcement of immigration law has not adequately deterred the migration of unauthorized aliens into arizona , and that state action is both necessary and appropriate to combat the negative effects of unauthorized immigration . 1070 for alien registration violations , which would have made these offenses felonies in certain circumstances , and substituted a provision making all violations misdemeanors . this section does not apply with respect to aliens who maintain authorization from the federal government to remain in the united states . sections 4 and 5 of s.b . 1070 address activities relating to the transport and harboring of unlawfully present aliens . section 4 modifies a preexisting arizona statute addressing alien smuggling , but this amendment does not alter the earlier statute's substantive scope . more significantly , section 5 adds a new criminal statute prohibiting alien smuggling - related activities , when such activities are committed by a person who is also in violation of another criminal offense . as a legal matter , states have inherent "police powers" to promote and regulate safety , health , welfare , and economic activity within their respective jurisdictions . the exercise of state police powers may be limited by the rights owed to individuals under the constitution . moreover , these powers can be affected by assertions and delegations of federal authority , which may change over time . when they do , state powers can be concomitantly restricted or expanded . beginning in the 1970s , federal legislation on aliens more frequently regulated the incidents of daily life of noncitizens , lawful and unlawful . prime examples include rules on noncitizen access to public benefits and programs , and sanctions against employers who hire unauthorized workers . to some degree , new federal restrictions crowded out concurrent state regulation . at the same time , however , the push by congress to regulate the stay of aliens in the united states more comprehensively also included , particularly in two statutes enacted in 1996 , increased authority for the states to mirror federal benefit restrictions and cooperate with immigration enforcement generally . laws like arizona's s.b . 1070 , even as modified by h.b . 2162 , appear to test the legal limits of a trend toward greater state involvement . nevertheless , not all jurisdictions have reacted similarly in responding to the influx of unauthorized aliens and the perception of growing state and local authority to react to it . at the one end of the spectrum , some jurisdictions ( occasionally referred to as "sanctuary cities" ) have been unwilling to assist the federal government in enforcing measures that distinguish between legal and non - legal residents of the community , and , in some cases , have actively opposed providing assistance to federal enforcement efforts . moving toward the middle of the spectrum , some states and localities communicate with federal immigration enforcement officers under limited circumstances ( eg , after arresting an unauthorized alien for a criminal offense ) , but for various reasons do not take a more active role in deterring illegal immigration .