an examination of these criticisms follows . most observers would maintain that the possibility of u.s. withdrawal from the wto is at best highly unlikely for procedural and substantive reasons . this is because a withdrawal resolution would have to pass both the house and senate and then surmount a likely presidential veto via an override with a two - thirds majority vote . it has also been debated what legal effect the resolution would have if adopted . do the most frequently made criticisms of the wto and trade agreements have merit ? do wto rules erode a country's sovereignty and undermine its leeway to set health , safety , environmental and other domestic regulations ? defenders of the wto and its system of rules come mainly from exporters of goods , services , and agricultural products , foreign investors , consumer groups , retailers , mainstream economists and other academics , and government leaders . they argue that rising levels of trade and a rules - based trading system contribute , on balance , to improving the welfare and prosperity of billions of people around the world . trade expansion is viewed as an engine of economic growth both here and abroad . wto membership is seen helping countries to keep their own markets open for the benefit of exporters , consumers , and industries using imports . wto agreements are deemed to make it less tempting for governments to impose economically costly trade barriers under short - term political pressure . supporters also argue that a rules - based trading system helps create more dynamic and competitive economies , and helps provide the kind of stability , predictability , and growth in international trade that is good for both the world and the united states . supporters , however , recognize that the wto has shortcomings . they worry , for example , about the wto's relevance as a result of the proliferation of regional and bilateral trade agreements . they are concerned that the wto has been unable to conclude the doha round trade liberalization talks since negotiations began nearly nine years ago . they are concerned about a perceived lack of transparency in the operations of the wto , particularly over the decision - making process guided by a consensus principle that makes it increasingly more difficult to make decisions . they are also unsure whether the mandate given to the wto is too large or too small . on the one hand , some supporters believe that the wto should stick to a much narrower agenda that deals with market access for goods and services . on the other hand , some supporters want to expand the wto's mandate to include trade issues more broadly defined , including competition policy , energy policy , global health services , and a host of other contentious issues such as corruption , corporate social responsibility , exchange rates , and cyber security . despite these concerns , supporters believe that the wto can be improved and reformed . they point to studies initiated by the wto itself to address these concerns and are confident that progress in addressing alleged shortcomings is being made .