the accompanying s.rept . 111-221 , submitted by subcommittee chair herb kohl , noted that the committee did not include $290 million in administration - requested user fees for which congress has not passed authorizing legislation ( for generic drug review , reinspection , export certification , and food inspection and facility registration ) . data column 7 of table 2 shows the committee - reported amounts . 111-211 described the committee's rationale for its recommendations , in agreement with the president's request , to increase fy2010 amounts for food safety ( $83 million ) ; drug , device , and biologics safety ( $43 million ) ; and regulatory science ( $20 million ) . repeating concerns it had raised in its fy2010 appropriations report , the committee strongly encouraged fda to develop a program , with states , for increasing the inspection of imported shrimp for banned antibiotics . regarding antibiotic development , it directed fda to report on its progress toward the committee's request last year for development of guidance on clinical trials . it specified that the report cover the guidance on community - acquired bacterial pneumonia , fda plans for guidances on multi - drug and pan - resistant organisms , and progress regarding development and appropriate use of antibacterial drugs for humans . the committee recommended several fda activities relating to antimicrobial resistance , specifically regarding use of antibacterial drugs in animals . the committee directed that the agency use $22 million for its critical path initiative , with $6 million of that going to partnerships . of the $6 million , at least $2 million must be used to support research in prevention , diagnosis , and treatment of tuberculosis . it directed fda to report on critical path spending semi - annually . the committee recommended $3 million for demonstration grants for improving pediatric device availability . regarding the drug supply chain ( e - pedigrees ) , it directed fda to report on the status of its work with electronic track - and - trace and authentication technologies . the committee stated its support of an administration - requested $1.4 million increase for studies to develop a modernized food label . it recommended $97 million for the generic drugs program , of which $56 million is for the office of generic drugs ( $4 million more than fy2010 and $2 million more than the administration's request ) . the committee directed fda to report on emergency use authorizations to include an assessment of whether the authority is sufficient . it recommended that $7 million in appropriated funds , as well as the $19 million in user fees , be used for mammography quality standards act activities ; supported the expansion of nanotechnology research ; recommended $16 million for orphan product development grants ( $2 million more than the budget request ) ; recommended $6 million for the office of women's health ; and recommended a $1 million increase to hire staff "facilitating the development of drugs to treat rare diseases.