discoveries. in accordance with the patent act of 1952 ( the "patent act" ) , an inventor may seek the grant of a patent by preparing and submitting an application to the uspto . under current law , each application is then placed into queue for eventual review by officials known as examiners . the uspto publishes most , but not all , pending patent applications "promptly after the expiration of a period of 18 months" from the filing date . among the applications that are not published prior to grant are those that the applicant represents will not be the subject of patent protection abroad . in particular , if an applicant certifies that the invention disclosed in the u.s. application will not be the subject of a patent application in another country that requires publication of applications 18 months after filing , then the uspto will not publish the application . uspto officials known as examiners then determine whether the invention disclosed in the application merits the award of a patent . the uspto examiner will consider a number of legal requirements , including whether the submitted application fully explains and distinctly claims the invention . in particular , the application must enable persons skilled in the art to make and use the invention without undue experimentation . in addition , the application must provide the "best mode," or preferred way , that the applicant knows to practice the invention . the examiner will also determine whether the invention itself fulfills certain substantive standards set by the patent statute . to be patentable , an invention must meet four primary requirements . first , the invention must fall within at least one category of patentable subject matter . according to the patent act , an invention which is a "process , machine , manufacture , or composition of matter" is eligible for patenting . second , the invention must be useful , a requirement that is satisfied if the invention is operable and provides a tangible benefit . third , the invention must be novel , or different , from subject matter disclosed by an earlier patent , publication , or other state - of - the - art knowledge . finally , an invention is not patentable if "the subject matter as a whole would have been obvious at the time the invention was made to a person having ordinary skill in the art to which said subject matter pertains. this requirement of "nonobviousness" prevents the issuance of patents claiming subject matter that a skilled artisan would have been able to implement in view of the knowledge of the state of the art . if the uspto allows the patent to issue , its owner obtains the right to exclude others from making , using , selling , offering to sell , or importing into the united states the patented invention . those who engage in those acts without the permission of the patentee during the term of the patent can be held liable for infringement . adjudicated infringers may be enjoined from further infringing acts .