still dominate. another critic has argued that creating the dni position "was a misguided reform that would add bureaucratic layers without improving operations and analysis. others believe that the act was merely an unworkable half - way measure that failed to create a single , integrated intelligence community . one media analyst claims , "without absolute control over intelligence agency spending or people , the spymaster cannot compel much of anything to happen. the concerns over the future of the reforms included in the 2004 act will probably affect consideration of the nomination of retired air force general james r. clapper , jr. to succeed blair and become the fourth dni . general clapper has had a long history of serving in senior positions in the intelligence community and is widely respected . the position is potentially highly influential , but it does not provide the extensive line responsibilities that cabinet secretaries possess . it requires sharing of power and close coordination and cooperation rather than decisive direction . it necessarily entails great leadership skills and the ability to forge consensus among senior intelligence leaders of some 16 separate and diverse agencies . the occupant of the position is likely to be subject on a regular basis to criticism for either meddling unnecessarily or failing to exert authorities that are in fact ambiguous . the dni position is one that is built around an interagency , "whole - of - government," approach to dealing with the myriad and serious challenges of the 21 st century . a review of the history and functioning of the position suggests that the dni and odni are appropriate subjects for enhanced congressional oversight . a primary lesson drawn in the aftermath of the attacks of september 11 , 2001 , was that u.s. intelligence had not dealt effectively with the threat to the u.s. homeland posed by international terrorist groups . previously , the intelligence community had been organized to deal with potentially hostile nation states that posed the threat of nuclear or conventional attacks . sharp lines had been drawn between foreign intelligence and domestic law enforcement . little attention had been given to coordination by intelligence agencies with national , state , tribal , and local law enforcement agencies . the work of intelligence agencies prior to 9 / 11 was extensively investigated and analyzed ; the resulting consensus among many members of congress and outside observers was that major changes were required . it was quickly realized that information about the 9 / 11 plotters available to some agencies had not been shared with others and that there had been a failure "to connect the dots. an initial response to the 9 / 11 attacks was to remove statutory barriers that had discouraged sharing of information between law enforcement and intelligence organizations . this was followed by an intensive combined investigation by the two intelligence committees . based on the work of the joint inquiry , the two committees made a number of recommendations .