, from the date the claim was received by the va ) . the number of claims pending has been of growing concern to veterans , vsos , and members of congress . congress appropriated additional resources toward reducing the accumulation of claims and appeals . total monthly receipts for vdc were just under $3.7 billion in fy2012 . although ssdi and vdc both serve the goal of providing income security for individuals with disabilities , these programs fundamentally differ in how they define "disability" and determine eligibility for benefits . for example , an individual must be unable to work to be eligible for ssdi benefits , yet employability is not a factor in vdc disability determinations . indeed , veterans that receive a disability rating from the va will not necessarily be eligible for ssdi benefits , unless their particular condition prevents them from entering the civilian workforce under specific ssa guidelines . this report seeks to clarify why one group of individuals with disabilities may be eligible for benefits under vdc , but ineligible for benefits under ssdi ( and vice versa ) , through a description and comparison of several distinguishing characteristics of the ssdi and vdc programs . this report concludes with a discussion of the challenges facing the administration of both programs , including processing delays for pending claims and appeals . these issues will be of particular interest to congress due to the high numbers of ssdi claims resulting from a combination of the recent economic decline , an increase in the number of baby - boomers approaching retirement age and their most disability - prone years . in addition , the extension of presumptive conditions has expanded the pool of veterans eligible for vdc . there are clear differences in the general goals of ssa and va disability compensation programs that have likely evolved from the ssdi focus on administering benefits primarily for a civilian work population , which contrasts with the vdc focus on compensating individuals for the adverse health conditions connected to military service . under current statute , the vasrd is used as the sole tool in determining compensation levels for veterans with service - connected disabilities . the vasrd ratings are presumed to reflect the "average" impact of the impairment on "average" earnings capacity or economic loss . however , because vdc is granted for any condition incurred or aggravated by military service , vdc is also provided for conditions that do not impact employment or earnings capacity ; thus , payments for those conditions then reflect noneconomic loss . a 2007 report by the veterans' disability benefits commission concluded that va disability compensation should additionally compensate veterans for "… their inability to participate in usual life activities and for the impact of their disabilities on quality of life," also called noneconomic loss . the institute of medicine has also made recommendations on developing and implementing a methodology that can be used to evaluate the impact of disabilities on veterans' quality of life . this methodology could presumably be used to recommend appropriate compensation for veterans' noneconomic loss . crs is not aware of similar studies or efforts to identify ways to compensate ssdi recipients for noneconomic loss .