it is a complex article and every aspect of it cannot be addressed here . it is also important to note that the article was published in 1996 . many developments in first amendment jurisprudence have occurred since then . to the extent possible , recent developments will be mentioned and compared to ms. kagan's arguments . as a result of the article's age , it is not clear how ms. kagan's view of first amendment doctrine may have changed , if it has at all . ms. kagan begins her analysis by recognizing that the supreme court has said that "the purpose of congress ... is not a basis for declaring a law unconstitutional. courts instead are to focus on the effects of a particular speech restriction on first amendment freedoms . she argues instead that first amendment doctrine , in spite of the supreme court's protestations , is primarily ( though perhaps not solely ) motivated by a desire to discover improper government motive . to explain why ms. kagan thinks her government motive theory is necessary to understand first amendment doctrine , she begins with an example of a case that , in her opinion , could only make sense in the context of first amendment doctrine if the court is primarily concerned with improper government motive . v. city of st. paul , the supreme court invalidated a statute that prohibited fighting words based upon race , color , etc . the outcome of this case is strange , ms. kagan notes , because fighting words have been identified as a category of speech that falls outside the protections of the first amendment and can be prohibited completely . thus , under an effects - based theory , it likely would not matter constitutionally if only a subset of this category of speech was prohibited . the court nonetheless invalidated the statute despite the fact that it punished only a subset of a category of unprotected speech . ms. kagan hypothesizes that this outcome can be best understood when viewed as an attempt by the court to guard against laws that have a greater likelihood of being motivated by an improper purpose . ms. kagan believes these effects - focused theories are ultimately unsatisfying on their own to explain first amendment doctrine . even within the spheres of unprotected speech , the court will invalidate a statute if it appears that "official suppression of ideas [may be] afoot," because , under ms. kagan's theory , preventing the official suppression ( or support ) of particular ideas is the court's primary concern . after explicating this example , ms. kagan embarks upon a methodical and thorough explanation and analysis of her theory . she does so by offering other holistic and widely accepted theories of first amendment jurisprudence and attempting to fit aspects of first amendment jurisprudence with those theories as rigorously as she attempts to fit those aspects of doctrine with the government motive theory . she ultimately concludes that , in general , her government motive theory does the best job of explaining first amendment doctrine , but in arriving at that conclusion she makes numerous observations where the other first amendment doctrine models may explain doctrine better than the theory she advances .