section 112 . under this section , the secretary of defense may grant funding to the governor of a state who submits a "drug interdiction and counterdrug activities plan" that satisfies certain statutory requirements . the secretary of defense is charged with examining the sufficiency of the drug interdiction plan and determining whether the distribution of funds would be proper . while the emphasis is certainly on counterdrug efforts , a state plan might include some related border security and immigration - related functions that overlap with drug interdiction activities . by approving the state of arizona's drug interdiction plan , the secretary of defense has enabled the arizona national guard to engage in some border security measures . for example , as part of its continuing requests for additional national guard troops under the joint counter narco - terrorism task force ( jcntf ) , arizona cites the negative impacts of illegal drug trade and illegal immigration on the southwestern border states as support for its request . section 502 ( f ) of title 32 has been used to expand the operational scope of the national guard beyond its specified duties . this provision provides that "a member of the national guard may ... without his consent , but with the pay and allowances provided by law ... be ordered to perform training or other duty " in addition to those he or she is already prescribed to perform ( emphasis added ) . this is the provision of law that was used to provide federal pay and benefits to the national guard personnel who provided security at many of the nation's airports after september 11 and who participated in hurricanes katrina and rita - related disaster relief operations . in 2004 , congress passed another law that could arguably provide federal funding for national guard personnel conducting border security operations under title 32 . in the event of a "homeland defense activity," chapter 9 of title 32 of the u.s. code authorizes the secretary of defense to provide federal funding at his discretion to a state , under the authority of the governor of that state , for the use of its national guard forces if their participation is "necessary and appropriate. a "homeland defense activity" is statutorily defined as "an activity undertaken for the military protection of the territory or domestic population of the united states ... from a threat or aggression against the united states. although a deployment of national guard troops for border security purposes could arguably be an activity "undertaken for the military protection" of a "domestic population," it is unclear whether the porous nature of the border or illegal entry of aliens is the type of "threat" or "aggression" that would be "necessary and appropriate" for national guard troops . the military does not appear to have a direct legislative mandate to protect or patrol the border or to engage in immigration enforcement . indeed , direct military involvement in law enforcement activities without proper statutory authorization might run afoul of the posse comitatus act .