when he introduced h.r . 5088 , representative oberstar said that the house transportation and infrastructure committee would not hold hearings on the bill , because it held three days of hearings on similar legislation in the 110 th congress . the 111 th congress bill reflected testimony at those hearings and subsequent comments , he said . no specific schedule for action on the bill was announced . the administration did not take an official position on the legislation , although , as noted above , epa , the corps , and other agencies joined in a may 2009 letter expressing support for legislative clarification of issues raised by the two supreme court rulings . there was no further legislative action on either bill during the 111 th congress . in light of the widely differing views of proponents and opponents , future prospects for similar legislation are highly uncertain . future action also is uncertain because both of the two principal sponsors , senator feingold and representative oberstar , were defeated for re - election in november 2010 . nevertheless , the desire among stakeholders for greater certainty over which waters are jurisdictional under the clean water act remains and could continue to draw attention in the 112 th congress , although the direction of future legislation could differ from past proposals . one difficulty of legislating changes to the cwa in order to protect wetlands and other u.s. waters results from the fact that the complex scientific questions about such areas are not easily amenable to precise resolution in law . the debate over revising the act highlights the challenges of using the law to do so . the legal and policy questions associated with the swancc and rapanos cases — concerning the outer geographic limit of cwa jurisdiction and the consequences of restricting that scope — have challenged regulators , landowners and developers , policymakers , and courts for more than 35 years . ultimately , if congress were to enact legislation like that in the 111 th congress or an alternative , the implications of defining "waters of the united states" and making other statutory changes proposed in the legislation would depend on several factors: the new statutory language itself , accompanying legislative history , new regulations that the corps and epa might promulgate to implement the legislation , and interpretive case law resulting from likely future legal challenge . findings in h.r . 5088 would have stated that the swancc and rapanos rulings impair the statutory protection of u.s. waters , contrary to congressional intent . section 4 was the important definitional provision of the bill . like the senate committee bill , it would have affected the key cwa phrase which sets the act's reach . also like the senate committee bill , h.r . 5088 would have struck the term "navigable waters" and install "waters of the united states" as the direct jurisdictional phrase . a key difference between the bills , however , was that while s. 787 would have inserted the fairly short text quoted above , h.r .