neither h.r . 1 nor the final fy2011 appropriations law ( p.l . 112-10 ) made any changes to the funding allocation formula from fy2010 . both included less for renewals than requested by the president , but more than was provided in fy2010 . as noted previously ( in the section " funding levels for housing for the elderly and persons with disabilities " ) , the president's budget requested that congress begin funding the renewal of mainstream vouchers for persons with disabilities in the section 8 account , rather than through the housing for persons with disabilities account . hud requested $114 million for this purpose in fy2011 . both the house and senate bills proposed to adopt the president's request . 1 did not explicitly include funding in the tenant - based rental assistance account for renewing section 811 vouchers . the final fy2011 appropriations law ( p.l . 112-10 ) appropriated less than a third of the amount requested by the president for section 811 renewals . the bill directed that the funds be used to renew vouchers issued since 2007 . renewal funding for vouchers issued prior to fy2007 was provided in the section 811 account . each pha has a contract with hud that identifies how many vouchers it is authorized to administer ; in aggregate , there are around 2.3 million authorized vouchers allocated across the phas . in some years , congress creates additional vouchers , which increase that total . some are replacement vouchers , called tenant protection vouchers , which are given to families who are being displaced from other hud programs . others are new , or "incremental," vouchers . in recent years , incremental vouchers have been set aside for specific special populations or purposes . in fy2010 , congress provided $15 million for vouchers for families in the child welfare system and $75 million for vouchers for homeless veterans . for fy2011 , the president's budget requested $85 million for new vouchers as part of a demonstration program involving supportive housing for families and individuals at risk of homelessness . the house bill from the 111 th congress included funding for the president's homelessness demonstration request , along with $75 million for vouchers for homeless veterans through the veteran's affairs supportive housing ( vash ) program and $66 million for vouchers to continue assistance to certain families displaced by the 2005 hurricanes . like the house bill , the senate bill from the 111 th congress would have funded the president's homelessness demonstration , provide $75 million for vash vouchers , and provide $66 million for families displaced by hurricanes . additionally , the senate bill would have provided $16 million for the family unification program ( fup ) , which would provides vouchers to families involved in the child welfare system . 1 included no funding for new incremental vouchers , but the final fy2011 appropriations law ( p.l . 112-10 ) provided about $50 million for vash vouchers . the project - based rental assistance account provides funding to administer and renew existing project - based section 8 rental assistance contracts between hud and private multifamily property owners .