the primary focus has been on the disclose act . the prohibitions are codified at 2 u.s.c . in an exception to the prohibition on corporate and union treasury spending , feca allows for the creation of separate segregated funds or political action committees , also known as pacs . specifically , corporations and unions can use their treasury funds to establish , operate and solicit voluntary , limited contributions to their pacs . these voluntary pac donations can then be used to contribute to federal campaigns or to make expenditures that expressly advocate election or defeat of federal candidates . in the 1976 landmark supreme court decision , buckley v. valeo , the constitutionality of many provisions in feca was challenged . this case is important because it established the framework for constitutional analysis of campaign finance regulation . in buckley , the court upheld reasonable contribution limits , invalidated certain expenditure limits , and upheld reporting and disclosure requirements . in addition , the court created the distinction between issue advocacy and express advocacy , finding that a communication could be regulated if it contained words express advocacy of the election or defeat of a candidate , which includes words such as "vote for" or "vote against. by contrast , such ads could not be regulated if they only contained general public policy messages that fell short of calling for election or defeat of candidates , sometimes referred to as issue advocacy . a generation would pass between the enactment of feca and the next time that congress would again enact major campaign finance legislation — the bipartisan campaign reform act of 2002 ( bcra ) — but political advertising and the funding sources for that advertising remained prominent during both legislative debates . as the legislation that became bcra was being debated in the late 1990s and early 2000s , a chief concern surrounding issue advocacy was whether the ads were actually about public policy issues — as proponents of the advertisements suggested — or whether they were really messages designed to encourage votes for or against candidates within in the context of ads that were only nominally related to public policy . in an effort to restrict issue advocacy , bcra created a new concept within feca known as electioneering communications in order to regulate messages that might affect elections , but did not expressly advocate for the election or defeat of a clearly identified federal candidate . importantly , bcra prohibited corporations and unions from using general treasury funds to pay for electioneering communications , meaning that potentially any ad that even mentioned a political candidate during pre - election periods would have to be paid for with pac funds or not aired . in 2007 , in fec v. wisconsin right to life , inc. , the supreme court limited the application of the prohibition , thereby easing some restrictions on corporate - and union - funded ads that would otherwise be classified as electioneering communications . as a result of the court's ruling , if an advertisement could reasonably be interpreted as something other than calling for a vote for or against a candidate , it could not be prohibited .