the same can be said for russia in 2010 . most analysts agree that russia will reduce its forces in coming years , as aging systems retire , with or without an arms control treaty in place . as a result , the verification regime in the new start treaty has been streamlined , to make it less costly and complex than the regime in start , and adjusted to reflect the limits in new start and the current circumstances in the relationship between the united states in russia . in particular , it focuses as much on maintaining transparency , cooperation , and openness as it does on deterring and detecting potential violations . the discussion that follows reviews some of the limits and restrictions and some of the monitoring and verification provisions in start , and compares them with provisions in new start , to highlight both similarities and differences between the two treaties . participants in the debate about the new start treaty , both in the senate and in the public at large , sought to compare the verification regimes in the two treaties to determine whether the regime in the new start treaty can provide the united states with the information it needs to effectively verify russian compliance . it has counted and monitored these missiles for 15 years . it is now far less concerned about the possibility that russia has hidden extra missiles away in undeclared or unknown facilities . even if it had done so before start entered into force , these missiles would now be aging and probably lacking appropriate maintenance . further , the united states may now be less concerned about russia's incentives to violate the treaty . as secretary rumsfeld said of the 2002 moscow treaty , russia had little incentive to exceed the treaty's limits because it planned to reduce its forces to the treaty levels with or without an agreement . but this comparison could not , by itself , provide useful answers about the verifiability of the new start treaty if it simply compared the lists of inspections , notifications , data exchanges , and cooperative activities mandated by the two treaties . even though more transparency and cooperation may be preferred in the abstract , the monitoring measures in the new treaty "should be determined by the treaty's specific limits and the need to verify those limits. as noted earlier , no verification regime can provide the united states with absolute confidence that russia will comply with all the limits in the treaty , or absolute assurances that the united states will be able to detect any russian effort to evade the limits . even if the united states is confident that it could detect militarily significant violations in time to respond and offset any threats to its security , there will be some risk that noncompliant activity may go undetected for some time . depending on the weight one places on this risk , the possibility that russia might pursue undetected violations might be argued as grounds to reject the treaty .