successive u.s . administrations since the early 1990s have sought to use a combination of negotiations , aid , and bilateral and international sanctions to end north korea's weapons programs , but have not curbed the dprk's increasing capabilities . u.s. interests in north korea encompass grave security , political , and human rights concerns . bilateral military alliances with the republic of korea ( rok , the official name for south korea ) and japan obligate the united states to defend these allies from any attack from the north . tens of thousands of u.s. troops based in south korea and japan , as well as tens of thousands of u.s. civilians residing in those countries , are stationed within striking range of north korean intermediate - range missiles . north korea's rapid advances in its nuclear and long - range missile capabilities may put the u.s. homeland at risk of a dprk strike . a conflict on the korean peninsula or the collapse of the government in pyongyang would have severe implications for the regional — if not global — economy . negotiations and diplomacy surrounding north korea's nuclear weapons program influence u.s. relations with all the major powers in the region , particularly with china and south korea . at the center of this complicated intersection of geostrategic interests is the task of dealing with a totalitarian regime that is unfettered by many of the norms that govern international relations . a country of about 25 million people , north korea was founded by kim jong - un's grandfather , kim il - sung , on an official philosophy of juche ( self - reliance ) that has led it to resist outside influences , which the regime generally has seen as a potential threat to its rule . the kim family's near - totalitarian control has helped enable north korea to resist outside influences , as well as to enter into and then break diplomatic and commercial agreements , to an extent surprising for a relatively small country surrounded by more materially powerful neighbors . over the past 70 years , the kims have created one of the world's largest militaries , which acts as a deterrent to outside military intervention and provides pyongyang with a degree of leverage over foreign powers that has helped the regime extract diplomatic and economic concessions from its neighbors . this same militarization , however — combined with north korea's often - provocative behavior , opaque policymaking system , and willingness to defy international conventions — also has severely stunted north korea's economic growth by minimizing its interactions with the outside world . despite kim's apparently solid hold on power and indications that the dprk economy is strengthening , north korea's internal situation remains difficult , with most of the population deeply impoverished , and slowly increasing access to information from the outside world potentially could lead to greater public discontent with the regime if growth does not continue . congress has both direct and indirect influence on the u.s. policy on north korea . through sanctions legislation , congress has set the terms for u.s. restrictions on trade and engagement with the dprk , as well as on the president's freedom to ease or lift sanctions against the dprk .