, effectiveness ) . congress passed provisions in the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 ( arra , p.l . 111-5 ) which required states applying for state fiscal stabilization funds to provide assurances that they will take actions to improve teacher effectiveness . this section discusses teacher policy issues that may arise if congress proceeds with reauthorization . since that time , funding for this purpose has increased roughly fivefold . the authorization for esea programs expired at the end of fy2008 , and the 113 th congress is considering whether to amend and extend the esea . federal policy has , until very recently , been silent on what constitutes effective teaching . the definition of an effective teacher and the evaluation of teachers' performance have largely remained the responsibility of school leadership within broad parameters outlined at the district level ; indeed , few states have intervened in this process . still , congress has shown increasing interest in growing federal involvement in this area , most recently through passage of rtt and several hearings on the topic . among other questions that may arise during esea reauthorization , congress may consider whether definitions of teacher effectiveness and principal effectiveness should be written into federal law ; whether housse procedures currently laid out in nclb to identify highly - qualified teachers can be adapted to reform teacher evaluation ; whether federal accountability requirements for student achievement can be amended to facilitate their use in teacher evaluation ; whether the federal investment in teacher and principal training should be targeted at improving evaluation systems ; whether the best policy levers for reforming teacher evaluation systems to emphasize effectiveness occur at the state , district , or school level ; and whether value - added methods for determining the effectiveness of individual teachers , principals , schools , or districts is currently feasible across grades and subject areas and should be required by federal policy . along with increasing the federal role in the evaluation of teacher and principal effectiveness , congress has shown interest in influencing the use of these evaluations . the tif requires that grantees reform compensation systems to reward teacher performance with bonuses and other financial incentives . rtt requires that grantees go further and use evaluations to inform high - stakes decisions such as the granting of tenure , awarding full certification , and removing ineffective teachers . with the knowledge that these decisions are often made at the local level of our educational system , congress may consider whether the federal government will have a sustained role in teacher and principal compensation and whether this role will focus on seeding efforts to develop the capacity to link compensation to performance ; whether performance - based teacher compensation efforts have triggered reforms in other areas such as evaluation procedures , leadership development , and data systems ; whether successful reforms in a limited set of school districts can be replicated by scaling up the federal investment ; and whether federal policy should address other barriers ( i.e. , beyond failure to identify poor teacher performance ) that limit the role of teacher evaluations in high - stakes decision - making . nclb requires that highly - qualified teachers be equitably distributed among classrooms and schools .