finally , the court addressed the practical implications of its decision . these nine hirings occurred over a six - year period . in 1997 , a group of black applicants who scored in the qualified range filed a charge of discrimination with the equal employment opportunity commission ( eeoc ) claiming that the city's practice of initially hiring only from the well - qualified group , which was 75.8% white and only 11.5% black , had an unlawful disparate impact on the basis of race . subsequently , they filed a title vii suit in federal court , and the district court certified a class of more than 6,000 black applicants who had scored in the qualified range but had not been hired . although the city stipulated that its classification of applicants as either well - qualified or qualified had had a disparate racial impact , it sought summary judgment on the ground that the applicants had failed to file their eeoc claim within the statutorily mandated deadline . the district court rejected this argument and later ruled in favor of the applicants , ordering the city to hire 132 members of the class and awarding back pay to the rest . the u.s. court of appeals for the seventh circuit reversed the district court's decision , holding that the applicants had failed to meet the statutory filing deadline because "[t]he hiring only of applicants classified 'well qualified' was the automatic consequence of the test scores rather than the product of a fresh act of discrimination. the supreme court granted review in order to determine "whether a plaintiff who does not file a timely charge challenging the adoption of a practice — here , an employer's decision to exclude employment applicants who did not achieve a certain score on an examination — may assert a disparate - impact claim in a timely charge challenging the employer's later application of that practice. under title vii , two different types of discrimination are prohibited . the first is disparate treatment , which involves intentional discrimination , such as treating an individual differently because of his or her race . the second type of prohibited discrimination — at issue in lewis — is disparate impact , which involves a neutral employment practice that is not intended to discriminate but that nonetheless has a disproportionate effect on protected individuals . an employer may defend against a disparate impact claim by showing that the challenged practice is "job related for the position in question and consistent with business necessity," although a plaintiff may still succeed by demonstrating that the employer refused to adopt an available alternative employment practice that has less disparate impact and serves the employer's legitimate needs . regardless of whether they allege disparate impact or disparate treatment , individuals who want to challenge an employment practice as unlawful are required to file a charge with the eeoc within a specified period — either 180 days or 300 days , depending on the state — "after the alleged unlawful employment practice occurred.