ii . u.n. world conferences on women u.n. member states have sought to address women's equality and gender empowerment through four world conferences specifically addressing issues related to women . the first conference , held in 1974 in mexico city , inaugurated the u.n. "decade on women," which spanned from 1976 to 1985 . the second conference was held in copenhagen , denmark , in 1980 , and the third was held in nairobi , kenya , in 1985 . the conferences addressed and expressed member states commitments to achieving ( 1 ) equality between men and women , ( 2 ) the integration of women into development , and ( 3 ) recognition of the participation of women in achieving world peace . the conferences also focused on women's health , work , and education . the fourth world conference on women , held in beijing in 1995 , sought to build on commitments made at previous conferences . the conference had two outcome documents: the beijing declaration and the platform for action , which were adopted by consensus ( 185 governments ) . the beijing declaration reaffirmed member state commitments to equal rights for men and women and the empowerment and advancement of women . governments also expressed their determination to intensify efforts to ensure full human rights for women and girls , eliminate discrimination against women , promote sustainable development and education , combat violence against women and girls , and ensure equal access to economic resources . the platform for action , described in its mission statement as an "agenda for women's empowerment," reaffirmed the human rights of women and girls and called for strong commitments by u.n. member states to take specific actions to address issues affecting women , including poverty , education , health , violence against women , armed conflict , decision - making , environment , and economic inequality . the united states was a key participant in the fourth world conference and played a significant role in drafting the declaration and platform for action . in december 1995 , the u.n. general assembly , including the united states , adopted resolution 50 / 45 endorsing both documents . iii . the u.n. convention on the elimination of all forms of discrimination against women ( cedaw ) cedaw ( the convention ) is the only international human rights treaty that specifically focuses on the rights of women . it calls on states parties to take all appropriate measures to eliminate discrimination against women in all areas of life . this includes equality in legal status , political participation , employment , education , health care , and the family structure . article 2 of the convention specifies that states parties should undertake to "embody the principle of equality of men and women in their national constitutions or other appropriate legislation ... to ensure , through law and other appropriate means , the practical realization of this principle. as of april 29 , 2009 , 186 countries have ratified or acceded to the convention . the united states is the only nation to have signed but not ratified cedaw . to date , the treaty has not been considered for advice and consent to ratification by the full senate .