thereafter. the usfs has included such expenditures as authorized activities in its state fire assistance program . however , congress has not appropriated funds explicitly for this program . despite being a state and not a federal responsibility , protecting private lands and structures from wildfires continues to garner congressional attention , as the threat of wildfire persists . whether and how to assist private landowners and communities , to combine this assistance with other assistance and incentive programs , and to fund such assistance could be debated in the farm bill context or in other legislative settings , such as the annual appropriations bills , or not at all . interest in producing energy from woody biomass and other renewable sources derives from both demand and supply interests . demand is driven by the need to produce renewable transportation fuels , such as ethanol , to meet the renewable fuel standard ; by state requirements , and possible federal standards , for electricity production from renewable sources ; and by the general interest in , and possible legislation for , reducing greenhouse gas emissions ( eg , cap - and - trade legislation ) . supply interests are driven by concerns over hazardous wildlife fuels and invasive species — the removal of both provides biomass that could be converted into renewable energy rather than disposed of in ways that contribute their carbon to the atmosphere . numerous programs exist to induce or assist energy production from biomass . some were created in the 2008 farm bill , including two directed specifically at woody biomass . others have been created under authorities such as § 210 of the energy policy act of 2005 ( p.l . 109-58 ) and § 203 of the healthy forests restoration act of 2003 ( p.l . concerns over these programs include duplication and inconsistencies among authorities , definitions , and efforts ; and the potential diversion of wood waste from existing markets ( eg , for pulp and paper , particleboard , and other products that use wood fiber ) to energy production , rather than increasing sustainable and beneficial removals of biomass from the forests . congress might examine and modify existing programs to be more consistent and efficient in encouraging sustainable and beneficial use of biomass to produce renewable energy . some , concerned about incentives or "subsidies" for renewable energy , might seek to constrain or terminate programs that could shift biomass from current beneficial uses to energy production . forests provide a broad array of environmental services — clean air and water , wildlife habitats , pleasant scenery , and more — for which private landowners are generally not compensated , because these services are typically not bought and sold in a marketplace . a variety of interests have examined the possibility of finding ways to compensate landowners for continuing to provide ecosystem services . one means would be to develop such markets , and the 2008 farm bill included a provision ( § 2709 ) to facilitate this development . a new farm bill might extend , expand , alter , or terminate the 2008 provision . alternatively , some propose federal "green payments" to directly reward farmers and other landowners who provide environmental benefits through their land management practices .