other differences between h.r . 5019 and s. 3663 may be significant in other policy contexts that are beyond the scope of this report . home star would employ a two - tiered structure for energy - efficiency rebates . its silver star program tier would provide up to $3,000 per home in prescriptive rebates for straightforward home upgrades , including insulation ; efficient heating , ventilation , and air conditioning units ; new windows ; and other measures . the senate version would also offer rebates for water - saving products or services certified under the u.s. environmental protection agency's watersense program . under silver star , contractors are guaranteed a fixed rebate amount for installing qualified measures , as long as they complete the necessary rebate applications and agree to post - installation quality assurance inspections . silver star rebates would be paid automatically to contractors upon job completion and submission of a rebate request . quality assurance inspectors would visit 10% to 20% of silver star participating homes ( depending upon the certification of the contractor ) to ensure measures were properly installed . the gold star program tier , by contrast , would offer $3,000 rebates for more comprehensive energy retrofits achieving at least 20% energy savings , with rebates increasing to as much as $8,000 per home for retrofits achieving 45% energy savings . the senate version would also offer up to $1,200 per home for comprehensive water efficiency retrofits . under gold star , contractors would use specialized software to model a home's baseline energy / water use , then propose a set of retrofit measures to improve that baseline , based on the modeling software calculations . retrofit measures could include those covered under silver star , or additional measures that could yield significant savings . before paying rebates , gold star would require "testing out" to document actual energy / water savings once installation had been completed . quality assurance inspectors would visit 10% to 15% of gold star participating homes . the proposed home star program may present a significant opportunity for both efficiency improvements and employment in the united states . the program targets the residential sector , which numerous studies have shown to be among the largest sources of cost - effective energy - efficiency ( and water - efficiency ) opportunities in the united states . it also targets a wide base of currently unemployed or under - employed residential contractors . structurally , the home star program seeks speedy implementation by building upon prior experience with both federal and state energy - efficiency programs to provide operating models that may be replicated nationwide . nonetheless , several operational aspects of the program would be new to a federal program , or have not been tried for a program of home star's scale . crs has identified a number of key considerations which may warrant further attention as congress reviews the home star program's operational details . in addition to the specific operational issues discussed above , three overarching market issues may also warrant further congressional consideration — a "do - it - yourself" option , expectations for program participation , and anticipated growth in the weatherization industry .