the process is not automatic . appropriations are required to perform studies and construction ; that is , congressional study and construction authorizations are necessary but alone are insufficient for the corps to pursue a project . projects under these authorities can be conducted without project - specific congressional study or construction authorization or project - specific appropriations ; these activities are performed at the discretion of the corps . for most cap authorities , congress has limited the project size and scope as shown in table 3 . the caps typically are referred to by the section number in the bill in which the cap was first authorized . wrrda 2014 requires the assistant secretary of the army to publish prioritization criteria for the caps and an annual cap report . congress also has granted the corps some general authorities to provide technical assistance and assistance specifically for tribes . the corps does not need project - specific authority to undertake activities that are eligible under the authorities listed in table 4 . for assistance for presidentially declared disasters pursuant to the stafford act ( p.l . 93-288 ) , the corps may be tasked with performing various response and recovery activities that are funded through the disaster relief fund , and performed at the direction of the federal emergency management agency ( fema ) and the president and the request of the governor of a state or territory with an affected area . under the national response framework , the corps coordinates emergency support for public works and engineering . this includes technical assistance , engineering , and construction management as well as emergency contracting , power , and repair of public water and wastewater and solid waste facilities . the corps also assists in monitoring and stabilizing damaged structures and demolishing structures designated as immediate hazards to public health and safety . the agency also provides technical assistance in clearing , removing , and disposing of contaminated and uncontaminated debris from public property , and establishing ground and water routes into affected areas ; contaminated debris management is coordinated with the u.s. environmental protection agency . in addition to work performed as part of the national response framework , congress has given the corps its own emergency response authority . this authority is commonly referred to as the agency's p.l . 84-99 authority , based on the act in which it was originally authorized , the flood control and coastal emergency act . ยง701n ) authorizes the corps to perform emergency response and disaster assistance . 84-99 authorizes disaster preparedness , advance measures , emergency operations ( disaster response and post - flood response ) , rehabilitation of certain damaged flood control works , protection or repair of certain federally authorized shore protection works threatened by coastal storms , emergency dredging , and flood - related rescue operations . these activities are limited to actions to save lives and protect improved property ( public facilities / services and residential or commercial developments ) . the corps also has some authorities to assist with select activities during drought . most of the agency's emergency response work ( including the repair program described below ) generally is funded through supplemental appropriations provided directly to the corps .