the church challenged the zoning decision under rfra . the supreme court reiterated that § 5 of the fourteenth amendment gave congress the power to enforce existing constitutional protections , but found that this did not automatically include the power to pass any legislation to protect these rights . instead , the court held that there must be a "congruence and proportionality" between the injury to be remedied and the law adopted to that end . rather than an attempt to remedy a problem , rfra was seen by the court as an attempt by congress to overturn an unpopular supreme court decision . the law focused on no one area of alleged harm to religion , but rather just broadly inhibited state and local regulations of all types . consequently , the court found rfra to be an overbroad response to a relatively nonexistent problem . the "congruence and proportionality" test in boerne for sustaining an exercise of § 5 powers became a formidable hurdle in other contexts as particular regulation of the states was held to be unsustainable under other means . for example , though congress has broad power to regulate a wide range of activities under the commerce clause , the court has held that congress cannot authorize suits against states for violations of federal laws enacted under its commerce authority: in such circumstances , state sovereign immunity under the eleventh amendment prevails . on the other hand , congress could abrogate state sovereign immunity when it acted under § 5 , but a line of cases applying boerne reiterated that § 5 power was generally circumscribed . then , in a 2004 decision written by justice stevens , the court took a different analytical tack in upholding certain suits against states for violating the americans with disabilities act ( ada ) . in tennessee v. lane , two paraplegic plaintiffs alleged that the state of tennessee and several of its counties violated title ii of the ada , which requires that the disabled be provided access to public services , programs , and activities , by failing to provide physical access to state courts . analyzing the case as an attempt to ensure a fundamental right to access courts as part of due process instead of as an antidiscrimination measure to ensure equal protection , the court held that title ii , as applied to this right of access to the courts , was a proper exercise of congress's authority under § 5 of the fourteenth amendment to abrogate states' eleventh amendment immunity . in applying the boerne congruence and proportionality test , the court in lane noted that the right protected in title ii of the act was access to public services , programs , and activities . while the unequal treatment of the disabled would only generally be a constitutional violation enforceable under § 5 if it were irrational , the court emphasized that title ii was also intended to reach the more rigorously protected rights of the due process clause of the fourteenth amendment , such as the right of access to the courts . the court stated that these due process rights required a higher standard of protection than would generally apply .