it's not legally binding . it won't constrain u.s. missile defense programs. nevertheless , some have questioned whether russia's threat to withdraw from new start might have a "chilling effect" on u.s. missile defense plans and programs . they contend that the united states might limit these programs itself to avoid a possible disruption of the arms control process or the possible increase in tensions with russia . as senator jeff sessions noted in a speech on may 13 , 2010 , "i can't help but worry that these provisions will have a negative impact on u.s. decision - making with respect to missile defense. members of the senate are likely to raise this question , and explore the potentially different u.s. and russian views on the relationship between new start and u.s. ballistic missile defense programs , during the debate on the new start treaty . when the united states and soviet union negotiated the 1991 start treaty , the soviet union also sought to link limits on offensive nuclear weapons with limits on ballistic missile defenses . the united states did not agree to the soviet proposals , so the soviet union released a unilateral statement when it signed start , noting that the treaty would not remain in force if the united states withdrew from the 1972 abm treaty . this statement did not serve to slow u.s. missile defense programs after start entered into force . moreover , the united states and soviet union held discussions during the latter half of the 1990s on possible modifications to the abm treaty so that the united states could deploy more extensive ballistic missile defenses without withdrawing from the treaty . these negotiations proved unsuccessful . russia continued to object to u.s. ballistic missile defense plans and to caution the united states not to withdraw from the treaty . nevertheless , when the united states withdrew from the abm treaty in 2002 , russia did not withdraw from start . this report seeks to shed some light on the past relationship between ballistic missile defenses and negotiations on offensive arms control treaties . it provides an historical review of the way in which the united states and soviet union addressed ballistic missile defense issues during their negotiations on the first strategic arms reduction treaty ( start ) in the 1980s and early 1990s . it also provides a review of u.s. missile defense policy and summarizes data on missile defense spending during the 1980s , 1990s , and the past decade . the report then reviews the recent record on the way the new start negotiations addressed ballistic missile defense issues and offers some observations about whether this historical record may provide insights into how the united states might proceed with its ballistic missile defense programs in the future . russia's concerns about u.s. missile defense programs derive from its stated concern that missile defenses could upset strategic stability by undermining the effectiveness of russia's offensive nuclear weapons .