purpose . most sma statutes include a statement about the purpose ( s ) for designating the area . such statements often provide a basis for management that may differ from management of the area prior to designation . designation . many sma statutes include a provision explicitly designating and naming the area . these provisions often include a reference to the area's boundaries and to a map ( commonly identified by a name and date ) to be retained in a specific office ( typically the forest supervisor's office for the national forest in which the sma is located ) . nfs laws . most sma statutes direct that the sma is to be managed consistent with the laws , rules , and regulations generally applicable to national forest system lands . thus , the purposes and provisions enacted for the designated area are generally supplemental to existing governance , and not a substitute for that management guidance . management plan . many sma statutes require a management plan for the designated area , commonly completed within a specified period . sometimes the planning guidance requires public participation ; sometimes it does so indirectly , by reference to the nfma planning process and requirements . advisory committee . many sma statutes provide for an advisory committee or group for the designated area . this advisory committee is frequently permanent , but sometimes is just for the development of the management plan . also , some advisory groups are to represent the array of general public interests , but others are to focus on scientific issues associated with management of the area . land acquisition . most sma statutes authorize land acquisition for nonfederal land within the boundaries of the area . as the usfs has general land acquisition authority under the weeks law ( 16 u.s.c . buffer zones . some of the statutes designating smas prohibit the usfs from establishing buffer zones around the sma . this provision is akin to provisions enacted in several statutes designating wilderness areas , which note that the ability to see or hear a nonconforming activity from within the wilderness is not sufficient authority to restrict or prohibit that activity . effect on governance . several sma statutes direct that the designation is to have no effect on state or local laws and regulations , including law enforcement and taxation of private enterprise within the sma . authorization of appropriations . some sma statutes explicitly authorize appropriations for administering the area consistent with the statute . however , since few , if any , sma statutes authorize any activity not already authorized for nfs lands generally ( typically they restrict already - authorized activities ) , and since usfs appropriations are enacted for activities , not for specific units , it is not clear that an authorization is required for an sma . exceptions to this prohibition have been included for new roads to replace existing , environmentally damaging roads and for new roads as decided in the planning process for the area . wildfire , insect , and disease control . some sma statutes explicitly allow activities to control fires , insects , and diseases .