the supreme court reversed the d.c . as justice stevens retires , how the new court resolves the ambiguities associated with applying the chevron test will have a tremendous impact on chevron ' s ultimate legacy . circuit decision , finding the epa regulation to be a permissible exercise of authority under the caa . in doing so , the unanimous opinion , authored by justice stevens , laid out a basic two - part test to be applied in reviewing an agency's construction of its own statutory authority . in an oft - quoted passage , justice stevens summarized the test , which itself encapsulates the relationship between the courts , the agencies , and congress in administering and interpreting statutes: first , always , is the question whether congress has directly spoken to the precise question at issue . the term "stationary sources" was not defined by the caa . in 1981 , the environmental protection agency ( epa ) promulgated a regulation that allowed states to adopt the "bubble concept" or "plantwide" concept of "stationary sources" under their permit programs . such an interpretation calculated plant emissions as a whole , rather than calculating emission from each individual pollution - emitting device . therefore , a plant , which often contained more than one source of air pollution , could increase emissions from one device as long as there was a corresponding decrease within the same "industrial grouping" or "bubble. the natural resources defense council petitioned the u.s. court of appeals for the district of columbia circuit to set aside the regulation — arguing that such an interpretation of "stationary source" was contrary to the statute's purpose of improving air quality . circuit set aside the regulation as contrary to the caa and the case was appealed to the u.s. supreme court . if the intent of congress is clear , that is the end of the matter ; for the court , as well as the agency , must give effect to the unambiguously expressed intent of congress . if , however , the court determines congress has not directly addressed the precise question at issue , the court does not simply impose its own construction on the statute , as would be necessary in the absence of an administrative interpretation . rather if the statute is silent or ambiguous with respect to the specific issue , the question for the court is whether the agency's answer is based on a permissible construction of the statute . stevens's chevron analysis established what many commentators have considered to be a highly deferential judicial role when faced with a challenge to an agency's interpretation of its own authorizing statute or a statute it administers . at step one , a reviewing court must determine whether congress has spoken clearly on the issue at hand and give effect to any intent it finds congress expressed unambiguously . an agency interpretation that is contrary to the clear intent of congress must be rejected . if , however , congress's intent is unclear as to the immediate question , including where congress is silent , at step two the court's role is to defer to any reasonable agency interpretation of the pertinent statutory language .