within dhs , u.s . citizenship and immigration services ( uscis ) is responsible for immigration and naturalization adjudications and other service functions ; immigration and customs enforcement ( ice ) is responsible for enforcing immigration law in the interior of the united states , among other responsibilities ; and customs and border protection ( cbp ) is responsible for securing u.s. borders at and between official ports of entry . it is unknown , at any point in time , how many unauthorized aliens are in the united states ; what countries they are from ; when they came to the united states ; where they are living ; and what their demographic , family , and other characteristics are . demographers develop estimates about unauthorized immigrants using available survey data on the u.s. foreign - born population . these estimates can help inform possible policy options to address the unauthorized alien population . dhs and the pew research center ( pew ) regularly publish estimates of the unauthorized resident population based on data from the census bureau's american community survey ( acs ) and other sources . according to the dhs estimates , the unauthorized population totaled 11.5 million in january 2011 and 11.4 million in january 2012 . pew also estimated the 2011 unauthorized resident population at 11.5 million , and using data from the march current population survey ( cps ) and other sources , released a preliminary estimate of 11.7 million for the march 2012 unauthorized population . both the dhs and pew estimates suggest that the unauthorized resident population reached a peak in 2007 , totaling about 11.8 million and 12.2 million , respectively . between 2007 and 2009 , the unauthorized population decreased , according to both dhs and pew . the trend in the size of the unauthorized population since 2009 is uncertain . competing views on how to address this population proved to be a major obstacle to enacting comprehensive immigration reform legislation in past congresses . the unauthorized immigrant issue remains a key challenge in legislating on immigration reform today . the department of homeland security ( dhs ) has primary responsibility for administering and enforcing the immigration and nationality act ( ina ) , the basis of immigration law . unauthorized aliens enter the united states in three main ways: ( 1 ) some are admitted to the united states on valid nonimmigrant ( temporary ) visas ( eg , as visitors or students ) or on border - crossing cards and either remain in the country beyond their authorized period of stay or otherwise violate the terms of their admission ; ( 2 ) some are admitted based on fraudulent documents ( eg , fake passports ) that go undetected by u.s. officials ; and ( 3 ) some enter the country illegally without inspection ( eg , by crossing over the southwest or northern u.s. border ) . it is unknown what percentages of the current unauthorized resident population entered the united states in these different ways . in past years , researchers have endeavored to make this type of determination .