airwaves. all parties agreed that the monologue was not obscene and did not fit the definition for obscenity . the case , thus , squarely presented to the court the question of whether the fcc could regulate speech over broadcast that is indecent , but is not obscene . justice stevens took a methodical approach to the opinion , breaking down the issue presented into four separate questions: ( 1 ) the scope of the court's review ; ( 2 ) whether the fcc's order was a form of illegal censorship ; ( 3 ) whether the broadcast was , in fact , indecent , under the applicable law ; and ( 4 ) whether the order violated the first amendment . after finding that the court must focus its review on the fcc's determination that carlin's monologue was indecent , and that the fcc's action was not illegal censorship , stevens analyzed the more difficult questions presented by the case . the statute being enforced by the fcc in this case was 18 u.s.c . ยง 1464 which forbids the utterance of "any obscene , indecent or profane language by means of radio communication. justice stevens observed that the statute is written in the disjunctive , implying that each word has a separate meaning . despite the fact that 18 u.s.c . ยง 1461 , containing similar language to ban "obscene , indecent , or profane" speech through the mail , had been construed by the court to prohibit only obscene speech delivered through the mail , stevens reasoned that congress could not have intended the same standard to apply to different modes of delivering speech . furthermore , stevens found that the accepted definition of indecency does not require an appeal to prurient interest . rather , the term indecent "refers to nonconformance with accepted standards of morality. with that definition in mind , justice stevens had little trouble deciding that the "filthy words" broadcast was indecent . the only question left for justice stevens to answer was whether restricting indecent speech over broadcast radio was constitutional under the first amendment . stevens concluded that it is . in making this determination , justice stevens paid particular attention to the unique nature of the broadcast medium when deciding that restricting indecent speech over broadcast stations did not violate the first amendment . context for justice stevens , in this case and subsequent cases , was key . even though the speech at issue was undisputedly "vulgar , "offensive," and "shocking," stevens found that the monologue at issue in the case may have been protected speech in some contexts . stevens went so far as to include a transcript of the monologue in its entirety as an appendix to the opinion . however , justice stevens wrote that , though the monologue may be protected in some contexts , it was not "entitled to absolute protection under all circumstances. stevens set forth to analyze the context in which the speech occurred to determine whether the fcc's action was appropriate .