appendix a . current qdr legislation as amended through the fy2010 national defense authorization act this appendix includes •    the full , current text of title 10 , u.s. code , section 118 , as amended to date , which is the permanent statute , originally enacted in the fy2000 national defense authorization act , p.l . 106-65 , october 5 , 1999 , that requires a quadrennial defense review very four years , and •    the full text of provisions of the fy2010 national defense authorization act , p.l . 111-84 , october 28 , 2009 , that establish additional requirements for the 2010 quadrennial defense review , including provisions regarding an independent panel to assess the 2010 qdr . together , these statutes constitute the legislative requirements for the 2010 qdr . other statutes , not cited here , require a white house national security strategy statement , reports on u.s. nuclear , space , and ballistic missile defense policy , and quadrennial reports by the department of defense on the roles and missions of the military services . title 10 , u.s. code , section 118 § 118 . quadrennial defense review ( a ) review required . — the secretary of defense shall every four years , during a year following a year evenly divisible by four , conduct a comprehensive examination ( to be known as a "quadrennial defense review" ) of the national defense strategy , force structure , force modernization plans , infrastructure , budget plan , and other elements of the defense program and policies of the united states with a view toward determining and expressing the defense strategy of the united states and establishing a defense program for the next 20 years . each such quadrennial defense review shall be conducted in consultation with the chairman of the joint chiefs of staff . ( b ) conduct of review . — each quadrennial defense review shall be conducted so as — ( 1 ) to delineate a national defense strategy consistent with the most recent national security strategy prescribed by the president pursuant to section 108 of the national security act of 1947 ( 50 u.s.c . 404a ) ; ( 2 ) to define sufficient force structure , force modernization plans , infrastructure , budget plan , and other elements of the defense program of the united states associated with that national defense strategy that would be required to execute successfully the full range of missions called for in that national defense strategy ; ( 3 ) to identify ( a ) the budget plan that would be required to provide sufficient resources to execute successfully the full range of missions called for in that national defense strategy at a low - to - moderate level of risk , and ( b ) any additional resources ( beyond those programmed in the current future - years defense program ) required to achieve such a level of risk ; and ( 4 ) to make recommendations that are not constrained to comply with the budget submitted to congress by the president pursuant to section 1105 of title 31 . ( d ) two appointed by the ranking member of the committee on armed services of the senate .