circuit . the supreme court agreed to review only a narrow question raised by this ruling — whether epa's regulation of ghg emissions from motor vehicles triggered caa permitting requirements for ghg emissions from stationary sources as well — leaving the remainder of the d.c . circuit decision intact . when the supreme court ruled on this one issue , in 2014 , it gave epa most of what it wanted , allowing it to require such permitting for ghg emitters who would be subject to permit requirements anyway because of other pollutants they emit . in contrast to this record , petitioners may have better chances in the litigation that has been filed against epa's rules for new and existing power plants . that is one interpretation of the supreme court's unprecedented stay of the clean power plan , issued in february 2016 . until now , opponents in congress have been unable to overturn most of epa's ghg actions . with new congressional majorities in the 114 th congress , legislation to overturn epa's rulemaking has had easier going than in previous congresses . but the legislation still faces two important obstacles: the filibuster rule in the senate and the likelihood of presidential vetoes . whether either obstacle can be overcome depends on the specifics of the bills in question . while any congressional action to overturn epa's ghg regulations will face challenges , most analysts expect riders to appropriation bills to have the best odds of success . the differences are of scale and of degree . greenhouse gases are global pollutants to a greater extent than most of the pollutants previously regulated under the act ; reductions in u.s. emissions without simultaneous reductions by other countries may somewhat diminish but will not solve the problems the emissions cause . also , ghgs are such pervasive pollutants , and arise from so many sources , that reducing the emissions may have broader effects on the economy than most previous epa regulations . these and other considerations have led many in congress to try to prevent epa from using its general authority to control ghg emissions . if the rules are to be overturned during the remainder of the obama administration , there are two arenas in which to do so: the courts and the congress . opponents of the regulations have not prevailed in either venue , thus far , although the supreme court has stayed epa's implementation of the clean power plan pending the resolution of court challenges to the rule . in the courts , several of epa's early ghg - related actions , in 2009 and 2010 , survived challenges in 95 consolidated petitions for review in the d.c . the fleet of vehicles turns over slowly . thus , although new vehicles will be required to reduce ghg emissions by about 50% in model year 2025 and later vehicles , it will be 2040 or later before the full effect of that requirement is felt .