the context in which eda has carried out its mission has changed . congress has acted to refine the programs' components and focus . originally targeted to rural areas experiencing long - term economic depression associated with the decline in manufacturing and mining jobs accompanied by the outmigration of population , eda assistance today is directed to rural and urban areas experiencing long - term economic deterioration or sudden economic dislocation caused by the loss of a major employer ; foreign competition ; disasters ; and federal actions , including base closures and environmental actions . at its inception , eda was focused on addressing regional inequities and promoting balanced regional growth . today , eda views its mission as strengthening the competitiveness of regional economies and creating jobs in a global context , and as part of a larger effort involving other elements such as job training and workforce development . title v of the act authorized the creation of five regional commissions modeled after the arc . during its 46-year history , eda has remained relatively unchanged in its mission and the means of achieving it . the agency's mission is still the promotion of economic development in the nation's distressed areas , and the means of achieving that mission are primarily still regional planning and the shared financing of public works , public facilities , and technology enhancements in support of private sector commercial and industrial development projects . the creation of edds was a significant departure from the single - county approach under ara and mirrored the role of local development districts created under arda . the legislation limited the federal share of a project's cost , thus requiring local participating entities to share the risk . in addition , the act relied heavily on the use of unemployment data to define eligible ras , but included alternative criteria such as median income that had the net effect of expanding the number of eda - eligible counties . one of the criticisms of eda that has endured since its inception is the high percentage of communities that continue to qualify as economically distressed . over the life of the program , according to estimates included in a rutgers university study , 60% - 90% of counties met the qualifications for designation as economically distressed . as passed by congress , the pweda included grants to public agencies and nonprofit entities for public works projects , loans to businesses , and technical assistance and grants to redevelopment areas to be used to develop oedps . 87-27 ) ; the public works acceleration act of 1963 ( pwaa ; p.l . 87-658 ) ; and the appalachian regional development act of 1965 ( arda ; p.l . collectively , the three predecessor acts targeted assistance to projects in areas experiencing long - term economic stagnation as well as projects providing temporary public works employment as an anti - recessionary measure in response to rising unemployment . dominant themes and lessons of each of these acts became integral parts of eda's mission of job creation and poverty reduction in economically disadvantaged regions .