it affects the way all our other cases are presented . if we are willing to take a somewhat disinterested and wholly candid position even when it means surrendering a victory , then all our other cases will be presented with a greater degree of candor , and with a longer view , perhaps , than otherwise . given the loyalty of the solicitor general's office to the court , some scholars argue , the court has placed a great deal of confidence and trust in the judgment of the solicitor general's office . this trust is more centrally reflected in the office's impressive success rate in securing review for and winning on the merits in the cases supported by the office . individuals who have clerked in the office expressed the sentiment that the solicitor general "did not waste his capital on bringing up a poor case" and "was very careful not to squander his reputation with the court. some observers of the court argue , however , that the relationship between the court and the office of the solicitor general is not a function of a "special relationship," but the skill of the office's advocates . to be sure , supreme court justices have been reported to praise the quality of the attorneys in the solicitor general's office , noting , "[the] solicitor general's office by tradition has had a very high calibre lawyer working on its staff ... [the] ablest advocates in the u.s. are the advocates in the solicitor general's office. the key to the solicitor general's notable aggregate success rate in persuading the court to accept the cases it chooses and winning cases on the merits is argued to be the natural result of superior lawyering skills developed by the attorneys in the solicitor general's office through repeated interaction with the court . in other words , the solicitor general and the attorneys in her office are repeat player s , as compared with one - shotters , whose success is a result of arguing many more cases before the court than other litigants . the opportunity to argue multiple times before the court not only hones one's skills , but also generates familiarity with the preferences of the justices and the operation of the court . as one justice noted , the attorneys in the solicitor general's office were not only superb lawyers , but "the [s]olicitor [g]eneral knows all the catchwords , and they just know how to write them in a brief ; they know how to put things [to be effective]. the status of the solicitor general as a repeat player , however , does not account for variations in the success of the solicitor general before the court on a case - by - case basis . to understand the relationship between the solicitor general and the court , some argue , one also must understand that the solicitor general is not just a trusted partner or a familiar litigant , but that in addition to those roles , she is also a political actor who is fundamentally an agent of the president and , as a result , whose views reflect those of the executive .