department of justice regulations implement section 309 . these regulations require private entities offering examinations to assure , inter alia , that: the examination is selected and administered so as to best ensure that , when the examination is administered to an individual with a disability that impairs sensory , manual , or speaking skills , the examination results accurately reflect the individual's aptitude or achievement level or whatever other factor the examination purports to measure , rather than reflecting the individual's impaired sensory , manual , or speaking skills ( except where those skills are the factors that the examination purports to measure ... ) . the doj specifies that required modifications to a test "may include changes in the length of time permitted for completion of the examination and adaptation of the manner in which the examination is provided. moreover , a private entity administering a test may be required to provide "appropriate auxiliary aids for persons with impaired sensory , manual , or speaking skills , unless that entity can demonstrate that offering a particular auxiliary aid would fundamentally alter the measurement of the skills or knowledge the examination is intended to test or would result in an undue burden. these aids and services may include taped examinations , interpreters , or other effective methods of making orally delivered materials available to individuals with hearing impairments ; brailled or large print examinations and answer sheets or qualified readers for individuals with visual impairments or learning disabilities ; transcribers for individuals with manual impairments ; and other similar services and actions . a private testing entity may request documentation regarding a test - taker's disability , but that request must be "reasonable and limited to the need for the modification , accommodation , or auxiliary aid or service requested. entities administering examinations must give considerable weight in their consideration of a request for accommodations to accommodations that were provided in testing situations under an individualized education program ( iep ) pursuant to the individuals with disabilities education act or a plan adopted pursuant to section 504 of the rehabilitation act of 1973 ( often referred to as a section 504 plan ) . thirdly , the doj requires entities administering examinations to respond to requests for accommodations in a "timely manner ... to ensure equal opportunity for individuals with disabilities. in 2011 , a petition for writ of certiorari was filed with the u.s. supreme court in the case of national conference of bar examiners v. enyart . that petition , filed by the national conference of bar examiners ( ncbe ) , seeks review of a ninth circuit decision upholding an injunction that required the ncbe to permit stephanie enyart — a legally blind law student — to take the multistate professional responsibility exam and the multistate bar exam with the aid of technology that would read aloud the text and adjust its size , font , and color . while the state bar had no problem with these accommodations , the national conference of bar examiners ( ncbe ) refused to permit them .