only the government may generally do so . the 111 th congress expanded the payment and other protections for small business subcontractors under section 8 ( d ) of the small business act when it enacted the small business jobs act ( sbja ) of 2010 . among other things , the sbja amended section 8 ( d ) to require that prime contracts incorporating subcontracting plans also include terms obligating the contractor to: make a good faith effort to acquire articles , equipment , supplies , services , or materials , or obtain the performance of construction work from the small business concerns used in preparing and submitting … the bid or proposal , in the same amount and quality used in preparing and submitting the bid or proposal , and provide the contracting officer with a written explanation whenever it fails to do so . in addition , the sbja amended section 8 ( d ) to require that prime contractors with subcontracting plans notify the contracting officer in writing if they pay a subcontractor a reduced price , or if payment is more than 90 days past due on a contract for which the federal agency has paid the prime contractor . contracting officers are also required to consider any "unjustified failure" by a prime contractor to make full or timely payments to a subcontractor in evaluating the contractor's performance , and note any "history" of unjustified failures to make full or timely payment in the federal awardee performance and integrity information system ( fapiis ) . regulations promulgated by sba to implement these provisions of the sbja further bar prime contractors from restricting subcontractors' ability to "discuss[] any material pertaining to payment or utilization with the contracting officer," apparently with the intent of promoting reporting by subcontractors in the event that prime contractors fail to provide the requisite notices . however , the preface to these regulations also makes clear that sba does not view the sbja as requiring contracting officers to involve themselves in disputes regarding reduced or late payments , or regarding whether particular subcontractors were "used" in preparing bids or proposals . instead , sba envisions contracting officers factoring contractors' failure to work with small businesses "used" in their bids or offers , or unjustifiable late or reduced payments , into contractors' performance evaluations . retainage can be seen as a type of withholding . however , the term "withholding" can also be used more broadly to describe the nonpayment of contract amounts because of debts of the contractor outside of the contract . contractors withholding funds under a contract subject to the prompt payment act must generally provide both the procuring agency and the subcontractor with written notification of withholding , and the amount withheld cannot exceed the amount specified in this notice . contracting parties often agree to retainage and withholding in order to encourage timely completion of the contract and ensure full understanding between the parties regarding the terms of completion . because the payment and interest clauses of the contract apply only to the parties , the federal government's obligations run only to the prime contractor . prime contractors have the duty to pay subcontractors , and subcontractors have the duty to pay lower - tier subcontractors .