hamas remains in control of gaza . israel and the united states reestablished relations with the new pa government , and israel imposed a tight land , sea , and air blockade on the gaza strip , in what it describes as an act of self - defense to prevent arms from reaching hamas . with the blockade , israel also hoped to turn gazans against hamas by contrasting hamas rule with the better life of palestinians in the west bank . instead , the blockade isolated the territory and helped to strengthen hamas's control . from december 2008 to january 2009 , israeli forces carried out a major military offensive , called operation cast lead , against hamas in order to stop rocket fire into southern israel and to weaken or overthrow hamas . the campaign resulted in more than 1,000 palestinian deaths and the destruction of much of the gaza strip's infrastructure and many buildings . hence , the white house reaction to the israeli announcement was positive: we believe that israel , like any other nation , should be allowed to undertake an investigation into events that involve its national security . israel has a military justice system that meets international standards and is capable of conducting a serious and credible investigation , and the structure and terms of reference of israel's proposed independent public commission can meet the standard of a prompt , impartial , credible , and transparent investigation . but we will not prejudge the process or its outcome , and will await the conduct and findings of the investigation before drawing further conclusions . however , turkish foreign minister davutoglu was not satisfied . he declared , the crime was committed in international waters , not in israel's territorial waters . a commission which will conduct an inquiry into an attack staged in international waters should be international . finally , davutoglu stated that if an international commission were not set up , then turkey would unilaterally review its ties with israel and implement sanctions against it . israel's state comptroller micha lindenstrauss will carry out yet another investigation into the legality of the government's decision - making as well as intelligence and public relations issues . the probe will not duplicate that of the idf or the turkel group . meanwhile , u.n. secretary general ban ki - moon took note of the israeli announcement , but added that his own proposal for an international inquiry remains on the table and he hoped for a positive israeli response . turkey accepted ban's proposal and called on israel to do so . however , israeli defense minister ehud barak said , after meeting the secretary general and providing details concerning new steps to ease the blockade ( see " the blockade ," below ) "we consider an [international probe] while organizations that support terror are trying to send more ships to gaza to be an irresponsible act. on june 17 , the turkish foreign ministry announced that a panel headed by the foreign and justice ministers "will assess the national and international dimensions" of the raid and prepare the ground for a possible international investigation .