there has been some concern that the funding amount is inadequate for the program . richard foster , the chief actuary of the centers for medicare and medicaid services , estimates that by 2011 or 2012 the initial funding will be exhausted , "resulting in substantial premium increases to sustain the program. cbo concurs that $5 billion will not be enough to cover the costs of all applicants through 2013 . many of the states that elected not to participate cited the funding as their reason . for example , texas governor rick perry in a letter to the secretary stated that the funding is insufficient and that "state officials could be forced to reduce health coverage , raise premiums or ask state taxpayers to pay" for the hrp . similarly , wyoming governor dave freudenthal wrote the secretary expressing the concern "that the allotted money may prove to be insufficient to fully operate this program until 2014. . if hhs estimates that there will be a funding shortage , then the secretary has the authority to make any program adjustments necessary to eliminate the deficit . the secretary has proposed allocating funds for the program by using a formula similar to what was used for the state children's health insurance program ( chip ) , whereby funds would be allotted to states using a combination of factors , including nonelderly population , nonelderly uninsured , and geographic cost , as a guide . the secretary intends to reallocate the unspent state allotments after a period of not more than two years , based on an assessment of enrollment and expenditure experiences of each state . applicants will no longer have to wait on an insurance company to send them a denial letter . specific coverage policy ( eg , providers and procedures covered and prescription drug formularies ) is not addressed by the law . in other words , section 1101 ppaca does not require nor expressly prohibit certain providers , procedures , prescriptions drugs , or medical technology . however , the secretary does have the authority to establish additional requirements for the program that can be used to establish coverage policy . with respect to network adequacy , the secretary established by regulation that each pcip may specify the network of providers it contracts with , but the pcip must demonstrate to hhs that it has a sufficient number and range of providers to ensure that all covered services are reasonably available to enrollees . the secretary further established that pcips must cover certain benefit categories listed below . specific covered items and services within these broad coverage categories may vary between pcips . the secretary also established the following excluded coverage categories: ( 1 ) cosmetic surgery except to restore bodily function or correct deformity resulting from disease ; ( 2 ) custodial care except for hospice ; ( 3 ) in vitro fertilization , artificial insemination or any other artificial means used to cause pregnancy ; ( 4 ) abortion services except when the life of the woman would be endangered or when the pregnancy is the result of an act of rape or incest ; and ( 5 ) experimental care except as part of an fda - approved clinical trial .