there are other policy options . the state department has the options of making statements from washington , dc , and adding critical concerns in the annual reports to congress on human rights around the world . the state department could expand contact with taiwan under the assistant secretary for democracy , human rights , and labor , including voicing u.s. concerns about the conditions of tibetan and uighur minorities in the prc . taiwan has hosted the dalai lama . the state and justice departments have considered an extradition treaty with taiwan , at its request . the administration , u.s. firms , and human rights organizations could encourage taiwan and its it companies to support internet freedom . u.s. agencies , including the agency for international development ( usaid ) , could coordinate closely with the taiwan foundation for democracy ( tfd ) and taiwan's international cooperation and development fund ( icdf ) on foreign assistance programs , including to promote democracy and governance . u.s. and taiwan programs could promote the international freedom and professionalism of the press . congress could enact legislation or take other actions to implement section 2 ( b ) of the tra and promote human rights and legal reform in taiwan . members as well as staff could intensify inter - parliamentary exchanges with taiwan's legislative yuan and its staff to build up that democratic institution . congressional and staff delegations could further observe taiwan's elections and attend presidential inaugurations . delegations could specifically visit the tfd as well as the museum in taipei dedicated to the victims of the "228 incident. but there were a couple of mentions . at a news conference on november 12 , 2008 , that coincided with the day that ex - president chen shui - bian was first detained , stephen young , the director of ait in taipei , said that "not only taiwan but also your friends around the world will be watching this process very closely , and we believe it needs to be transparent , fair , and impartial. when the new ait director , william stanton , met with taiwan's justice minister in september 2009 and mentioned that some people in the united states have commented on chen's case , he nonetheless encountered controversy in taiwan's government and media for supposed u.s. interference . in contrast to the executive branch which is restricted by the state department's guidelines on contact with taiwan's officials , congress could use its greater flexibility in communicating with taiwan's officials up to the president to enhance engagement that promotes u.s. values , democracy , and rule of law . the kmt government did not crack down on the dpp . representative solarz urged the government's restraint , stating that "to crack down on parties that advocate taiwan independence would be a violation of fundamental principles of human rights . it would also betray a distressing lack of confidence in the political wisdom of the people of taiwan. in december 1992 , taiwan's people elected a new legislative yuan , without the kmt returning the same old members who had run for election on mainland china in the 1940s and stayed in the legislature without elections for decades .