appendix b . social security auxiliary benefits ( benefits for the worker's family members ) social security provides benefits to eligible family members of a retired , disabled or deceased worker . benefits payable to family members are equal to a specified percentage of the worker's pia , subject to a maximum family benefit amount . social security provides a monthly benefit to the spouse or divorced spouse ( if the marriage lasted 10 or more years ) of an entitled retired or disabled worker equal to 50% of the worker's pia . a monthly survivor benefit equal to 100% of the deceased worker's pia is payable to the surviving spouse or surviving divorced spouse of a worker who was fully insured at the time of death . benefits for spouses , divorced spouses and surviving spouses are reduced if claimed before fra . in addition , these benefits are reduced or fully offset if the beneficiary receives his or her own social security retired - worker benefit or a pension from a job that was not covered by social security ( such as certain federal , state or local government jobs ) . the child of a disabled or retired worker is eligible for 50% of the worker's pia . the child of a deceased worker is eligible for 75% of the worker's pia . social security also provides a monthly mother's or father's benefit , equal to 75% of the worker's pia , to a surviving parent of any age who cares for the deceased worker's child , when that child is under the age of 16 or disabled . table b - 1 provides a summary of social security auxiliary benefits for the family of a retired , disabled or deceased worker , including eligibility requirements related to age and other factors . maximum family benefit amount the total amount of benefits payable to a family based on a retired or deceased worker's record is capped by the maximum family benefit amount . the maximum family benefit varies from 150% to 188% of the retired or deceased worker's pia , and the maximum family benefit cannot be exceeded regardless of the number of beneficiaries entitled to benefits on the worker's record . if the sum of all benefits based on the worker's record exceeds the maximum family benefit amount , each dependent's or survivor's benefit is reduced in equal proportion to bring the total amount of benefits within the family maximum . for the family of a worker who attains age 62 in 2012 , or dies in 2012 before attaining age 62 , the total amount of benefits payable is limited to 150% of the first $980 of pia , plus 272% of pia over $980 and through $1,415 , plus 134% of pia over $1,415 and through $1,845 , plus 175% of pia over $1,845 . the dollar amounts in the maximum family benefit formula are indexed to average wage growth , as in the primary benefit formula . a separate maximum family benefit formula applies to the family of a worker who is entitled to disability benefits .