some of these issues were addressed by the 2014 farm bill . defining what is considered an eligible material or eligible crop under bcap became somewhat contentious during the early years of implementation . by 2010 , concerns had surfaced about eligible material creating direct competition with existing uses through the chst matching payments . others have expressed concerns about allowing certain fast - growing non - native plants to be included as eligible crops . many of the issues that initially arose around bcap have been addressed , and so have become less acute over time . among lingering issues is a concern that a number of grasses that are considered invasive species , and that also have favorable characteristics as energy crops , may in theory have the potential to cause economic and environmental damage in spite of efforts to prevent such an outcome . another concern centers on the continued slow development of a commercial - scale cellulosic biofuels industry that bcap was meant to support . a summary of issues related to eligible crops and materials follows . in early 2010 , after usda's 2009 notice on chst matching payments , some manufacturing and nursery industries that use wood shavings , wood chips , sawdust , and other wood "scraps" noticed an increase in price for their raw materials . this increase was linked , by some , to the chst matching payments , which offered a federal payment match for the same materials if delivered to a qualified biomass conversion facility . the chst matching payment of up to $45 per ton created an incentive for material owners to sell to biomass facilities rather than to manufacturers that use the same raw materials for products such as composite panels , particle board , and fiberboard , or to nurseries and landscaping firms that use bark and wood chips for mulch . renewable biomass harvested from the national forest system and other public land is subject to a statutory provision that prohibits material that would otherwise be used for higher - value products . this prohibition , however , did not initially apply to renewable biomass harvested from private land . in usda's initial proposed rule ( february 8 , 2010 ) , such biomass remained eligible for chst matching payments , largely because the 2008 farm bill ( p.l . 110-246 ) did not specifically prohibit biomass that would have otherwise been used for higher - value products produced on private land . however , based on the initial reaction to the chst matching payments , usda expanded the public land restriction to private land as well . therefore , all biomass material that would otherwise be used for higher - value products , from either public or private sources , is considered ineligible under usda's final rule . in an effort to enforce this division between higher - value products , in its final rule ( october 27 , 2010 ) usda added the requirement that "eligible material be directly harvested from the land " in accordance with an approved conservation plan , forest stewardship plan , or equivalent plan ; be separated from a higher - value product ; and not be classified as a higher - value product by usda .