, budget neutrality ) . nationally , 6.4% of all workers are self - employed ( 9.5 million workers ) . some studies suggest that workers may be more likely to move into self - employment during economic recessions and to move out of self - employment during periods of economic growth . yet , as described below , participation in sea is low . less than 1% of uc claimants participate in the program ; in large part , because few states have active programs . project gate was a federally funded demonstration project implemented in seven sites in three states ( minnesota , pennsylvania , and maine ) between 2003 and 2005 . designed to help individuals start or expand their own businesses , project gate provided self - employment training and other services . although sea programs are available only to eligible uc claimants likely to exhaust their unemployment benefits , project gate was designed for a wider population ( i.e. , anyone interested in starting or growing a small business ) . researchers conducted an impact analysis of one subgroup of project gate participants composed of recent unemployment benefit claimants in minnesota , providing a parallel with sea participants . it also evaluates sea program outcomes using survey data in three states: maine , new jersey , and new york . based on a group comparison between sea participants and sea - eligible ( but non - participating ) individuals , the study highlights several positive outcomes . first , the analysis concludes that sea participants were 19 times more likely than eligible non - participants in sample states to be self - employed at any point after their period of unemployment . second , the study finds that sea program participants were four times more likely to have obtained any type of employment ( i.e. , self - employment or wage / salary employment ) than eligible non - participants . finally , sea program participants reported high levels of satisfaction with self - employment and the training they received as part of the sea program . the evaluation also has several limitations . because the study failed to use a randomized , experimental design , the findings may be due not only to the impact of the sea program , but also to unobserved differences between sea participants and eligible non - participants . additionally , this study was conducted during a time of relatively low unemployment in the three target states . additional reasons for this low participation most likely include barriers at both the state and individual levels . 112-96 , states are authorized to set up sea programs for individuals who ( 1 ) have at least 13 weeks of remaining benefit entitlement through the eb program ( or euc08 program , when it was authorized ) and ( 2 ) are participating in entrepreneurial training activities . this analysis finds both positive and negative outcomes for these project gate participants . for this subgroup of recent uc benefit claimants , participation in project gate increased the probability of owning a business and being employed .