the constitutional question was thus prompted . a case raising the question , boumediene v. bush , was soon brought . although justice stevens did not write the majority opinion in boumediene , he arguably had two important roles in the case . first , when the court earlier declined to review the case , he and justice kennedy issued a statement noting the "obvious importance of the issues raised" by the case , signaling a possible willingness to vote to review the case after some procedural circumstances had changed . second , as the senior associate justice on the court , justice stevens has the role of assigning the writing of opinions in cases in which the chief justice is not in the majority . in what circumstances may congress limit the federal courts' jurisdiction over petitions for habeas corpus ? justice stevens has been a key player in the supreme court's resolution of such questions . he authored majority opinions in two significant cases , rasul v. bush and hamdan v. rumsfeld . in those cases , the court decided questions regarding guantanamo detainees' access to habeas review on statutory grounds , without addressing whether the u.s. constitution might guarantee such a right . nevertheless , they arguably provided the legal underpinning for the 2008 decision boumediene v. bush , in which the court reached the constitutional question . likewise , although the hamdan decision struck down early military commission procedures on statutory grounds , it arguably framed the court's approach to reviewing the balance of the three branches' powers during wartime and set the stage for future reviews of military commission procedures . justice stevens might also be characterized as the leading voice among the justices encouraging the court to rule on difficult separation - of - powers questions implicated by wartime detentions . in 2004 , for example , he wrote a dissenting opinion , joined by three other justices , in rumsfeld v. padilla . the case involved a man , determined by the president to be an enemy combatant , arrested in chicago and detained in a military brig . the court resolved his subsequent habeas challenge on statutory grounds , and did not resolve questions regarding the president's authority to conduct military detentions . in dissent , justice stevens argued that the court had a duty to address the "questions of profound importance to the nation" raised in the case . he used relatively strong language to describe the importance of the questions at stake , concluding with the argument that "if this nation is to remain true to the ideals symbolized by its flag , it must not wield the tools of tyrants even to resist an assault by the forces of tyranny. over time , the writ of habeas corpus has evolved as the primary means to challenge executive detentions . what legal frameworks limit the executive's authority to detain and try persons captured in a military conflict as it sees fit ? do statutory and constitutional rights to challenge one's detention extend to non - citizens detained outside of the united states ? the u.s. constitution does not mention the writ , except to limit the circumstances in which it may be suspended .