appendix b . comprehensive and start - up tribal cse programs this appendix includes two tables . table b - 1 displays the 57 comprehensive tribal cse programs , arranged by the year in which they became comprehensive . a tribal program is considered comprehensive if it has all of the 14 program components stipulated in the federal tribal cse regulations . table b - 2 shows the four start - up tribal cse programs . a start - up tribal cse program does not have to have all of the required program components . in fy2001 through fy2006 , there were nine tribes or tribal organizations that had comprehensive cse programs . in fy2007 , 12 tribes or tribal organizations had comprehensive cse programs . in fy2008 , 13 additional tribes or tribal organizations ( for a total 25 ) were operating comprehensive cse programs . in fy2009 , four additional tribes or tribal organizations ( for a total 36 ) were operating comprehensive cse programs . in fy2010 , two additional tribes or tribal organizations ( for a total 38 ) were operating comprehensive cse programs . in fy2011 , three additional tribes or tribal organizations ( for a total 41 ) were operating comprehensive cse programs . in fy2012 , four additional tribes or tribal organizations ( for a total 45 ) were operating comprehensive cse programs . in fy2013 , six additional tribes or tribal organizations ( for a total 51 ) were operating comprehensive cse programs . in fy2014 , six additional tribes or tribal organizations ( for a total 57 ) were operating comprehensive cse programs . appendix c. american indian and alaska native population figures for tribes with cse programs table c - 1 shows four population figures for each of the 61 tribal cse programs . for a discussion of the problems in determining tribal populations , see the " data " section , above . the second column is based on the 2005 indian population and labor force report . the third column is based on the 2013 indian population and labor force report , which provides data for 2010 . with regard to the bureau of indian affairs data ( columns 2 and 3 ) , the bolded data represent 2010 data and the unbolded data represent 2005 data . the fourth and fifth columns are based on information from the decennial census , from the 2010 census . this section examines the issues mentioned above . the precept "it takes a village to raise a child" could have had its foundation in indian culture . for many years , the majority of indian families maintained extended family relationships , usually living in groups that included the nuclear family plus grandparents , uncles , aunts , cousins , nephew , nieces , and other related individuals . children were raised within this extended family network , which was responsible for their care , education , social well - being , cultural history , and traditions . this situation does not exist nearly as much today ; native american families , like those in many other population groups , have drifted apart over the past decades .