rescissions . in addition to the $50 million offset from bcap in the senate - passed version above , the most recent house - passed version contains $979 million of other rescissions from agriculture accounts . supplemental nutrition program for women , infants , and children ( wic ) . pigford settlement . section 608 of the house - passed amendment provides $1.15 billion of discretionary funds for a final settlement of the pigford lawsuit against usda for past racial discrimination in the farm loan programs . this appropriation supplements $100 million of mandatory funds that were provided in the 2008 farm bill , and thus would provide a total of $1.25 billion . the 2008 farm bill permitted any claimant in the original pigford decision from 1999 who had not previously obtained a determination to petition in civil court for a determination . on february 18 , 2010 , udsa and the department of justice announced a $1.25 billion settlement of these so - called pigford ii claims . the administration requested the funds shortly after the settlement in february , but the house amendment to h.r . 4213 posted on may 20 would be the first bill to provide funds . a march 31 , 2010 , deadline for congress to appropriate $1.15 billion has passed , giving the plaintiffs a right to void the february settlement . but because the settlement is a priority for usda and the white house , and efforts are proceeding for the appropriation , plaintiffs have not exercised their right to void the settlement . biodiesel tax credits . section 202 of the house - passed amendment contains the same extension to december 31 , 2010 , as the versions above . the house bill would rescind $70 million from unobligated prior - year balances from the natural resources conservation service . conservation tax deduction . conservation tax deduction . section 114 of the senate - passed version contains the same extension to december 31 , 2010 , as the house version above . instead of going to a conference committee , a subsequent house amendment to the senate amendment was passed by the house on may 28 , 2010 , to address differences between the chambers . it contains essentially the same agricultural disaster assistance and both of the tax extensions , and adds money for a settlement of the pigford discrimination case against usda . agricultural disaster assistance . section 604 of the house - passed amendment provides effectively identical disaster relief language as in the senate - passed version above . biodiesel tax credits . conservation tax deduction . section 224 of the house - passed amendment contains the same extension to december 31 , 2010 , as the versions above . during senate consideration of amendments to the house version during june , there was difficulty reaching agreement over the budget impact of the bill , and a desire for more offsets rather than emergency spending . this began to jeopardize the prospects that the ancillary provisions such as the agricultural disaster and pigford funding would remain in the bill . the original house - passed version of h.r .