sec . 6801 expresses the sense of the senate that ( 1 ) health care reform presents an opportunity to address issues related to medical malpractice and medical liability insurance ; ( 2 ) states are encouraged to develop and test litigation alternatives while preserving an individual's right to seek redress in court ; and ( 3 ) congress should consider establishing a state demonstration program to evaluate alternatives to the existing civil litigation system with respect to medical malpractice claims . sec . 10607 creates a new phsa sec . 933v - 4 , that authorizes the appropriation of $50 million for a five - year period beginning in fy2011 for the secretary to award demonstration grants to states for the development , implementation , and evaluation of alternatives to current tort litigation for resolving disputes over injuries allegedly caused by health care providers or organizations . these grants will exist for no more than five years . states that receive a grant are required to develop an alternative that ( 1 ) allows for the resolution of disputes caused by health care providers or organizations ; and ( 2 ) promotes a reduction of health care errors by encouraging the collection and analysis of patient safety data related to the resolved disputes . prior to receiving a grant , a state will have to demonstrate that its alternative: ( 1 ) increases the availability of prompt and fair resolutions of disputes ; ( 2 ) encourages the efficient resolution of disputes ; ( 3 ) encourages the disclosure of health care errors ; ( 4 ) enhances patient safety by reducing medical errors and adverse events , ( 5 ) improves access to liability ; ( 6 ) informs the patient about the differences between the alternative and tort litigation ; ( 7 ) allows the patient to opt out of the alternative at any time ; ( 8 ) does not conflict with state law regarding tort litigation ; ( 9 ) does not abridge a patient's ability to file a medical malpractice claim . each state will be required to identify the sources from and methods by which compensation will be paid , which can include public and private funding sources . in addition , each state will be required to establish a scope of jurisdiction to whom the alternative will apply so that it is sufficient to evaluate the effects of the alternative . the secretary will provide to the states that are applying for the grants technical assistance , including guidance on common definitions , non - economic damages , avoidable injuries , and disclosure to patients of health care errors and adverse events . when reviewing states' grant applications , the secretary will consult with a newly established review panel that will be composed of relevant experts appointed by the comptroller general . there are various reporting requirements that must be completed . first , states that receive a grant must submit a report to the secretary covering the impact of the activities funded on patient safety and on the availability and price of medical liability insurance .