justice stevens filed a dissenting opinion , joined by three other justices . it has thus been up to the courts to interpret the scope of patentable processes under ยง 101 of the patent act . college savings bank held a patent for its financing methodology , based on certificates of deposit and annuity contracts , designed to guarantee investors funds for future college expenses . the state of florida soon adopted college savings bank's methodology and created the florida prepaid postsecondary education expense board ( the board ) to issue similar financing options to its own residents . consequently , college savings bank filed a claim for patent infringement against the board under the patent remedy act . the principal issue in florida prepaid was whether the patent remedy act had legitimately abrogated state sovereign immunity from suit for patent infringement . college savings bank argued that congress had lawfully done so pursuant to the due process clause by ensuring an individual an adequate remedy in the case of a deprivation of property perpetrated by the state in the form of patent infringement . the district court agreed with college savings bank , and the federal circuit court affirmed . however , the supreme court , in a 5-4 decision , overturned the federal circuit decision , holding that the prca was not a valid use of the ยง 5 enforcement power of the fourteenth amendment and therefore not a legitimate abrogation of state sovereign immunity . he first observed that the constitution vested congress with plenary authority over patents , and that congress had passed laws providing federal courts with exclusive jurisdiction of patent infringement litigation . he noted that there is "a strong federal interest in an interpretation of the patent statutes that is ... uniform," and that such federal interest is "threatened ... by inadequate protection for patentees. in justice stevens' view , it was "appropriate for congress to abrogate state sovereign immunity in patent infringement cases in order to close a potential loophole in the uniform federal scheme , which , if undermined , would necessarily decrease the efficacy of the process afforded to patent holders. he believed that the patent remedy act was a proper exercise of congress's power under ยง5 of the fourteenth amendment to prevent state deprivations of property without due process of law . supporting the concern for potential due process violations , he referred to the legislative history of the patent remedy act that included congressional findings that state remedies would be insufficient to compensate inventors whose patents had been infringed , and also that state infringement of patents was likely to increase . justice stevens argued that the patent remedy act "merely puts" states in the same position as the federal government and private users of the patent system when it comes to the possibility of being held accountable for patent infringement . at the conclusion of his dissent , justice stevens criticized the majority opinion's "aggressive sovereign immunity jurisprudence" that "demonstrates itself to be the champion of states' rights. vicarious infringement liability is possible where a defendant "has the right and ability to supervise the infringing activity and also has a direct financial interest in such activities.