appendix a . text of h.r . 4173 § 1117 , as passed by the house sec . restriction on proprietary trading by designated financial holding companies . ( a ) in general - if the board determines that propriety trading by a financial holding company subject to stricter standards poses an existing or foreseeable threat to the safety and soundness of such company or to the financial stability of the united states , the board may prohibit such company from engaging in propriety trading . ( b ) exceptions permitted - the board may exempt from the prohibition of subsection ( a ) proprietary trading that the board determines to be ancillary to other operations of such company and not to pose a threat to the safety and soundness of such company or to the financial stability of the united states , including — ( 1 ) making a market in securities issued by such company ; ( 2 ) hedging or managing risk ; ( 3 ) determining the market value of assets of such company ; and ( 4 ) propriety trading for such other purposes allowed by the board by rule . ( c ) rulemaking authority - the primary financial regulatory agencies of banks and bank holding companies shall jointly issue regulations to carry out this section . ( d ) effective date - the provisions of this section shall take effect after the end of the 180-day period beginning on the date of the enactment of this title . ( e ) proprietary trading defined - for purposes of this section and with respect to a company , the term 'proprietary trading' means the trading of stocks , bonds , options , commodities , derivatives , or other financial instruments with the company's own money and for the company's own account ( d ) effective date - the provisions of this section shall take effect after the end of the 180-day period beginning on the date of the enactment of this title . appendix b . text of h.r . 4173 § 619 , as passed by the senate , and which is included as part of the conference - base text of h.r . 4173 sec . restrictions on capital market activity by banks and bank holding companies . ( a ) definitions - in this section — ( 1 ) the terms `hedge fund ' and `private equity fund ' mean a company or other entity that is exempt from registration as an investment company pursuant to section 3 ( c ) ( 1 ) or 3 ( c ) ( 7 ) of the investment company act of 1940 ( 15 u.s.c .