other examples occurred in 1996 . 1833 , to ban partial - birth abortions , cleared congress on march 27 , but was not presented to the president until april 5 . 956 , to regulate product liability suits , cleared congress on march 29 , but was presented only on april 30 . both measures were vetoed , though the congressional schedule in these instances suggests that avoidance of a possible pocket veto was not at issue . once so signed , the enrolled measure is ready for presentment to the president . the longest delay in presentment identified during the past two decades was 176 days , occurring in the case of h.r . 1757 from the 105 th congress ( 1995-1996. ) one other measure identified , h.r . 2466 from the 106 th congress ( 1997-1998 ) , was enrolled but ultimately never presented , instead being tabled by concurrent resolution . in these latter two cases , it is not clear from the record whether any specific dispute between the branches led to these delays . if the constitution offers no source of constraint on the action of congress in presenting measures to the president , the only other likely source of such constraints would be rules of congress itself . specifically pertinent would be rules governing the administrative actions that take place between final congressional action on a measure and its presentment to the president . these are internal congressional proceedings , whose regulation is subject to the constitutional grant to each house of congress of plenary power to "determine the rules of its proceedings. today's congressional practice in these matters derives in part from joint rules that were in effect from 1789 until 1876 , and in part from provisions of the legislative reorganization act of 1946 ( p.l . 79-602 , 60 stat . the processes governed by these regulations begin with the preparation of the final text of the measure , under the direction of the clerk of the house or secretary of the senate ( depending on the chamber of origin ) ; this preparation is called enrollment . the enrolled measure is then examined for correctness , today under the auspices of the clerk or secretary of the senate , respectively . it is then signed by the speaker , in the house , and then the vice president ( or other presiding officer ) , in the senate , to attest that the respective houses have agreed to it . despite this paucity of specific mandates , there is precedent for attempting to enforce the timely occurrence of actions requisite to presenting an act of congress to the president . house rule ix provides that questions of the privileges of the house are privileged for consideration on the floor of the house . it defines such questions as those "affecting the rights of the house collectively , its safety , dignity , and the integrity of its proceedings. it is the practice of the house that such questions must be presented in the form of a resolution .