( see figure 1 ) . traffickers appear to be using overland smuggling , littoral maritime trafficking , and short - distance aerial trafficking to transport cocaine from south america . some 79% of drug flights from south america land in honduras . a large but unknown proportion of opiates , as well as foreign - produced marijuana and methamphetamine , also flow through the same pathways . some members have argued that a more integrated effort might include having the state department develop a multi - year drug strategy for the region that would seek to avoid the so - called "balloon effect" in which successful efforts in one area drive drug - related activities to another area . members have also urged the administration to establish a coordinator within the state department to oversee the planning and implementation of the various counterdrug assistance programs in latin america . the obama administration has taken steps to better coordinate the country and regional antidrug programs previously discussed , and to ensure that u.s. - funded efforts complement the efforts of partner governments and other donors . the administration has appointed a coordinator within the state department to oversee the planning and implementation of the aforementioned regional security assistance packages . the office of national drug control policy ( ondcp ) is also working with other federal agencies , as well as independent policy experts , to develop a western hemisphere counterdrug strategy that is scheduled to be published later this year . according to ondcp , the strategy will emphasize "interdiction and disrupting transnational criminal organizations , institutional strengthening , building strong and resilient communities , and drug demand reduction. the administration is encouraging countries that have received u.s. assistance in the past — particularly colombia — to share technical expertise with other countries in the region , a strategy that analysts have recommended . colombia and mexico are supporting the implementation of the central american security strategy adopted at a donor's conference in guatemala in june 2011 as part of the group of friends of central america . another aspect of developing a more integrated approach to counterdrug efforts in latin america involves ensuring that non - aid programs related to drug policy complement the goals of u.s. counterdrug assistance programs . those include: drug kingpin sanctions: the u.s. department of the treasury's office of foreign assets control ( ofac ) targets and blocks financial assets , subject to u.s. jurisdiction , of drug kingpins and related associates and entities . first instituted in 1995 to block assets owned by principal figures of the colombia's cali cartel ( e.o . 12978 ) , a second , expanded sanctions program was later introduced in 1999 , which has a global scope ( foreign narcotics kingpin designation act ) . targets from latin america and the caribbean are a central focus of both programs , with traffickers centered in colombia constituting the entirety of e.o .