and with that comes responsibilities. some u.s. officials , including general john hyten , the commander of u.s. strategic command ( stratcom ) , have noted that new start serves u.s. national security interests because its monitoring regime provides transparency and visibility existing into russian nuclear forces and because its limits provide predictability about the future size and structure of those forces . however , in testimony before the senate armed services committee in february 2019 , general hyten also expressed concern about new kinds of nuclear forces that russia may develop in the coming years . he noted that these weapons could eventually pose a threat to the united states and said he thought the united states and russia should expand new start so they would count them under the treaty limits . as is noted below , article v , paragraph 2 of the treaty provides a mechanism for the parties to address concerns about the emergence of new kinds of strategic offensive arms . it states that the parties should raise their concerns about such weapons in the bilateral consultative commission ( bcc ) established by the treaty , and seek to reach a resolution there . in may 2019 , undersecretary of state andrea thompson stated that the united states had begun to have discussions with russia about these systems at the technical expert level , but she did not specify whether these discussions were occurring in the bcc . russian officials have stated that some of its new systems should not count under new start because they do not meet the treaty's definition of deployed missile launchers or heavy bombers . nevertheless , the public debate about the possible extension of new start has begun to incorporate views about how to address these weapons . for example , some experts believe the united states and russia should extend the treaty before 2021 , then use the time during the extension to discuss how to include these new systems under the treaty limits . some , however , have suggested the opposite , arguing that the united states should not agree to extend new start unless russia agrees , before the extension takes effect , to count its new systems under the treaty limits . others believe that the united states should agree to extend new start only if russia agrees , before the extension takes effect , to use the time during the extension to negotiate a new treaty that not only captures the new kinds of weapons , but also imposes limits on russia's nonstrategic nuclear forces . russian officials have also questioned whether the united states and russia are in a position to extend new start before it expires in 2021 . at a conference in washington in march 2019 , anatoly antonov , russia's ambassador to the united states , noted that russia is not interested in expanding new start so that it would count new kinds of strategic systems and that russia would be unwilling to discuss an extension of new start until the united states addresses russia's concerns with u.s. implementation of the treaty's conversion and elimination procedures .