he was evacuated to morocco for medical treatment . on january 12 , 2010 , he was unexpectedly flown to ouagadougou , the capital of burkina faso , whose president , blaise compaoré , had earlier been appointed the regional mediator in guinea's political crisis by the economic community of west african states ( ecowas ) . in dadis camara's absence , the cndd defense minister , brig . gen. sekouba konaté , informally assumed the position of acting head of state . however , uncertainty remained over konaté's authorities , the extent of dadis camara's injuries , and the future leadership of the country . the power vacuum coincided with reports of rising ethnic tensions , the reported recruitment of militia groups by various factions , and instability within the cndd and wider armed forces . fears of imminent conflict caused some guineans , human rights groups , and diplomats to call for a regional intervention force . the key public figures in the government of national unity are konaté , jean - marie doré , and rabiatou serah diallo . doré , the former spokesman for the forces vives coalition , was named prime minister on january 19 . serah diallo , a prominent trade union leader , was appointed in early march to head the quasi - legislative national transition council ( cnt ) , which was inaugurated with 155 members representing political parties , trade unions , civil society groups , and other socioeconomic demographics . the cnt is expected to revise guinea's electoral laws and the constitution , though its precise mandate and authorities have not been publicly detailed . doré appointed a 34-person cabinet , composed of 24 civilians and 10 military officers selected by the cndd , in mid - february . the civilians include representatives of political parties and civil society groups . the defense ministry , security ministry , and justice ministry , however , remain under cndd leadership . konaté separately appointed a 23-member "presidential cabinet" of advisors , including several hard - line cndd figures previously seen as loyal to dadis camara . the trio of key leaders represents three prominent ethno - regional groups and guinea's two largest religious identities , christian and muslim . doré and serah diallo both have roots in the opposition movement against former president lansana conté , though they were not previously seen as allies . they also have little experience in government , which is seen by some as both a potential challenge and an asset , as many are critical of guinea's poor governance record . serah diallo leads a trade union coalition that was instrumental in organizing watershed anti - conté demonstrations in early 2007 . prior to his appointment , doré led a small opposition political party , the union for guinean progress ( upg , after its french acronym ) . he ran for president in 1998 but garnered less than 2% of the vote , far less than the two leading opposition candidates at the time . doré was later elected to the national assembly , but he declined to take up his seat after the 2002 legislative elections in a protest against electoral fraud .