this expansion has generated both concern and support . some consider this expansion to be beyond the chartered purpose of the ccc , while others prefer the stability and consistency of mandatory funding to that of the appropriations process . although congress as a whole makes final funding decisions , the rise in the number of agricultural programs with mandatory budget authority from the authorizing committees has not gone unnoticed or untouched by appropriators . the authorizing committees contend that appropriators in recent years have not funded the agriculture committees' priorities as much as authorizers had desired . authorizers therefore maintain that they are justified to write legislation using the mandatory funding at their discretion . in a broader context , suppose that an appropriations subcommittee knows the amount of appropriations needed for a desired level of activity . with enough foresight about the use of chimps , those goals could be met with a smaller discretionary spending allocation ( the "302 ( b ) " allocation ) than the desired level . some may suggest that a lower discretionary allocation to one subcommittee ( assuming there will be chimps ) potentially allows other subcommittees to receive a higher allocation . ultimately , congress as a whole — not individual committees — makes the final funding decisions when it enacts laws and appropriations . congress may fund programs both in authorizing laws and in appropriations acts . some say that tension among committees , interest groups , and political parties is part of the process by which congress enacts laws and appropriations . in general , the production agriculture community has not raised strong opposition to most of the recently enacted reductions in mandatory programs because the farm commodity programs have not been targeted . nonetheless , they are not supportive of any reductions that increase funding for nonagricultural programs . conversely , environmental and conservation supporters have been more vocal and expressed significant concern over the reductions — by both authorizers and appropriators — because many cuts have targeted conservation programs . these groups argue that when authorizers reduce conservation funding they undercut many of the programs that generated political support for the farm bill's initial passage . they also argue that cuts by appropriators circumvent commitments made in the farm bill by the authorizers . the 2002 and 2008 farm bills ( p.l . 110-246 , respectively ) used mandatory funding from the ccc to support an increasing number of conservation , rural development , and other programs . the funding levels for these mandatory programs do not need to be determined in the annual appropriations process , since the authorizing committees set the eligibility rules , payment formulas , and / or mandatory funding levels in authorizing legislation . funding for mandatory programs is thus available based on the authorization without appropriations action . the baseline for a government program is a projection at a particular point in time of what the multiyear federal spending ( budget authority or outlays ) would be under current law if no policy changes were made . the baseline serves as a benchmark or starting point for future budget analyses .