justice stevens dissented from that opinion . the u.s. supreme court reversed . writing for the court , justice stevens asserted that the constitutional question was "starkly presented" by the facts in the case . he examined the history of the constitutional rights involved , noting that statutory sentence enhancements are a relatively new development in a landscape of constitutional rights with centuries - old foundations . he acknowledged that the history supports judges' ability to exercise discretion in sentencing . he later argued that his statements had been mischaracterized . in the state prosecution , apprendi pleaded guilty to three weapon possession charges . in the plea agreement , the state reserved the right to request a sentencing enhancement based on the state's "hate crimes" statute . at sentencing , evidence was presented to support and refute apprendi's alleged racial motivation in firing into the victims' home . applying a preponderance of the evidence standard as directed by the state statute , the state trial judge concluded that apprendi had acted with racial prejudice and accordingly enhanced his sentence on that basis . however , a question emerged regarding their application to sentencing determinations , particularly as "sentence enhancements" became a popular legislative tool: to what extent do facts taken into account during sentencing require a "beyond a reasonable doubt" determination by a jury ? justice stevens has had a critical role in the supreme court's resolution of that question , in several respects . first , he asserted that the constitutional question should be addressed , describing the constitutional guarantees at issue as being of "surpassing importance. second , along with justice scalia , in early cases reviewing sentencing enhancements , he indicated his broad interpretation of the jury trial and due process rights . however , he argued that such discretion has generally been limited to determinations regarding an appropriate sentence within a given range ; it has not historically been extended to authorize additional penalties on the basis of a new factual determination . in a concurring opinion , for example , he wrote , "i am convinced that it is unconstitutional for a legislature to remove from the jury the assessment of facts that increase the prescribed range of penalties to which a criminal defendant is exposed. he added that "[i]t is equally clear that such facts must be established by proof beyond a reasonable doubt. third , having persuaded five of the court's nine justices of his views , he authored the opinion for the court in a apprendi v. new jersey , the leading case in which the court announced a broad reading of the constitutional rights at issue . finally , he wrote for the court in united states v. booker , a decision applying the apprendi holding to the federal sentencing guidelines . although this line of cases has resulted in closely divided opinions , the justices were not divided along typical lines . it held that the "statutory maximum" for apprendi purposes is the maximum sentence a judge may impose solely on the basis of the facts reflected in the jury verdict or admitted by the defendant .