however , this legislation was not enacted . conversely , congress could legislate to modify any aspects of the proposed policy letter that might not comport with its intent . given that the proposed policy letter would allow agencies to contract out functions closely associated with the performance of inherently governmental functions and critical functions provided that certain conditions are met , its restrictions on contracting out functions that are not themselves inherently governmental might not be as stringent as some members of congress would wish . for others , the standard by which to judge the government's appropriate degree of reliance on the private sector might be found in an excerpt from the circular a - 76 policy statement , which reads as follows: "the longstanding policy of the federal government has been to rely on the private sector for needed commercial services. however , others might respond that this and similar policy statements are no longer valid , or useful , as the scope and complexity of government activities and procurement have grown . additionally , they might note that other objectives , policies , or principles have become as important ( if not more so ) than reliance on contractors . examples of this type of change may be found in ofpp's proposed policy letter . yet another approach might be to consider why , or under what circumstances , it could be preferable to use contractors . for example , ofpp notes that "[c]ontractors can provide expertise , innovation , and cost - effective support to federal agencies for a wide range of services. relatedly , it is unclear whether the proposed policy letter's inclusion within its definition of "critical functions" of functions that should be performed by government personnel to ensure that agencies develop and maintain "sufficient internal capacity to effectively perform and maintain control over functions that are core to the agency's mission and operations" comports with congress's intent in section 321 of the duncan hunter national defense authorization act . section 321 appears to group critical functions in a separate category from those that should be performed by the government to maintain in - house expertise . while commentators generally suggest that ofpp has undertaken a systematic , thoughtful approach to "work reserved for performance by federal government employees," certain aspects of the proposed policy letter may raise related questions that congress might wish to explore , or instruct the executive branch to explore . for example , a principal - agent test , which is not among the two tests for identifying inherently governmental functions included in the proposed policy letter but which ofpp has requested comments on , would "require agencies to identify functions as inherently governmental where serious risks could be created by the performance of these functions by those outside government , because of the difficulty of ensuring sufficient control over such performance. interagency contracting , in particular , might be subject to this particular type of problem and also might be more susceptible to attenuated accountability , or limited transparency , than intra - agency contracting . for these reasons , a review of interagency contracting ( or particular forms of interagency contracting ) might be warranted in light of the proposed policy letter .