there are two primary reasons for this . first , the new "but - for" causation standard established in gross means that an employee now has to show that age was the deciding factor in an employment decision , not just one of several motivating factors . second , after gross , the employee always retains the burden of persuasion with respect to proving discrimination because the burden no longer shifts to the employer to prove that nondiscriminatory motives led to the employment decision , as it does under the price waterhouse burden - shifting mixed - motive framework that exists for title vii . it is also important to note that the gross decision could potentially affect claims brought under statutes other than the adea . for example , several other employment discrimination statutes are patterned on title vii , including the americans with disabilities act and the rehabilitation act of 1973 . like the adea , these two statutes , which , among other things , prohibit employment discrimination on the basis of disability , were not amended as title vii was to include language authorizing mixed - motive claims . therefore , these statutes appear to be susceptible to the same interpretation that the court applied to the adea . although it is unclear how far the logic of gross may extend , it is also conceivable that such an analysis could be applied to other non - discrimination statutes in which employees may sue employers , such as labor or whistleblower laws . in addition , the gross decision may spur congressional efforts to overturn the ruling . since gross was decided on statutory grounds , several legislators who disagree with the court's interpretation have introduced legislation that would amend the adea to clarify that a plaintiff establishes an unlawful employment practice under the adea or any other federal law prohibiting employment discrimination if the plaintiff demonstrates that the employment action was motivated by an impermissible factor . under this legislation ( h.r . 3721 / s. 1756 ) , which would apply retroactively to all claims that were pending on or after the date of the gross decision , a plaintiff would be able rely on any form of circumstantial or direct evidence to establish such a claim , at which point the burden would shift to the employer to demonstrate that it would have taken the same action in the absence of the impermissible motivating factor . such congressional action is not uncommon . for example , in the wake of the supreme court's decision in ledbetter v. goodyear tire & rubber co. , inc. , congress enacted the lilly ledbetter fair pay act of 2009 , which superseded the ledbetter decision by amending title vii to clarify that the time limit for suing employers for pay discrimination begins each time they issue a paycheck . of community affairs v. burdine . when the plaintiff can directly present evidence of age discrimination , use of the mcdonnell douglas burden - shifting model is unnecessary , and the plaintiff can usually present either direct or circumstantial evidence that would enable a jury to conclude that discrimination occurred .