these issues are discussed below . atf's firearms budget program funds activities related to administering and enforcing federal laws related to the manufacture , importation , and distribution of firearms . the principal focus of atf's firearms - related activities , however , is the reduction of firearms - related violence . as part of this focus , the atf has dedicated increased resources in recent years toward investigating the criminal activities of violent street gangs , ensuring that federally licensed gun dealers comply with the law , and suppressing gun trafficking . atf's authority to regulate firearms commerce in the united states is derived generally from three statutes: ( 1 ) the national firearms act of 1934 ( nfa ) , ( 2 ) the gun control act of 1968 ( gca ) , and ( 3 ) the arms export control act of 1976 . the proposed fy2011 firearms program allocation accompanying the administration's budget request is $837.4 million , or 72% of the fy2011 budget request ( $1.163 billion ) . the proposed allocation includes an increase of $12.7 million over base ( $11.8 million for project gunrunner and $854 thousand for emergency support function #13 ) . if atf previously needed anywhere near 16 positions for such purposes , representative mollohan asked rhetorically , was not the atf request "woefully inadequate ? atf deputy director kenneth melson did not comment on the regulatory backlog , but conceded that the agency needed additional "regulation writers. with regard to the regulatory backlog , it is significant to note that , in most cases , atf iois serve as the "subject area experts," who are usually tasked with drafting regulations . atf's capabilities to regulate u.s. firearms and explosives commerce adequately and deter the illegal use of these commodities is undergirded by its ability to promulgate clear and concise regulations . although most of the atf subject area experts on alcohol and tobacco remained with the department of treasury's alcohol and tobacco tax and trade bureau ( ttb ) , atf is still responsible for the bulk of enforcement of criminal statutes related to these commodities . other issues raised by subcommittee members included the scope of gun trafficking on the southwest border , the effectiveness of violent crime impact teams , and inter - agency coordination on gang violence . atf's arson and explosives budget program covers activities related to administering and enforcing federal laws governing the manufacture , importation , and distribution of explosives , as well as investigating arson cases with a federal nexus . the federal statutory provisions regulating explosives commerce in the united states were enacted under title xi of the organized crime control act of 1970 ( often referred to as the explosives control act of 1970 ) . reportedly , as part of the department's law enforcement information - sharing program , this and other databases are to be linked and made web - accessible , and first responders anywhere in the united states are to have access to critical information about arson and explosive cases nationwide . nevertheless , as described below , both atf and the fbi share concurrent jurisdiction over federal criminal investigations involving explosives , and both bureaus have maintained separate databases on explosives incidents .