benefit reforms . the law adds new mandatory and optional benefits to medicaid . 111-148 : ยง2007 ) in the supplemental appropriations act , 2008 ( p.l . such mandatory benefits include coverage of free - standing birth clinics , and tobacco cessation services for pregnant woman . the law also authorizes states to offer new optional benefits such as preventive services for adults and health homes for persons with chronic conditions . the medicare , medicaid , and schip extension act of 2007 ( mmsea , p.l . out of any funds in the treasury not otherwise appropriated , the law appropriates to the secretary , acting through the assistant secretary of aging , $10 million for each of fy2010 through fy2014 to carry out adrc initiatives . 111-148 : ยง2406 ) the law expresses the sense of the senate that the 111 th congress should comprehensively address long - term services and supports in a way that guarantees elderly and disabled individuals the care they need , and that makes long - term services and supports available in the community as well as in institutions . 111-148 : ยง2601 ) some elderly and disabled individuals , referred to as dual eligibles , qualify for health insurance under both medicare and medicaid . these dual eligible individuals qualify for medicare part a and / or parts b and d and are eligible for medicaid because they have limited income and assets . previous federal law gives the secretary authority to waive selected medicaid and medicare requirements , as well as approve waivers to reach individuals who otherwise would be ineligible for medicaid . chip - related provisions . the law requires states to maintain the current chip structure through fy2019 , but does not provide federal chip appropriations beyond fy2015 , at which point , if future appropriations are insufficient , chip children will obtain comparable coverage through the exchanges or medicaid , as applicable . if new funding is made available , states will receive higher federal matching rates for chip services beginning in fy2016 . upon enactment , states are required to maintain chip eligibility levels through fy2019 as a condition of receiving federal matching funds for medicaid expenditures ( notwithstanding the lack of corresponding federal chip appropriations for fy2016 through fy2019 ) . miscellaneous medicaid and chip reforms . the law adds several offices within the centers for medicare and medicaid services ( cms ) to better coordinate care across the medicare and medicaid / chip programs . one of these offices will be dedicated to improving coordination for beneficiaries eligible for both medicare and medicaid ( dual eligibles ) . another will add a medicare and medicaid innovation center to develop and test new payment and service delivery models to reduce medicare , medicaid , and chip expenditures , while preserving and enhancing quality of care for beneficiaries . medicaid is a means - tested entitlement program operated by states within broad federal guidelines . to qualify , an individual must meet both categorical ( i.e. , must be a member of a covered group , such as children , pregnant women , families with dependent children , the elderly , or the disabled ) and financial eligibility requirements .