their amicus brief is discussed below . as noted above , in rumsfeld v. forum for ac ademic and institutional rights , inc. , the supreme court unanimously upheld the constitutionality of the solomon amendment . before reaching the constitutional question posed in the case , however , the court first considered and rejected the statutory argument advanced in hls's amicus brief . specifically , the court held that because the statute requires the military to be granted the same "access to campuses and to students that is provided to any other employer," the underlying rationale for granting such access is irrelevant . for these and other reasons , the court rejected fair's constitutional challenge to the solomon amendment . and this wrong tears at the fabric of our own community by denying an opportunity to some of our students that other of our students have . the importance of the military to our society – and the great service that members of the military provide to all the rest of us – heightens , rather than excuses , this inequity . the law school remains firmly committed to the principle of equal opportunity for all persons , without regard to sexual orientation . and i look forward to the time when all our students can pursue any career path they desire , including the path of devoting their professional lives to the defense of their country . subsequently , hls filed its amicus brief in support of fair . however , unlike fair , which was challenging the constitutionality of the solomon amendment , kagan and her colleagues argued that the case should be resolved on statutory grounds . as noted above , the amicus brief signed by kagan and her hls colleagues argued that the dispute over the solomon amendment should be resolved on statutory rather than constitutional grounds . the statutory text of the solomon amendment bars institutions of higher education from prohibiting or preventing military recruiters from gaining access to students and campuses "in a manner that is ... equal in quality and scope" to the access provided to other employers . according to the brief , this statutory language makes clear that the solomon amendment would be violated only when an institution of higher education subjects the military to disfavored or unequal treatment . thus , hls and other schools with similar nondiscrimination policies were in compliance with the statute because these nondiscrimination policies were being applied evenly to both the military and other employers , meaning that the military was being granted access "equal in quality and scope" as the statute required . as the amici argued , these policies do not single out military recruiters for disfavored treatment: military recruiters are subject to exactly the same terms and conditions of access as every other employer . when other recruiters have failed to abide by these tenets , they have been excluded . when military recruiters have agreed to follow them , they have been welcomed .