appendix a . data on nunn - mccurdy breaches sources and methodologies selected acquisition reports are not reliable sources for analyzing nunn - mccurdy breaches . in some instances , sar data is subsequently amended . for example , chemical demilitarization - assembled chemical weapons alternatives ( chem demil - acwa ) was reported to congress in the september 2010 sar as a significant breach , prompting then usd ( at&l ) ashton carter to direct cape to examine the program . cape determined that the program had a critical breach , not a significant breach , as reported to congress . information on the critical breach was subsequently included in the december 2010 sar . the significant breach notification is not included in table a - 1 because for purposes of this analysis , crs deems the december sar as a correction of the record , akin to an errata sheet , and not a result of a second breach . in other instances , sar data does not accurately reflect the timing of nunn - mccurdy breaches . for example , dod did not submit a sar in december 2008 . as a result , the vh - 71 breach that would have been reported in a december 2008 sar was reported in the march 2009 sar . for purposes of this analysis , crs is categorizing vh - 71 based on when the breach occurred ( 2008 ) and not on when the sar was sent to congress . in its 2013 annual report: performance of the defense acquisition system , dod published data on the number of programs that had nunn - mccurdy breaches . however , this data was derived from the sars and therefore does not contain the most comprehensive and up - to - date information . in 2011 , the government accountability office published the report trends in nunn - mccurdy cost breaches for major defense acquisition programs , which contained data on the number of programs that had nunn - mccurdy breaches . the data contained in the gao report was the most comprehensive at the time . subsequent to gao's audit work , program data was restated . as a result , the gao list does not include updated or restated data . appendix b . legislative history on september 8 , 1982 , president ronald reagan signed into law the department of defense authorization act for fiscal year 1983 ( p.l . 97-252 ) , which included what has come to be known as the nunn - mccurdy act . this appendix traces the most significant changes to the nunn - mccurdy act . department of defense authorization act , 1982 ( p.l . 97-86 ) antecedents of the nunn - mccurdy act on may 14 , 1981 , senator sam nunn offered a floor amendment to the department of defense authorization act of 1982 requiring dod to notify congress if the cost growth of an mdap ( referred to in the amendment as a major defense system ) exceeded certain thresholds . the purpose of the measure was to "help control the increasing costs of major defense systems.