section 286 does not . the general principles of federal conspiracy law apply to both . the elements of conspiracy to defraud the united states under 18 u.s.c . 371 are ( 1 ) an agreement of two or more persons ; ( 2 ) to defraud the united states ; and ( 3 ) an overt act in furtherance of the conspiracy committed by one of the conspirators . the "fraud covered by the statute reaches any conspiracy for the purpose of impairing , obstructing or defeating the lawful functions of any department of the government" by "deceit , craft or trickery , or at least by means that are dishonest. the plot must be directed against the united states or some federal entity ; a scheme to defraud the recipient of federal funds is not sufficient . the scheme may be designed to deprive the united states of money or property , but it need not be so ; a plot calculated to frustrate the functions of an entity of the united states will suffice . in contrast , a second federal statute , 18 u.s.c . 286 , condemns conspiracies to defraud the united states of money or property through submission of a false claim . the elements of a section 286 violation are that "the defendant entered into a conspiracy to obtain payment or allowance of a claim against a department or agency of the united states ; ( 2 ) the claim was false , fictitious , or fraudulent ; ( 3 ) the defendant knew or was deliberately ignorant of the claim's falsity , fictitiousness , or fraudulence ; ( 4 ) the defendant knew of the conspiracy and intended to join it ; and ( 5 ) the defendant voluntarily participated in the conspiracy. conviction does not require proof of an overt act in furtherance of the conspiracy . conspiracy is a crime which begins with a scheme and may continue on until its objective is achieved or abandoned . a conspiracy is thought to continue as long as overt acts continue to be committed in furtherance . this will ordinarily include distribution of the conspiracy's spoils . as a general rule , however , overt acts of concealment do not extend the life of the conspiracy beyond the date of the accomplishment of its main objectives . the rule does not apply when concealment is one of the main objectives of the conspiracy . the liability of individual conspirators continues on from the time they joined the plot until it ends or until they withdraw . the want of an individual's continued active participation is no defense as long as the underlying conspiracy lives and he has not withdrawn . an individual who claims to have withdrawn must show either that he took some action to make his departure clear to his co - conspirators or that he disclosed the scheme to the authorities . the burden that he has withdrawn rests with the defendant . "withdrawal terminates the defendant's liability for post withdrawal acts of his co - conspirators , but he remains guilty of conspiracy.