appendix a . best - selling car imports in the south korean market it has been 10 years since any u.s. imported car model ranked among the top 10 imported cars in the south korean market . only european or japanese cars ranked as the top 10 best - selling imports in 2009 ( see table a - 1 ) . a decade ago , chrysler's grand caravan and grand cherokee ltd ranked among the top 10 imported models , and in earlier years several ford models were also among the best - selling imported cars in the south korean market . appendix b . comparison of automobile tariff reductions appendix c. agreements between south korea and various partner countries beyond their commercial engagement with the united states , the european union and south korea are also exploring free trade agreements with other trading partners . for example , the european union is in the midst of negotiating a new generation of ftas with several countries including canada , india , and singapore . vietnam is another possible preferential trade agreement partner for the european union . also underway are negotiations on a new partnership and cooperation agreement ( pca ) between the european union and china . the average u.s . most favored nation ( mfn ) tariff on textiles is 8% and the european union also maintains an mfn applied duty of 6.6% on textiles . the south korean average applied mfn tariff on textiles is higher than the average u.s. and eu tariffs at 9.1% . apparel tariffs in the three markets range from 11.5% to 12.6% . implementation of the two ftas would result in the abolition of most tariffs on textiles and apparel , the overwhelming majority of which will be implemented immediately upon enforcement . this should provide u.s. , eu , and south korean textile and apparel manufacturers greater access to each others markets , with south korean textile manufacturers likely to increase their exports to the united states and european union markets . textile and apparel trade is governed by complex rules of origin . the korus fta adopts the "yarn forward" rule , which means generally apparel using yarn and fabric from the united states and south korea qualifies for preferential tariff treatment . a special textile safeguard is included , which allows the united states to impose tariffs on certain goods should injury occur due to import surges . the koreu fta will maintain the european union's standard rules of origin on textiles with only a small number of exceptions . the korus fta provides for the establishment of a committee on textile and apparel matters to respond to concerns , whereas the koreu fta does not include a separate committee or working group on textiles among the six specialized committees and seven working groups that would be established . as discussed earlier , textile and apparel products manufactured in the kic are significant , but these products are not covered explicitly in the koreu fta due to political sensitivity regarding labor issues . likewise , the proposed korus fta does not seem to provide for duty - free entry into the united states for products made in the kic , including textiles and apparel .