note that h.r . 1043 and s. 102 differ with regard to deadlines . 5454 by request . he nonetheless raised a number of concerns during the budget committee hearing . for example , he questioned whether a 45-day period for executive branch review of spending measures might be too long . dr. liebman explained that omb's major concern was the prospect of an omnibus bill being passed in mid - december with some staff away for the holidays and time pressure for final decisions on the president's upcoming budget submission to congress in early february , but omb could probably agree to a shorter window for submitting rescission packages for a regular appropriations law . the chairman also expressed concern that the member who had "sponsored" an item contained in the rescission package would be guaranteed a minimum time allotment during floor debate to defend and justify the provision . representative spratt , on the other hand , expressed pleasure with cosponsors of h.r . 5454 that "span the democratic [party] spectrum" and stated , "i look forward to working with all interested parties as we consider ways to improve this bill and move it through congress. several other measures in the 111 th congress would have established expedited rescission procedures , including h.r . 1294 ( companion to s. 524 ) , h.r . 4921 ( companion to s. 907 ) , and s. 3423 . other bills would have provided for expedited rescission along with various other budget process reforms , such as increased earmark accountability or spending controls . in the 111 th congress , h.r . 3964 , s. 1808 , and s. 3026 provided examples of such omnibus budget process bills . none of the expedited rescission measures received further action in the 111 th congress . the following analysis provides a comparative overview of some major features in the three senate measures considered in hearings in the 111 th congress along with house companion bills ( s. 524 / h.r . the obama administration's bill , introduced in the 112 th congress as s. 102 and h.r . 1043 , is also featured in the table . it was previously introduced in the 111 th congress as h.r . two modifications appearing in the senate bills have been noted in the table and would affect the deadline for submission of special rescission messages by the president and the disposition for any savings realized . all of the measures featured in table 1 would share a similar purpose of establishing expedited procedures in congress for the consideration of certain rescission proposals by the president by amending the ica to add the new features . as described above , under the framework established by the ica , the president may propose to rescind funding provided in an appropriations act by transmitting a special message to congress and obtaining the support of both houses within 45 days of continuous session . if denied congressional approval during this time period , either by congress ignoring the presidential rescission request or by one or both houses rejecting the proposed rescission , the president must make the funding available to executive agencies for obligation and expenditure .