blueprint . under the blueprint , ed would provide states and leas with additional flexibility in how they spend "federal dollars" to improve student outcomes . states and leas would be given the flexibility to use most federal administrative funds and reservations to build their capacity to support "reform and improvement. most leas would also be provided with flexibility in how they spent more of their esea program funds , as long as they complied with the requirements associated with the funds and were improving student outcomes . under the blueprint , ed indicates that it would reward grantees who are improving student outcomes but would also seek to replicate their best practices . thus , for each competitive grant program discussed in the blueprint , grantees that are "significantly improving" student outcomes would be eligible to received continuation funds as well as funds to expand their strategies to additional students , schools , leas , or states . this particular strategy for "growing success" would be used as a way to target federal funds to successful projects . the blueprint proposes that federal , state , and local levels work together to use data for continuous improvement , test innovative ideas , evaluate and replicate promising approaches , and "scale - up" programs that show evidence of improved results . current law . the esea contains several special flexibility authorities that allow exceptions to these general requirements . these include ed - flex ; secretarial case - by - case waivers ; esea , title i - a schoolwide programs ; flexibility for small , rural leas ; the innovative programs block grant ; and transferability authority ; plus the state and local flexibility demonstration program ( state - flex and local - flex ) . in general , these authorities increase the ability of states or leas to use federal funding in accordance with their own priorities . these authorities , however , are significantly limited in terms of the number of states and leas that may participate , the number and size of the programs affected , or the range of requirements that may be waived . under the authority of the american recovery and reinvestment act , ed has begun to establish competitive grant programs that allow state and local levels to apply for funding to further certain school reform goals and to evaluate their progress toward these goals . in addition , ed has offices that conduct policy analysis and evaluation at the federal level . the blueprint may seek to expand these current mechanisms of evaluation or seek to align state , local , and federal evaluation . several offices currently conduct research that evaluates policies , programs , and practices for elementary and secondary education students . for example , the office of planning , evaluation , and policy development ( opepd ) conducts evaluations of proposed education policy and designs , conducts , and reports on evaluations to describe program operations and outcomes to promote program improvement . in addition , the institute of education sciences ( ies ) has several centers that conduct evaluations of educational policies , programs , and interventions . opepd and ies conduct both congressionally mandated evaluations and evaluations of broad national interest determined by ed .