part 340 . a significant step in this deregulation process involves an assessment of the plant's environmental impact , including impacts on the human environment . the national environmental policy act ( nepa ) requires federal agencies to prepare a detailed environmental impact statement ( eis ) for all "major federal actions significantly affecting the quality of the human environment. the "human environment" includes socioeconomic impacts that might arise from the major federal action . if an agency is unsure of the significance of any environmental impacts , it may prepare an environmental assessment ( ea ) , which is a limited review . based on the conclusions of that review , the agency can decide an eis is needed because of the impacts found , or it may issue a "finding of no significant impact," known as a fonsi . monsanto corporation , the developer of herbicide - tolerant varieties of ge alfalfa and sugar beet ( marketed under the name of roundup ready alfalfa and roundup ready sugar beet ) , petitioned aphis for deregulation of these items in 2004 ( for ge alfalfa ) and 2005 ( for ge sugar beets ) . aphis conducted eas of the ge plants to assess the impacts of growing them on a commercial scale . aphis issued ea - fonsis for ge alfalfa in june 2005 and for ge sugar beets in march 2005 . both of these ea fonsis were challenged in separate lawsuits . the courts found that aphis's environmental assessments were inadequate . these two cases are discussed in detail below ( see " legal challenges of aphis environmental assessments and injunctions " ) . the cases of ge alfalfa and ge sugar beets highlight the regulatory complexities of such biological innovations , especially as they pertain to commercialization of these ge varieties through the aphis process of deregulation . while initial deregulation of herbicide - tolerant and pest - resistant ge corn , soybeans , and cotton varieties led to widespread adoption of these plants over the past 15 years , new ge plant innovations are raising new concerns about the adequacy of the aphis biotechnology regulatory regime . for example , current development of ge varieties of corn that will express industrial chemicals and pharmaceuticals raises concerns about their potential to cross - pollinate with corn meant for human consumption . both ge alfalfa and ge sugar beets show the potential for such cross - pollination and its attendant environmental impacts . with development of ge plants that express industrial chemicals , the issue may take on even greater environmental significance . another environmental concern has arisen as acreage of herbicide - tolerant ge varieties has increased: herbicide - resistant weeds ( mainly glyphosate - tolerant varieties ) have also evolved . the plant biotechnology industry is responding to such weed resistance with development of new "stacked" ge varieties , ones combining tolerance to several different herbicides within a single seed . such innovations may raise further concerns about the adequacy of the existing regulatory structure . in july 2007 , aphis published a draft eis as part of the evaluation of its regulatory structure .