nevertheless , estimates are possible . fiscal stimulus is not without its critics . the case against more fiscal stimulus comes in three forms , used separately or in combination: one , no further stimulus is needed ; two , fiscal stimulus does not work ; and three , stimulus increases the budget deficit , makes the u.s. long - term debt problem worse , and dampens economic growth . in regard to the need for stimulus , the u.s. economy does have strong recuperative powers and it is possible that private spending and economic growth will soon surge without further fiscal stimulus . events such as improved consumer confidence , lower energy prices , a more normal flow of credit , or faster growth in the rest of the world could separately or in combination induce stronger spending by households and businesses . has the recent financial crisis caused a reduction in the potential output of the u.s. economy and placed it on a lower trend growth path ? it is difficult to make a concurrent determination because potential output is not directly observable , and can only be imputed from the economy's actual post - crisis performance . a clear determination of any such permanent output loss is some years in the future . although the imf study gives reasons why the financial crisis possibly could have adversely affected the economy's supply side , the study also finds that there can be some significant mitigating factors that could be particularly relevant for the u.s. economy . first , a high pre - crisis investment share is a good predictor of a large potential output loss . this is a reflection of the high sensitivity of investment to the negative effects of a financial crisis . for the united states there was no sharp increase in investment spending above trend as measured as a share of gdp for the three years prior to the financial crisis , averaging near a typical 16% of gdp . second , the imf study also found that those economies that aggressively apply stimulative fiscal and monetary policies during the crisis tend to have smaller medium - term output losses . as already discussed , the united states has applied quickly and substantially stimulative polices in response to the financial crisis . third , countries with fewer labor market rigidities suffered smaller medium - term output losses . u.s. labor markets , as compared with other advanced economies , are relatively free of labor market rigidities , though as mentioned declining house prices may have reduced mobility of some workers who own their own homes . the congressional budget office ( cbo ) currently projects u.s. potential output to increase at an annual average rate of 2.2% for the 2013-2018 period , the same pace as during the 2002-2012 period . cbo's projected rate of growth of potential output is well below the post - war average of 3.3% . slower growth of potential gdp is largely the consequence of a projection of significantly slower labor force growth than during the post - war period in the coming decades .