as amended , the e.o . ( e ) assigns to omb the duty to "assist the president by clearing and coordinating departmental advice on proposed legislation. effectively directs omb to review and modify many documents that agencies produce for congressional recipients ( eg , testimony and correspondence ) , in order to ensure compliance with the president's policy agenda and coordination across agencies . the current process was established through e.o . requires departments and agencies ( but not independent regulatory agencies ) to submit all "significant" proposed and final regulatory actions to oira for review before they are published in the federal register and take effect . oira may return some draft proposed and final rules to agencies for "reconsideration," as discussed in box 2 . requires some transparency for "formal" oira reviews of draft proposed and final rules , but not for "informal" reviews . congress has used statutory provisions added to omb's appropriation to limit the scope of certain omb reviews . discussion in appendix c of the apa and four examples of omb involvement in agency decision making ( and associated congressional responses ) may inform congressional consideration of potential options that relate to the process outlined in omb's may 2005 memorandum . agency submissions of budget information and requests . in approaching the subject of omb controls on agency mandatory spending , congress might consider at least five general options . the budget and accounting act of 1921 required agencies to submit budget requests to the president for potential modification , before the requests are submitted to congress . omb administers this process on the president's behalf . the report then discusses one case where the process appears to have been implemented . as a second general option , congress might conduct oversight through the use of hearings or other forms of investigative inquiry of how agencies and omb have operated in the past , or currently operate , under omb's process . in addition , if congress wished to consider options that involve lawmaking , the use of oversight tools to gain more information about omb's process might help prevent unintended consequences from legislating . if congress wished to learn more about the process , how it has been used , and what its effects have been , a number of topics might be investigated or studied . for example , little is publicly known about the scope and effect of omb's controls on mandatory spending programs . potential avenues of inquiry related to this topic might include the following: establishing which agencies and programs have been subject to omb's process ; determining what its effects on program outputs , outcomes , and spending have been ; discovering what the process's impact has been on the activities , capacity , and workload of agency budget , legal , policy analysis , and program offices ; and ascertaining how the process has worked in practice ( eg , the extent to which omb has judged agency - submitted offsets to be "inappropriate," returned submissions for reconsideration , or granted exceptions to the process's offset requirement "in light of extraordinary need or other compelling circumstances" ) .