the other four trust funds had a deficit . the largest deficits in fy2012 were in the social security disability trust fund ( - $29.7 billion ) and the medicare hospital insurance trust fund ( - $16.5 billion ) . saving is the portion of national output that is not consumed and represents resources that can be used to increase , replace , or improve the nation's capital stock . consequently , saving can increase the productive capacity of the nation , future income , and the amount of goods and services consumed in the future . national saving is the sum of private saving ( by households and businesses ) and public saving ( by federal , state , and local governments ) . it has been argued that trust funds and trust fund programs ( especially social security ) can adversely affect both private and public saving . first , in a widely cited and influential article , martin feldstein estimated that social security has had the effect of lowering personal saving ( a component of private saving ) by 20% - 50% through an asset - substitution effect and the inducement - to - retire effect . however , feldstein's results were questioned by dean leimer and selig lesnoy who found that feldstein's work was flawed because of a computer programming error . after correcting the error , they concluded that the data show that social security had very little effect on personal saving . in a subsequent paper , feldstein reestimated his model with updated data and obtained essentially the same results as in his earlier paper . dennis coates and brad humphreys , and philip meguire , however , showed that feldstein's results are not robust to alternative specifications . in a review of the literature , the congressional budget office ( cbo ) concluded that for each dollar of social security wealth , private wealth is reduced by between zero and 50 cents ; however , cbo could not rule out higher or lower effects . second , two studies suggest that trust fund surpluses in general and the social security trust funds in particular tend to increase federal deficits and reduce public saving . kent smetters estimated that for each dollar increase in the social security surplus , the non - social security federal budget deficit increased by more than $2.00 . sita nataraj and john shoven examined all trust fund surpluses rather than just the social security trust fund surplus and estimated that each dollar increase in trust fund surpluses is offset by a $1.50 increase in the federal funds deficit . the authors blame the shift to the unified budget concept after fy1969 . subsequent research , however , has questioned these findings . peter orszag showed that the results of nataraj and shoven are sensitive to the variables used and time period examined . thomas hungerford shows that previous researchers ( smetters , and nataraj and shoven ) paid insufficient attention to the statistical properties of their variables , and , consequently , their results appear to be spurious . after correcting the methodological problems , he found no support for the argument that trust fund surpluses increased federal funds deficits .