climate provisions . some commentators and several governments have expressed concerns that the establishment of the cifs as trust funds in the mdbs may prejudice the outcomes of the international negotiations on climate finance within the framework of the united nations . many developing countries have expressly stated that they do not consider funds contributed to the cifs as meeting u.n. annex i obligations . responsiveness to donors . the treasury department has similarly stated that the united states invests in the mdbs because they "promot[e] core american interests and values. this arrangement is due primarily to the structure and organization of the banks . mdbs' governance is weighted on the basis of the cumulative financial contributions and commitments by the donor countries , and thus , while a single trust fund , like the cifs , may be designed to balance equally the roles of developed and developing countries , the mdbs are designed to give greater weight to the major donors . the united states retains the most influence on world bank matters , with a 14.97% voting share and the ability to veto major policy decisions . it is followed by japan in second place , germany in third , and france and the united kingdom tied for fourth . the only developing or emerging country with as much voting interest is china , at fifth , with 3.21% . with a governing structure that requires one representative from the world bank , as trustee , and one representative from the group of remaining mdbs , as well as eight representatives from participating donor countries , the overall governance structure of the cifs has remained responsive to donor interests . possession of fiduciary standards . both current and past u.s . administrations have argued that the world bank has the proper internal safeguards to oversee large amounts of financing . as reported by the department of treasury , "the world bank is an attractive trustee [for environmental funds] precisely because of its strong fiduciary standards and its extensive capacity to uphold them. possession of institutional expertise , information , and credibility provisions . the controversy is compounded by the bank's inability to reach a consensus on the definition of "clean energy technology," retaining provisions for ultra - supercritical coal - fired power generation in its environmental strategies . recent guidance from the u.s. administration regarding the world bank's engagement with coal - fired power generation in developing countries similarly leaves the definition open , stating that projects "could include more carbon efficient fossil fuel generation" in their portfolio . while observers generally agree that funding from the cifs is unlikely to be used in coal - fired power generation projects , most agree that continued investment by the world bank in fossil fuel energy and infrastructure may have several unintended effects , including ( 1 ) counteracting any gains made with the bank's renewable portfolio , ( 2 ) directing resources toward large - scale power generation for industrial use rather than energy access and poverty reduction in poor urban and rural communities , and ( 3 ) drawing the bank's professional and technical staff away from a concentration on energy efficiency and renewable energy activities to remain involved with fossil fuels .