they are listed in chronological order by the year they were enacted . this section provides an overview of two executive branch policies addressing abortion or voluntary family planning: the mexico city policy ( also referred to as "protecting life in global health assistance," or plgha ) , and usaid policy determination 3 ( pd - 3 ) on voluntary sterilization . the mexico city policy has traditionally restricted u.s. family planning assistance to foreign ngos engaged in voluntary abortion activities , even if such activities are conducted with non - u.s. funds . unlike the aforementioned laws which are enacted by congress , the policy has , for the most part , been implemented and reversed through statements and instruments issued by the executive branch . should u.s. funding be permitted or withheld from countries or organizations that participate in these activities ? what impact , if any , might the withholding of u.s. funds have on population growth , family planning , and reproductive health services in developing countries ? members of congress have engaged in heated debates regarding these issues in connection with a broader domestic controversy regarding u.s. abortion policy . these debates have continued since the supreme court's 1973 landmark ruling in roe v. wade , which holds that the constitution protects a woman's decision whether to terminate her pregnancy . in nearly every congress since roe , members who oppose abortion have introduced legislation that would prohibit the practice in the united states . many congressional opponents have also sought to attach provisions to annual appropriations measures banning the use of federal funds to perform abortions . before the roe decision , the majority of discussions in congress regarding the federal funding of abortion focused on domestic authorization and appropriations legislation , particularly labor and health and human services appropriations . after roe , however , the controversy spread to u.s. foreign assistance , leading to the enactment of abortion and voluntary family planning restrictions in foreign assistance authorizations and appropriations . debate over international abortion restrictions has also reached the executive branch . in 1984 , president reagan issued what has become known as the "mexico city policy," which required foreign nongovernmental organizations ( ngos ) receiving u.s. agency for international development ( usaid ) family planning assistance to certify that they would not perform or actively promote abortion as a method of family planning , even if such activities were undertaken with non - u.s. funds . in the intervening years , the mexico city policy has been rescinded and reissued by various administrations . most recently , it was rescinded by president barack obama in january 2009 and reinstated and expanded by president donald trump on january 23 , 2017 . during the 115 th congress , members have continued to debate prohibitions and restrictions on abortion and family planning activities abroad . as in prior appropriations cycles , some members sought to renew , add , modify , or remove language addressing these issues in state - foreign operations legislation . in addition , some introduced legislation aiming to make the mexico city policy ( also referred to as "protecting life in global health assistance," or plgha ) , or its reversal , permanent law .