the frb has established a web page tracking how it is proceeding . information on frb implementation is available on the frb's website , which lists completed initiatives and planned activities , and includes links to proposed implementing regulations and comments which have been supplied to the agency in response to those proposed regulations . the fdic has a similar web page offering information on dodd - frank implementation . title iii allocates prudential supervision among three federal regulators . the office of the comptroller of the currency ( occ ) will now regulate federally chartered thrifts as well as national banks ; the federal deposit insurance corporation ( fdic ) will now regulate state - chartered thrifts as well as state - chartered banks which are not members of the federal reserve system ( frs ) ; and the board of governors of the federal reserve system ( frb ) will now regulate both bank holding companies ( including financial holding companies ) and thrift or savings and loan holding companies , as well as state - chartered banks which are members of the federal reserve system ( frs ) . other provisions of title iii provide for reallocation of ots personnel and property among those agencies , with various safeguards respecting employee rights and status . many of the provisions of titles iii and vi appear to be designed to correct perceived inadequacies in terms of the prudential regulation of banks , savings associations , bank holding companies , and savings and loan holding companies or discrepancies between the regulation of banks and savings associations . in january 2011 , the frb , fdic , occ , and ots published a "joint implementation plan: 301-326 of the dodd - frank wall street reform and consumer protection act. for example , there are provisions preventing depository institutions under supervisory or enforcement orders from changing their charters without full consent by the existing chartering authority and a plan for meeting the requirements of the enforcement order . there are numerous provisions requiring greater coordination among regulators and provisions enhancing the authority of frb to oversee all of the components of holding companies . there are also provisions providing backup examination and enforcement authority in case the frb's efforts fail to meet the standards imposed under the statute . there are various provisions designed to minimize regulatory differences applicable to different types of banking institutions and to address what have appeared to be loopholes permitting certain companies to own or control a depository institution without having to submit to consolidated regulation by the frb under the bank holding company act ( bhc act ) . miscellaneous matters addressed in title iii include changing the basis of deposit insurance assessments imposed on banks ; permanently increasing deposit insurance coverage to $250,000 ; applying that increase retroactively to january 1 , 2008 ; and establishing offices of minority and women inclusion in the department of the treasury and in the federal financial regulatory agencies . title vi contains a number of provisions designed to tighten regulation of banking activities possibly threatening the safety and soundness of depository institutions and their holding companies . there are provisions tightening the controls on transactions with affiliates , derivative and swaps operations , and lending limits .