it does not purport to be exhaustive . crs stresses that it has no knowledge of the facts surrounding the gulf spill other than what has been publicly reported ; hence the provisions listed here are only an informed guess as to those that ultimately may be found violated . that the federal laws listed herein extend to the gulf spill seems clear , notwithstanding that the spill site is 50 miles off the coast of louisiana , well beyond the territorial limits of the united states on the outer continental shelf . except for the migratory bird treaty act and occupational safety and health act , all the included laws expressly apply beyond the u.s. territorial sea , either out to the limit of the united states' exclusive economic zone at 200 nautical miles offshore , or , as applied to persons subject to u.s. jurisdiction , anywhere on the high seas . as for the migratory bird treaty act and occupational safety and health act , the outer continental shelf lands act broadly declares that the laws of the united states are extended to the subsoil and seabed of the outer continental shelf , "and to all artificial islands , and all installations and other devices permanently or temporarily attached to the seabed" to explore for or produce resources . thus , by one route or the other , the extraterritorial location of the deepwater horizon spill is not an obstacle to the imposition of civil and criminal penalties under the covered statutes . at the outset , the reader should note that the penalty ceilings stated in the program statutes listed here may not be the applicable ones . as for civil penalty ceilings , congress has enacted the federal civil penalties inflation adjustment act of 1990 to ensure that inflation over a long period does not erode the deterrent force of a penalty ceiling . this act requires federal agencies to adjust at least once every four years the maximum ( and minimum , if any ) dollar amount on civil penalties within their jurisdiction to reflect movement in the consumer price index . it applies whether the civil penalty is administratively or judicially imposed . ( the occupational safety and health act , listed below , is expressly exempted. ) under one statute covered here , the outer continental shelf lands act , this inflation - adjustment requirement also is imposed by the individual program statute . by whatever authority imposed , these inflation adjustments to the program - statute maximums are indicated in the following list by the phrase " ( adjusted to [dollar amount] ) . as for ceilings on criminal penalties , the criminal fine improvements act ( cfia ) often applies . this statute , enacted in 1984 and amended in 1987 , reflected congress's sense that some fines in the u.s. code were too low . the cfia was intended to substantially increase them . under this statute , the maximum criminal fine a court may impose may be up to the greater of the amount specified in the law setting forth the offense or various alternative ceilings in the cfia .