; tsca ) . thirty - five years of experience with tsca implementation and enforcement have demonstrated the strengths and weaknesses of the law and led many to propose legislative changes to tsca's core provisions in title i . on april 15 , 2010 , senator lautenberg introduced comprehensive legislation ( s. 3209 ) to amend tsca , and representatives waxman and rush posted draft tsca reform legislation on the home page of the house committee on energy and commerce . the latter house draft was subjected to stakeholder comments and critiques in a series of meetings during the spring . the proposal was revised and introduced july 22 , 2010 , as h.r . this report compares key provisions of s. 3209 , as introduced , h.r . 5820 , as introduced , and current law . the major provisions of tsca title i are summarized in tables 1 through 6 . the first column of each table describes the provisions of tsca title i . the second and third columns summarize provisions of s. 3209 and h.r . 2601 et seq . 5820 , respectively , that are related to the tsca provisions in the first column . new provisions that would be added to the end of tsca title i by one or both proposals — for example , those related to reduced use of animals for toxicity testing — are summarized in table 6 . the basic organization of tsca would be unaffected by the proposals . for example , provisions related to testing would still be in section 4 , requirements for notifying epa when a new chemical or new use is proposed would still be in section 5 , and regulatory authorities would remain in section 6 . also unaffected would be recently enacted changes , such as a provision that bans exports of elemental mercury . however , most of the original title i provisions would be amended or deleted by the proposed legislation , and both proposals would make substantial changes to current law . for example , both proposals would shift the burden of demonstrating the safety of chemicals from the u.s. environmental protection agency ( epa ) to manufacturers and processors , and would prohibit manufacture , processing , and distribution of any chemical substance or mixture for any use for which safety had not been demonstrated to epa's satisfaction . exemptions from prohibitions would be allowed for particular uses only if a use was "in the paramount interest of national security" ; lack of the chemical use "would cause significant disruption in the national economy" ; the use was essential or critical and there was no safer feasible alternative ; or the chemical use , relative to alternatives , provided a benefit to health , the environment , or public safety . in addition , the proposals would require data development and submission to epa for all chemicals in commerce , rather than only for chemicals that epa has found "may present an unreasonable risk of injury to health or the environment" and for which epa has demonstrated a data need , as required under current law .