like h.r . 5699 , s. 3934 would create a recovery zone and provide similar tax relief measures . s. 3934 would adopt a number of measures discussed in detail above . specifically , ( 1 ) oil - spill - related losses would be allowed a five - year nol carryback , ( 2 ) individuals would be awarded enhanced access to retirement accounts , and ( 3 ) a work opportunity tax credit ( wotc ) would be available for firms hiring individuals living in the affected region . s. 3934 would also provide additional tax relief for certain businesses making qualifying investments in the region . specifically , businesses would not be required to recognize as income insurance or other claims payments reinvested in the affected region . eligible investments include those made in commercial or charter fishing businesses , hotels , recreation , entertainment , or restaurants located in the recovery zone . additional tax relief provisions included in s. 3934 include favorable depreciation and expensing allowances for recovery zone property and tax - exempt bond financing . a number of provisions in s. 3934 appeared in a gulf coast recovery plan released by gulf coast senators in july 2009 . one feature of this earlier plan , not included in s. 3934 , is the proposed gulf coast hotel tax holiday . under this proposal , affected states could reduce tourism related taxes in an effort to attract visitors . the federal government would reimburse state and local governments for forgone revenue . most of the payments have been for claims of lost income or wages . these payments are generally includible in recipients' gross income because they do not appear to qualify for any exclusion . a number of bills have been introduced in both the house and the senate that would provide tax relief to victims of the oil spill . some of this legislation targets the tax treatment of disaster payments , while other proposals seek to enact a broader package of tax - related relief measures . a number of bills have been introduced in the house that would provide some form of tax relief to oil spill victims . the oil spill tax relief act of 2010 ( h.r . many of the policy options below represent tools that have been used to assist victims of natural disasters . the gulf coast access to savings act of 2010 ( h.r . 5602 ) would allow for up to $50,000 in tax - free distributions from retirement plans for those sustaining economic losses resulting from the oil spill , provide tax incentives for the use of distributions by affected individuals making home purchases , and increase the amount that may be borrowed from an employer plan without penalty to $100,000 . 5602 have been referred to the house committee on ways and means . the gulf oil spill recovery act of 2010 ( h.r . 5699 ) would make various tax relief measures available for oil spill victims .