940 are presented below . eligible assets backing covered bonds ( section 2 ( 7 ) ) . one question is whether covered bonds should be limited to residential mortgages , or whether other types of loans should be eligible assets for statutory designation ( as opposed to a contractual covered bond ) . 940 as introduced , the covered bond statutory framework would be available for non - mortgage asset classes . 940 specifically included the potential to use covered bonds for certain residential mortgages , home equity loans , commercial mortgages , public sector securities , auto loans , student loans , credit card loans , and small business loans . eligibility of asset classes would be dependent upon any rule or supervisory guidance from relevant federal agencies . in addition to these enumerated assets , the secretary of treasury would be allowed to designate additional types of eligible assets by rule , after consultation appropriate regulators . eligible issuers of covered bonds ( section 2 ( 9 ) ) . 940 as introduced , there would have been four categories of covered bond issuers . key sections of h.r . federal regulators of covered bond programs ( section 2 ( 6 ) ) . although the secretary of treasury would have been directed to establish the covered bond regulatory oversight program , the federal banking regulators would have been the covered bond regulators for insured depositories and banks and savings and loan holding companies , and their affiliates , in general . the secretary of treasury would have been the covered bond regulator for entities without an existing federal banking regulator , such as some issuers that are sponsored by an eligible firm for the sole purpose of issuing covered bonds on a pooled basis . statutory definition of a covered bond ( section 2 ( 4 ) ) . recall that contractual covered bonds are already legal in the united states h.r . representative garrett introduced h.r . 940 on march 8 , 2011 . a related hearing was held on march 11 , 2011 , in the subcommittee for capital markets and government sponsored enterprises , of the house committee on financial services . 940 would have established a statutory framework for covered bonds in the united states to replace the purely contractual system now in place . 940 , the department of treasury would establish an oversight program for covered bonds . the federal banking regulators or the treasury would have been the covered bond regulators ( depending on the covered bond issuer ) , and the treatment of covered bonds in the case of bank failures would have been clarified . these included ( 1 ) insured depositories and their subsidiaries ; ( 2 ) bank holding companies , savings and loan holding companies , and their subsidiaries ; ( 3 ) nonbank financial companies and their subsidiaries that are approved by the covered bond regulator ; and ( 4 ) any issuers that are sponsored by an eligible issuer for the sole purpose of issuing covered bonds on a pooled basis . 940 would have created a statutory framework for covered bonds in the united states similar to programs in europe that distinguish contractual from statutory covered bonds .