education . the nbp proposes that broadband can provide an effective tool for meeting the educational needs and ambitions of educators , students , and parents of young children as well as support the department of education's strategies to improve educational achievement . energy and the environment . according to the nbp , broadband has multiple applications in the field of energy , conservation , and environmental protection . for example , smartgrid goals set by congress might not be achievable without broadband communications . economic opportunity . civic engagement . the nbp describes concepts such as government transparency that can lead to greater participation by all in the democratic process . the agency's choices were to classify broadband internet access as an information service , over which it would have no direct authority to regulate under title i , or as a telecommunications service , over which it would have extensive authority to regulate under title ii . there was also an intermediate option . the fcc contemplated classifying the transmission component of a broadband internet service as a telecommunications service , while classifying the processing component as an information service . the fcc ultimately chose to classify broadband internet services as information services only . at the time ( 2002 ) , the provision of broadband internet services arguably was still a nascent industry , and the fcc expressed a desire to avoid introducing into the developing market what it thought at the time could be too many regulations . however , this was a contentious question . the supreme court , in ncta v. brand x , made the final decision . the question before the court was whether the fcc could define cable - modem services ( i.e. , cable broadband services ) as information services . opponents of that classification argued that the fcc did not have discretion to define cable modem services as an information service . the court , however , sided with the fcc . what is important for the purposes of this discussion is that the court did not say that cable modem services are clearly and unambiguously information services . instead , the court said that the definitions of telecommunications services and of information services were ambiguous as they related to cable modem services , and that the fcc , as the agency with jurisdiction under the communications act , had the authority to interpret those definitions . the court gave deference to the fcc's determination that cable modem services should be defined as information services and determined that the fcc's classification of cable modem services in this way was reasonable . however , three justices dissented . justice scalia authored the dissent , concluding that cable modem services were actually two separate services: the computing service which was an information service , and the transmission service , which was a telecommunications service . the classification that these justices believe the communications act clearly mandates is the classification that the fcc now proposes to apply to broadband internet services . chairman genachowski has announced his intention to pursue what he has termed "light touch" title ii regulation of broadband services .