sentencing guidelines . only section 3553 ( e ) and rule 35 ( b ) authorize sentences below otherwise applicable mandatory minimums . unlike the safety valve , neither section 3553 ( e ) nor rule 35 ( b ) is limited to mandatory minimums established for controlled substance offenses . the substantial assistance provision , 18 u.s.c . § 3553 ( e ) , passed with little fanfare in the twilight of the 99 th congress as part of the massive anti - drug abuse act of 1986 , legislation that established or increased a number of mandatory minimum sentencing provisions . the section continues in its original form virtually unchanged: ( e ) limited authority to impose a sentence below a statutory minimum . the substantial assistance exception makes possible convictions that might otherwise be unattainable . yet , it may also lead to "inverted sentencing," that is , a situation in which "the more serious the defendant's crimes , the lower the sentence — because the greater his wrongs , the more information and assistance he had to offer to a prosecutor" ; while in contrast the exception is of no avail to the peripheral offender who can provide no substantial assistance . perhaps for this reason , most of the judges who responded to the sentencing commission survey agreed that a sentencing court should not be limited to assistance - related factors and should be allowed to use the generally permissible sentencing factors when calculating a sentence under section 3553 ( e ) . in the before - and - after sentencing tale of avoiding a statutory mandatory minimum for substantial assistance , rule 35 ( b ) is the after . it is available only after sentencing . if the defendant's sentence is vacated on appeal , a section 3553 ( e ) motion rather than a rule 35 ( b ) motion is the appropriate vehicle for relief during resentencing . the rule features a two - pronged postsentence authorization for sentence reduction at the behest of the government . first , the government may always file a motion for sentence reduction including reduction below an otherwise applicable mandatory minimum if it does so within a year of sentencing . second , the government may file a comparable motion a year after sentencing , but only under narrow circumstances that excuse the failure to make a more timely motion . here , too , a motion by the government is a prerequisite to relief , and the government's decision to refuse to move can be overcome only where the government's silence is unconstitutionally grounded or based on some rationale not reasonably related to a legitimate government end . a district court , faced with a rule 35 ( b ) motion , must determine whether the defendant in fact rendered substantial assistance and if so what level of reduction , if any , is warranted . congress has created three procedures that make punishment for these offenses a little less mandatory . one , the so - called safety valve ( 18 u.s.c .