ppaca does not mention such an office . according to the office's website , our office is responsible for ensuring compliance with the new insurance market rules , such as the prohibitions on rescissions and on pre - existing condition exclusions for children that take effect this year . it will oversee the new medical loss ratio rules and will assist states in reviewing insurance rates . it will provide guidance and oversight for the state - based insurance exchanges . it will also administer the temporary high - risk pool program and the early retiree reinsurance program , and compile and maintain data for an internet portal providing information on insurance options . in some cases , the language in ppaca appears to have created certain entities and advisory bodies as of the date that the legislation was enacted . for example , section 3201 ( a ) of ppaca states that "there is created within the centers for medicare & medicaid services a center for medicare and medicaid innovation ... to carry out the duties described in this section. section 3403 ( a ) states that "there is established an independent board to be known as the 'independent medicare advisory board.' in other cases , ppaca appears to require someone else to create these new entities . the national committee on vital and health statistics has been in operation for more than 55 years . other new entities were created by eliminating existing entities and transferring functions . for example , section 3509 ( a ) of the legislation establishes an office on women's health within the office of the secretary of hhs , transferring all functions and authorities of an existing office on women's health from the public health service . also , section 5103 of ppaca requires the secretary of hhs to create a national center for health workforce analysis , transferring the responsibilities and resources of the existing national center for health workforce analysis in the health resources and services administration ( hrsa ) within hhs to the new center within 180 days after enactment ( i.e. on the other hand , if ppaca is silent with regard to these types of issues , then the nature of congressional oversight will likely be different , and may focus on whether these new offices and advisory bodies are being established at all , whether they are duplicative of each other , and whether they are contributing to the overall purposes of the legislation . whether specific or general , oversight of the implementation of ppaca can provide congress with the information needed to decide whether the legislation needs to be changed in the future . ppaca requires gao to study and report on a variety of issues . some of the entities on which the cg's ppaca appointees serve arguably carry out more than just advisory or representational duties . for example: the patient - centered outcomes research institute ( which is described in ppaca as "neither an agency nor establishment of the united states government" ) is directed to improve evidence regarding how health conditions can be prevented , diagnosed , and treated through research and dissemination of findings . the institute is directed to carry out its research agenda through contracts and data collection efforts .