how much further is more uncertain . the supreme court in rjr nabisco , inc. v. european community declared: "absent clearly expressed congressional intent to the contrary , federal laws will be construed to have only domestic application. the court explained that , "[t]he question is not whether we think 'congress would have wanted' a statute to apply to foreign conduct 'if it had thought of the situation before the court,' but whether congress has affirmative and unmistakably instructed that the statute will do so . when a statute gives no clear indication of an extraterritorial application , it has none. venue : section 2339a asserts that venue is proper in "any federal judicial district in which the underlying offense was committed , or in any other federal judicial district as provided by law. the law provides as a general rule that conspiracy to commit an offense may be tried wherever an act in furtherance of the conspiracy occurs . crimes committed abroad may be tried where the accused is first brought into the united states . venue is also proper where the accused aided and abetted the commission of a completed offense . section 2339a's reach , when based solely on the location of the completed predicate offense , may be limited by supreme court decisions suggesting that venue over offenses committed within the united states is only proper in those districts in which the conduct element of the offense occurs . civil actions : section 2339a creates no private cause of action . nevertheless , 18 u.s.c . ยง2333 authorizes such suits for those injured in their person , property , or business by an act of international terrorism . the courts have concluded that the violations of section 2339a or section 2339b may constitute "acts of international terrorism" for purposes of section 2333 . they do so by construing violations of section 2339a or section 2339b as acts of "international terrorism" as defined in 18 u.s.c . section 2339a condemns providing material support for crimes that may be committed in a terrorism context . section 2339b condemns providing material support to foreign terrorist organizations that engage in such offenses . in its present form , section 2339b condemns: ( 1 ) whoever ( 2 ) knowingly ( 3 ) ( a ) attempts to provide , ( b ) conspires to provide , or ( c ) provides ( 4 ) material support or resources ( 5 ) to a foreign terrorist organization ( 6 ) knowing that the organization ( a ) has been designated a foreign terrorist organization , or ( b ) engages , or has engaged , in "terrorism" or "terrorist activity. whoever : the law here for section 2339b is the same as for section 2339a . "whoever" usually means any legal entity or individual . knowingly : section 2339b has two knowledge elements . the government must prove that the defendant was aware of the fact that he was providing something to an entity ( "whoever knowingly provides material support or resources to a foreign terrorist organization" ) . it must also show that the defendant was aware of the fact that the entity was a designated terrorist organization or that the entity engaged in terrorism or terrorist activity .