pursuant to p.l . 111-84 , an employee's level of pay may not be reduced as a result of his or her transition from nsps . for example , if an employee's nsps pay level falls between two gs steps , then the employee would be assigned to the higher step . in some cases , employees in nsps who were or will be transitioned to the gs or a similar pay scale may have been collecting pay rates higher than the position's gs grade classification permits . pursuant to p.l . 111-84 , an employee who meets this criterion will continue to receive his or her nsps rate of pay under pay retention statutes once he or she converts to the gs system . the employee's pay rate cannot be used as a factor in performance evaluation . for example , if an employee's position is evaluated and classified as a gs - 13 , the highest base pay level ( step 10 ) for such an employee in 2011 is $93,175 . if this employee were working in the washington , dc , locality pay area , his or her locality - adjusted rate of basic pay ( annual pay + locality pay ) would be $115,742 ( $93,175 * 1.2422 ) in 2011 . a supervisory employee in nsps was not capped at this pay rate , and could have been collecting an annual salary of $95,000 if he or she received positive performance evaluations . pursuant to statute , this employee would continue to receive a salary of $95,000 after transitioning from nsps and being assigned to the gs . nsps provides standard local market supplements , which are identical to gs locality pay rates , so the adjusted basic pay rate of the hypothetical nsps employee living in washington , dc , including the standard local market supplement for 2011 , would be estimated at $118,009 ( 95,000 * 1.2422 ) . pursuant to statute , this hypothetical employee would continue to receive a salary of $118,009 after being transitioned to the gs . the continued nsps pay rate is defined in statute ( 5 u.s.c . §5363 ) as "pay retention. the employee's manager would evaluate the employee's job duties and responsibilities based on the gs grade assigned to the position — without regard for the employee's pay rate . the statute requires agencies to provide employees on pay retention with half of the annual pay increase given to employees at the maximum payable rate for the gs grade ( step 10 ) to which his or her position is classified . an employee on retained pay , therefore , would not have his or her annual pay increase calculated as a percentage of his or her basic pay . his or her pay increase , instead , would be calculated as a percentage of a pay increase given to an employee who is at step 10 of the gs grade to which his or her position is assigned . the employee would continue to receive a retained rate of pay , until the employee's gs rate of pay eclipsed his or her retained nsps rate of pay .