in wrda 2007 ( p.l . 110-114 ) , three additional projects were authorized . indirectly related to combined federal and state work under cerp is a subset of everglades restoration projects being undertaken by the state . these projects may contribute to everglades restoration , but are not formally credited toward non - federal requirements under cerp . the river of grass acquisition by the state of florida is the most recent of these "non - cerp" projects by the state . it involves a proposed land acquisition agreement by the south florida water management district ( sfwmd ) to purchase large tracts of land south of lake okeechobee from the u.s. sugar corporation . the goal of the purchase is to acquire lands that will improve water quality and help regulate outflows from lake okeechobee . under the plan , sfwmd would remove u.s. sugar land from cultivation for sugarcane and citrus farming , and use it to move , store , and treat water flowing south to the everglades . this proposal is of interest to congress because it could affect the state's ability to contribute funding under cerp and , as a result , has the potential to alter the schedule of work on some cerp projects . the river of grass land acquisition dates to mid - 2008 , and has been revised on multiple occasions since then . in june 2008 , florida governor charlie crist and the u.s. sugar corporation announced that the state of florida would pursue purchasing all of the firm's agricultural lands and assets ( including 187,000 acres of farmland and additional associated sugar and citrus processing facilities ) at a cost of $1.75 billion . the acquired sugarcane and citrus farmland around lake okeechobee would be used to store and treat water flowing south toward the everglades and eventually into florida bay . based on subsequent real estate evaluations , a slightly scaled - back version of the original proposal ( 180,000 acres ) was approved by the sfwmd governing board in december 2008 , at an estimated cost of $1.34 billion . the land acquisition would be financed by the sale of bonds issued by sfwmd , which would be repaid from a portion of the property taxes collected by the 16 counties that comprise sfwmd . under florida law , these bonds are subject to judicial review to determine whether they serve a "valid public purpose. in may 2009 , sfwmd announced an amended proposal that further scaled back the original proposal . ( see table a - 1 . ) under the amended proposal , sfwmd would purchase 40% of the lands originally envisioned ( i.e. , 73,000 acres ) for $536 million . notably , u.s. sugar would lease back some of the land sold to sfwmd for a minimum of seven years , with provisions that would allow this arrangement to be extended for up to 20 years . sfwmd would have the option to acquire the other 107,000 acres included in the initial plan at a fixed price per acre during the first three years , and at the appraised market value during the next seven years .