bank. any program under this authority must be "terminated in a timely and orderly fashion. in addition to the fed , the federal deposit insurance corporation ( fdic ) also set up emergency programs in response to the crisis . on october 14 , 2008 , the fdic announced the creation of the temporary liquidity guarantee program to encourage liquidity in the banking system , including a debt guarantee program and a transaction guarantee program . this program was not specifically authorized by congress ; it was authorized under the fdic's standing systemic risk mitigation authority , 12 u.s.c . ยง 1823 ( c ) ( 4 ) ( g ) . the debt guarantee program guarantees debt issued by banks , thrifts , and bank holding companies , including commercial paper , interbank funding , promissory notes , and any unsecured portion of secured debt . title xi provides more specific , explicit authority for the fdic to create a program to guarantee debt of solvent depository institutions or depository institution holding companies and their affiliates "during times of severe economic distress. this supersedes the authority in 12 u.s.c . systemic risk regulation is not a new concept . on page one of a 2005 federal reserve document entitled federal reserve: purposes and functions , the fed identifies "maintaining the stability of the financial system and containing systemic risk that may arise in financial markets" as one of its four primary duties . at the time of the crisis , the fed could have used its existing regulatory powers over bank holding companies and certain consumer financial products to limit the likelihood of a systemic risk episode , and it could have used its existing lender - of last - resort powers to ameliorate the fallout following a systemic risk episode . besides its authority to lend to banks through the discount window , it had authority to provide direct assistance to any firm through its emergency authority , found in section 13 ( 3 ) of the federal reserve act . this emergency authority was used extensively during the recent crisis to provide assistance to non - bank parts of the financial system . finally , the fed has an overall statutory mandate to keep inflation stable and unemployment low . arguably , it would be impossible to meet this existing mandate if the fed ignored systemic risk . although regulators may have used their powers to attempt to prevent systemic risk before and during the crisis , it may be the case that they did not have all the legal authority needed to respond to the types of systemic issues that emerged . this may be , in part , because regulation has not kept pace with the changes brought about by financial innovation . this section looks at the fed's existing powers and gaps in its powers at the time of the crisis in light of the specific systemic issues raised in the previous section . systemic events have proven to be rare in modern times . when they occur , they are usually not predicted by many beforehand . this hampers the evaluation of a systemic risk regulator's performance .