however , there is a specific exception for wellness programs with attendant privacy protections . in order to effectuate this prohibition , gina not only contains certain requirements for health insurance and a general prohibition of employment discrimination provisions , but also has strong privacy protections . on the other hand , the aca is comprehensive health care legislation that is intended to , among other things , enhance consumer protections in the private health insurance market and expand health coverage . the aca , the more recent statute , does not specifically amend gina and also does not reference gina's requirements . generally , when interpreting the interactions of two statutes that address similar situations or subject matter , courts will try to read the statutes in such a way as to give effect to the language of both . title ii of gina prohibits discrimination in employment based on genetic information and generally prohibits the collection of genetic information . this raises questions about the potential for interaction between these two sets of provisions , specifically with respect to requirements around the release of genetic information and incentives for participation in such a program . this report provides a brief overview of gina , an overview of relevant aca and gina provisions relating to the provision of health insurance through the private market , an overview of relevant aca and gina provisions relating to the implementation of employer wellness programs , and statutory analysis of the potential interactions between the related provisions in both laws . as noted above , both gina and the aca contain provisions affecting certain elements of health insurance , as well as wellness programs . gina is a civil rights statute and has as its purpose the prohibition of discrimination against individuals on the basis of genetic information . further , when congress enacts legislation to amend an existing statute , courts may attempt to read new provisions together with those that were left unchanged and to interpret the provisions so they do not conflict . a leading treatise on statutory construction also notes that repeal of a prior law by implication is disfavored , and observes that "[t]he point of the rules of interpretation is to give harmonious effect to all acts on a subject where reasonably possible. however , where a new statute is a comprehensive revision of a subject area there is "a strong implication of a legislative intent to repeal former statutory law. while the aca has been described as a comprehensive revision of federal law regarding health care , the act evidences no intent to be the sole regulation of the health care system . these reforms include changes that will limit the ability of a group health plan or health insurance issuer to set premiums or determine eligibility for coverage based on criteria such as health status . title i of the genetic information nondiscrimination act of 2008 ( gina , p.l . 110-233 ) also contains requirements affecting health insurance premiums and coverage eligibility , and thus questions may be raised about the potential for interaction between these two acts . in addition , the aca includes provisions relating to the implementation of employer wellness programs .