according to u.s . ambassador to australia jeffrey bleich , "the relationship between the united states and australia is one of our strongest and most productive international alliances . it is a bond solidified during the pacific battles of world war ii and strengthened over the ensuing decades. the president's national security strategy document describes australia , along with our other allies in asia , as the "bedrock of security in asia and a foundation of prosperity in the asia - pacific region. the australia new zealand united states ( anzus ) treaty was signed in 1951 and entered into force in 1952 . a key aspect of the alliance with australia today is the annual australia - u.s . ministerial ( ausmin ) meetings . these consultations have been held since 1985 and are attended by the secretary of defense and the secretary of state from the united states , as well as the australian defense minister and minister for foreign affairs . the united states and australia conduct joint combined military training exercises , have exchange officers in each others' armed forces , and work to standardize equipment and operational doctrine . in recent years , australia invoked the anzus treaty after the attacks on the united states in 2001 , and australian troops fought with u.s. troops in iraq and afghanistan . australia has the largest non - nato military contingent in afghanistan and fought alongside the united states in vietnam , korea , world war ii , and world war i , as well as in iraq and afghanistan . australia has also played a key role in promoting regional stability in places such as timor leste , the solomon islands , and bougainville . the united states and australia have a very close intelligence relationship . the united states and australia also concluded a free trade agreement , which came into force in 2005 . the two nations signed a defense trade cooperation treaty in 2007 that would facilitate the trade of defense - related equipment and technology . the u.s. senate has not yet voted on ratification of this treaty . for all of the above reasons , and others , the united states and australia share a special relationship that includes a high degree of trust . australia also is a strong partner to the united states in nonproliferation policy . australia has been a staunch supporter of the non - proliferation treaty ( npt ) since its adherence in 1973 . australia has promoted strengthened international atomic energy agency ( iaea ) safeguards on civilian nuclear activities and was the first to sign the additional protocol , which strengthened iaea monitoring . australia is also a member of the nuclear suppliers group ( nsg ) , an export control coordination body . australia has developed stricter standards for nuclear trade than the export control regimes currently call for ; for example , requiring an additional protocol to be in force for any country importing uranium from australia . over the past four decades , australia has developed a bilateral safeguards system for uranium exports . a bilateral safeguards agreement is required , and countries may only retransfer australian uranium to other countries that also have a bilateral safeguards agreement with australia .