appendix a . use of monument authority in the antiquities act: comparison of two presidents appendix b . historical use of monument authority in the antiquities act appendix c. summary of president obama's monument proclamations this appendix provides a chronological list of president obama's 34 monument proclamations under the antiquities act . for additional information on a particular monument , see the pertinent proclamation identified in the footnotes . fort monroe national monument in virginia was designated on november 1 , 2011 . in establishing the 325-acre monument , the president stated that "fort monroe on old point comfort in virginia has a storied history in the defense of our nation and the struggle for freedom. fort ord national monument in california was designated on april 20 , 2012 . the purpose of the 14,651-acre fort ord national monument is to maintain its historical and cultural significance , as well as attract tourists and recreationists and enhance the area's unique natural resources , according to the president . chimney rock national monument in colorado was designated on september 21 , 2012 . the president cited the "spiritual , historic , and scientific resources of great value and significance" in proclaiming the 4,726-acre monument . césar e. chávez national monument in california was designated on october 8 , 2012 . the 10.5-acre monument "marks the extraordinary achievements and contributions to the history of the united states made by césar chávez and the farm worker movement that he led with great vision and fortitude," according to the president . first state national monument in delaware was designated on march 25 , 2013 . the 1,108 acres of the monument contain objects and areas of historic interest related to the settlement of delaware and the role of delaware as the first state to ratify the constitution , according to the president . charles young buffalo soldiers national monument in ohio was designated on march 25 , 2013 . the 60-acre monument was established to commemorate the life and accomplishments of colonel charles young , the highest - ranking african american commanding officer in the u.s. army from 1894 until his death in 1922 , the commander of a troop of buffalo soldiers , and the first african american superintendent of a national park , as described in the proclamation . río grande del norte national monument in new mexico was designated on march 25 , 2013 . in proclaiming the monument , the president stated that protecting the 242,555-acre monument "will preserve its cultural , prehistoric , and historic legacy and maintain its diverse array of national and scientific resources , ensuring that the historic and scientific values of this area remain for the benefit of all americans. san juan islands national monument in washington was designated on march 25 , 2013 . this 970-acre monument contains an archipelago of over 450 islands , rocks , and pinnacles in washington's puget sound . according to the president , the area contains an "unmatched landscape," numerous wildlife species in diverse habitats , archaeological sites , and historic lighthouses and is a "refuge of scientific and historic treasures and a classroom for generations of americans. harriet tubman – underground railroad national monument in maryland was designated on march 25 , 2013 .