the ccw proposal was not among those discussed . congress may also choose to do nothing . that is , congress may allow the current rulemaking process to continue and allow epa to select either its subtitle c - or d - related proposal . as of this writing , it is unknown when epa will finalize its proposal . in its fall 2010 "current regulatory plan," the office of management and budget's ( omb's ) office of information and regulatory affairs listed the date of the final action as "to be determined. this risk was particularly high at unlined surface impoundments . while new disposal units are likely to be built with a liner , 75% of surface impoundments in use today are greater than 25 years old and are unlikely to have a liner or groundwater monitoring . to address potential threats to human health and the environment associated with improper management of ccw , on june 21 , 2010 , epa proposed for public comments two regulatory options applicable to the management of ccw . under the first option , epa would draw on its existing authority to identify a waste as hazardous and regulate it under the hazardous waste management standards established under subtitle c of the resource conservation and recovery act ( rcra , 42 u.s.c . ยง 6901 et seq. ) the second option would establish criteria applicable to landfills and surface impoundments accepting ccw under rcra's subtitle d solid waste management requirements . under subtitle d , epa does not have the authority to enforce its proposed requirements . instead , epa would rely on states or citizen suits to enforce its standards . over 11,000 public comments were received before the november 19 , 2010 , deadline . commenters included those representing industry , environmental and citizen organizations , state government representatives , individuals , and some members of congress . disposal occurred in landfills , surface impoundments , and as minefill . the remaining 40.7 million tons was beneficially used in some capacity , primarily as an ingredient in certain building materials ( eg , concrete , cement , or gypsum wallboard ) , as structural fill , as a waste stabilization ingredient , and as blasting grit . the fact that hazardous constituents are present in a waste does not in itself mean that it poses a risk to humans . the degree to which there is actual risk depends on whether those constituents can find a pathway of human exposure and whether the resulting level of exposure is likely to be high enough to cause harm . stakeholders have long debated the extent to which the hazardous constituents actually can or do migrate from the point of deposition ( eg , a landfill or surface impoundment or a site where it may be used as a structural or embankment fill ) and subsequently harm or pose a threat to human health or the environment .