maybe they want to export . maybe they want to know how to use broadband . maybe they are veterans who are coming back and want to start a business or grow their business . our job is to make sure all that information and opportunity is accessible for small businesses so they can do what they do , which is keep our economy strong . there is also a general consensus that making federal management and technical assistance training programs more effective and responsive to the needs of small business would assist the national economic recovery . however , there are disagreements over how to achieve that goal . some advocate ( 1 ) increasing funding for existing programs to enable them to provide additional training opportunities for small businesses while , at the same time , maintaining separate training programs for specific demographic groups as a means to ensure that those groups' specific needs are met ; ( 2 ) requiring the sba to make more extensive use of outcome - based measures to better determine the programs' effect on small business formation and retention , job creation and retention , and the generation of wealth ; and ( 3 ) temporarily reducing or eliminating federal matching requirements to enable sba's management and technical assistance training resource partners to focus greater attention to service delivery and less to fund raising . others argue for a merger of existing programs to reduce costs and improve program efficiency , to focus available resources on augmenting the capacity of sbdcs to meet the needs of all small business groups , and require the sba to make more extensive use of outcome - based performance measures to determine program effectiveness . no case studies or empirical data are available concerning the efficiencies that might be gained by merging the sba's management and technical assistance training programs . advocates argue that merging the programs would improve communications , reduce confusion by business owners seeking assistance by ensuring that all small business management and technical assistance training centers serve all small business owners and aspiring entrepreneurs , lead to more sustainable and predictable funding for the programs from nonfederal sources , and result in more consistent and standard operating procedures throughout the country . let's allow them to hire new workers . in the face of historic economic challenges , we should be investing in america's job creators . sba's entrepreneurial development programs , or ed , do just that . of all the tools in the small business toolbox , these are some of the most critical . they help small firms do everything from draft business plans to access capital . the general consensus is that federal management and technical assistance training programs serve an important purpose and , for the most part , are providing needed services that are not available elsewhere . as karen mills , then - sba administrator , stated during a press interview in 2010: we find that our counseling operations are equally important as our credit operations because small businesses really need help and advice , and when they get it , they tend to have more sales and more profits and more longevity , and they hire more people . we could use that growth today .