differing from p.l . 111-296 ( although with similar intent ) , section 409 of the house bill would have required that participating schools gradually increase their revenues from non - federal sources ( including prices charged to paying students ) so as to ensure that the average per - lunch revenue from federal and non - federal sources matches at least the federal subsidy for a free lunch . while similar to p.l . 111-296 , section 103 would have covered many more states ( and children ) under provisions allowing the direct certification of children in medicaid households as eligible for free school meals . section 107 would have permitted local educational agencies ( leas ) to automatically certify as eligible for free school meals any child in a military household receiving a defense department "supplemental subsistence allowance for low - income families. section 146 would have required the agriculture department ( in consultation with the defense department ) to examine the access children in military households have to free and reduced - price school meals and recommend strategies that could better meet their needs . section 207 would have established and funded a new nutrition and wellness promotion program to support nutrition education and other promotion and compliance activities . should there be rules governing when the wic program will pay for foods ( like infant formula ) where new ingredients have been added that purport to increase their nutritional value ? the bill reported by the senate agriculture , nutrition and forestry committee would have given the agriculture department authority to bar foods where increased costs outweighed any increased nutritional value ; the house bill would have taken a somewhat different approach and called for a review of the benefits of any new or emerging ingredients . wic program advocates argued that , at a minimum , the house provisions should be adopted . others contended that giving the department either the senate or house versions of authority over the ingredient content of wic foods would have granted it too much power over innovation in and upgrading of wic foods ( eg , wic purchases make up a very large portion of the infant formula market ) and might produce a "two - tier" system whereby wic parents would not be provided the same types of foods that non - wic parents can purchase with their own money . in the end , p.l . 111-296 contains no authority for review or disapproval of wic food items . section 363 would have authorized the establishment of a nutrition corps under the corporation for national and community service . section 250 would have authorized a pilot program ( the "healthier us challenge initiative" ) to encourage the consumption of milk outside of school meal programs . on december 13 , 2010 , s. 3307 , the healthy , hunger - free kids act of 2010 , was enacted as p.l . this followed senate approval on august 5 , 2010 , and house passage on december 2 , 2010 .