in accordance with e.o . 13508 , s. 1816 would also require the epa administrator to issue an annual action plan — describing how federal funding in the president's budget submission to congress would be used to protect and restore the chesapeake bay — and biennial progress reports assessing relevant developments and indicators . the bill also provides that the " inspector general of the environmental protection agency shall evaluate the implementation of this section on a periodic basis of not less than once every three years. no other particulars about such an evaluation are specified in the proposal . the legislation would also require the epa administrator to consult with several different entities about particular matters . one of these directives is "to consult with the chesapeake bay program scientific and technical advisory committee regarding independent review of [certain] monitoring designs. proposed chesapeake bay accountability and recovery act of 2009 independent evaluator this proposed legislation ( h.r . 1053 , 111 th congress ) parallels some of the main provisions in e.o . 13508 , both of which deal with the chesapeake bay restoration and include an independent evaluator . the house bill , as approved by the house committee on natural resources , calls for an "interagency crosscut budget" for restoration activities in the chesapeake bay watershed , with funding , expenditures , and accounting requirements detailed ( sec . this crosscut budget , composed by the various agencies involved in the restoration program , is to be submitted to congress by the director of the office of management and budget , after consultation with the chesapeake bay executive council , the chief executive of each chesapeake bay state ( the definition of which includes the district of columbia ) , and the chesapeake bay commission . in addition , h.r . 1053 ( sec . 3 ) requires that the administrator of the environmental protection agency ( epa ) , "in consultation with other federal and state agencies , shall develop an adaptive management plan for the chesapeake bay program and restoration activities that includes," among other matters: a definition of specific and measurable objectives to improve water quality , habitat , and fisheries ; a process for stakeholder participation ; monitoring , modeling , experimentation , and other research and evaluation practices ; a process for modifying restoration priorities that have not attained or will not attain the aforementioned specific and measureable objectives ; and a process for prioritizing restoration activities and programs to which adaptive management is to be applied . the epa administrator is also required to submit annual reports on the implementation of the adaptive management plan . the proposal adds an independent evaluator , appointed by the administrator from among nominees submitted by the chesapeake executive council . the ie is to "review and report on restoration activities and the uses of adaptive management , including on such related topics as are suggested" by the council ( sec . the ie "shall submit a report to the congress every 3 years in the findings and recommendations of reviews" with regard to the adaptive management plans and their implementation ( sec .