the house passed h.r . 1108 in july 2008 , but no further legislative action was taken during the 110 th congress . reintroduced in the 111 th congress , the family smoking prevention and tobacco control act ( h.r . 1256 ) passed the house on april 2 , 2009 . the senate passed a slightly different version of the legislation ( s. 982 ) on june 11 , 2009 , which the house agreed to the following day . the family smoking prevention and tobacco control act ( fsptca ) was signed into law on june 22 , 2009 ( p.l . the fsptca amended the ffdca by granting fda authority over the regulation of tobacco products based on a public health standard rather than the safety and effectiveness standard by which the fda regulates pharmaceutical drugs and medical devices . the new law gives fda the authority to develop regulations restricting the sale , distribution , advertising , and promotion of tobacco products . any proposed regulation must meet the new public health standard . that standard requires fda to demonstrate that the proposal is appropriate for the protection of the public health , taking into account the risks and benefits to the population as a whole , including users and nonusers of tobacco products . in addition , fda has the authority to require changes in the design and characteristics of current and future tobacco products , such as the reduction or elimination of harmful ingredients and additives . again , the agency must show that any such proposal is appropriate for protecting public health , based on a consideration of the risks and benefits to the population as a whole . under the fsptca , manufacturers must obtain fda approval in order to market a new tobacco product . the same public health standard applies to such applications . however , the law provides two exceptions to the requirement that manufacturers obtain premarket approval for new products: ( 1 ) the manufacturer makes a claim and fda , upon review , agrees that the new product is substantially equivalent to a product already on the market , or ( 2 ) the new product is determined to be a "minor modification" of an existing product . for the first 21 months after enactment ( i.e. , until march 22 , 2011 ) , manufacturers are permitted to introduce and market a new product for which a substantial equivalence claim has been submitted , provided fda has not reviewed and rejected the claim . the fsptca prohibits the use of descriptors such as "light" and "mild. manufacturers seeking to market a tobacco product for which they wish to make a reduced - risk claim , explicitly or implicitly , must provide evidence substantiating that claim and meet additional requirements in order to obtain fda approval to market the product . the law requires a number of other important changes in the labeling , advertising , and marketing of cigarettes and smokeless tobacco products . beginning on june 22 , 2010 , more explicit and conspicuous health warnings will start to appear on smokeless tobacco product labels and advertising . new health warnings on cigarette labeling and advertising will appear at a later date .