balinski and h.p . young concluded that if "the intent is to eliminate any systematic advantage to either the small or the large , then only one method , first proposed by daniel webster in 1832 , will do. this method , called the webster method in fair representation , is also referred to as the major fractions method ( major fractions uses the concept of the adjustable divisor as does equal proportions , but rounds at the arithmetic mean [.5] rather than the geometric mean. ) how populous should a congressional district be on average ? how many representatives should the house comprise ? thus , another question was whether that state would be apportioned 14 or 15 representatives ? consequently , these two major issues dominated the apportionment debate: how populous a congressional district ought to be ( later re - cast as how large the house ought to be ) , and how to treat fractional entitlements to representatives . the questions of how populous a congressional district should be and how many representatives should constitute the house have received little attention since the number of representatives was last increased from 386 to 435 after the 1910 census . moreover , no matter how one specified the ideal population of a congressional district or the number of representatives in the house , a state's ideal apportionment would , as a practical matter , always be either a fraction , or a whole number and a fraction — say , 14.489326 . various methods were considered and some were tried , each raising questions of fundamental fairness . the issue of fairness could not be perfectly resolved: inevitable fractional entitlements and the requirement that each state have at least one representative lead to inevitable disparities among the states' average congressional district populations . congress , which sought an apportionment method that would minimize those disparities , continued this debate until 1941 , when it enacted the "equal proportions" method — the apportionment method still in use today ( for a full explanation of this method , see below ) . in light of the lengthy debate on apportionment , this report has four major purposes: 1. summarize the constitutional and statutory requirements governing apportionment ; 2. explain how the current apportionment formula works in theory and in practice ; 3. summarize challenges to it on grounds of inequity ; and 4. explain the reasoning underlying the choice of the equal proportions method over its chief alternative , the method of major fractions . the process of apportioning seats in the house is constrained both constitutionally and statutorily . as noted previously , the constitution defines both the maximum and minimum size of the house . there can be no fewer than one representative per state , and no more than one for every 30,000 persons . the apportionment act of 1941 , in addition to specifying the apportionment method , sets the house size at 435 , requires an apportionment every 10 years , and mandates administrative procedures for apportionment .