why does sba issue disaster loans instead of fema ? in 1978 , president jimmy carter signed executive order 12127 . the order merged many of the disaster - related responsibilities of separate federal agencies into the federal emergency management agency ( fema ) . during fema's formation , it was determined that sba would continue to provide disaster loans through the disaster loan program rather than transfer that function to fema . at the 1978 hearing before a subcommittee of the committee on government operations , chairman jack brooks questioned the rationale for keeping the loan program outside of fema . according to james t. mcintyre , director , office of management and budget ( omb ) , the rationale was as follows: [o]ne of the fundamental principles underlying this proposal is that whenever possible emergency responsibilities should be an extension of the regular missions of federal agencies . they may argue that loan processing times have been reduced and interagency coordination has improved as evidenced by the response to hurricanes gustav and ike . on the other hand , others might argue that the sba response to hurricane sandy indicates loan processing time still needs to be addressed . some may also be troubled by sba's perceived slow progress in implementing some of the requirements set forth in the small business disaster response and loan improvements act of 2008 such as the implementation of edalp and idap . they may further contend that the agency's response could have been more successful had these programs been in place before hurricane sandy . i believe the congress also subscribed to this principle in considering disaster legislation in the past . the disaster relief act of 1974 provides for the direction and coordination , in disaster situations , of agencies which have programs which can be applied to meeting disaster needs . it does not provide that the coordinating agency should exercise direct operational control.... [i]f the programs ... were incorporated in the new agency we would be required to create duplicate sets of skills and resources.... [s]ince the small business administration administers loan programs other than those just for disaster victims , both the sba and the new agency [fema] would have to maintain separate staffs of loan officers and portfolio managers if the disaster loan function were transferred to the new agency.... [o]ne of our basic purposes for reorganization ... would be thwarted if we were to have to maintain a duplicate staff function in two or more agencies . mcintyre added , "we believe we have achieved a balance in this new agency [fema] between operational activities and planning and coordination functions. he further stated that "we can provide better service to the disaster victims if oversight of disaster response and recovery operations is vested in an agency which can adopt a much broader prospective than would be possible if this agency [fema] had operational responsibilities as well. additionally , a clause in the stafford act that prohibits recipients of disaster aid from receiving similar types of aid from other federal sources is often cited as a rationale for keeping the entities distinct .