proposals to limit senate debate are as old as the senate itself . over the 224-year history of the body , numerous procedures have been proposed to allow the senate to end discussion and act . the most important debate - limiting procedure enacted was the adoption in 1917 of the "cloture rule," codified in paragraph 2 of senate rule xxii . under the current version of this rule , a process for ending debate on a pending measure or matter may be set in motion by a supermajority vote of the senate . when all time expires , the senate immediately votes on any pending amendments and then on the underlying matter . as noted above , the senate has considered — and in some cases , adopted — changes to the cloture rule and associated procedures at various times in the past . in recent congresses — and perhaps especially in the 112 th ( 2011-2012 ) and 111 th ( 2009-2010 ) congresses — some senators have expressed renewed concern over the effect of extended debate on the senate's capacity to act efficiently . rather than list all ( sometimes overlapping ) proposals introduced in recent congresses , the discussion below groups proposals into categories based on the procedural mechanism by which the change would be effected or the overall goal of the change . the first category addressed below includes proposals that provide a non - rule - based mechanism by which the senate could change its rules or precedents , or both , without needing to surmount the supermajority hurdle present in existing rules ; specifically , these proposals hinge on a novel ruling by the senate's presiding officer in relation to senate rules on debate or the constitutionality thereof . the second category discussed focuses on changes to the rules that would alter the vote threshold by which cloture is invoked . a third group of proposals focuses on the time the senate must expend in using the cloture process to end debate on a question . fourth , the report discusses proposals to limit debate on only certain questions ( eg , on the motion to proceed , motions related to establishing a conference committee ) . the fifth and final category addressed includes proposals that would increase the procedural burden on those opposing an end to debate on a particular matter . this section of the report then concludes by addressing other proposals that have been discussed in the context of changing the cloture process . each proposal to change the operation of cloture discussed above does not necessarily require a change in senate standing rules . for example , some rely only on changes in senate practices , and some propose a series of steps on the senate floor that could establish new precedents . many proposals do , however , require a rules change . a change to senate standing rules could be accomplished via adoption of a simple resolution making specified rules changes , though standing rules changes can also be accomplished through provisions of a statutory measure ( eg , pursuant to an amendment to legislation adopted on the floor ) .