plas can impede efficiency . all contractors and subcontractors on the project are bound by the agreement . a pla generally specifies the wages and fringe benefits to be paid on a project . a pla may require contractors to hire workers through a union hiring hall . instead of 19 local cbas ( each of which would have expired during the project ) , the pla standardized the terms and conditions of the project . the third study involved construction at the department of energy's lawrence livermore national laboratory in livermore , ca . an official from the laboratory provided gao with documents that indicated that the project contractor estimated that the pla lowered the cost of the project by about 0.4% . most of the estimated savings were due to lower costs for overtime , shift differentials , and holiday pay , as well as the greater use of apprentices instead of higher - paid journeymen . more recent studies have reached different conclusions about the economic impact of plas . the beacon hill institute at suffolk university in boston has published a series of studies on the effects of plas . the studies conclude that plas raise the costs of construction . in a study of 62 school construction projects in the boston area from 1995 to 2003 , researchers at the institute concluded that plas raised the cost of construction by $16.51 per square foot ( in constant 2001 dollars ) , or 12% . the study controlled for the size of construction ( i.e. , square feet ) and whether the project was new construction or renovation . the beacon hill institute also published a study in 2004 of school construction projects in connecticut . the study concluded that plas raised the cost of construction by $30.00 per square foot ( in constant 2002 dollars ) , or 18% . the estimate controlled for the size of the project , whether the project was new construction or renovation , the number of stories , and whether the project was an elementary school . on the other hand , a study of 70 new school construction projects in massachusetts from 1996 to 2002 concluded that , after controlling for several characteristics of the projects , the relationship between plas and school construction costs was not statistically significant . the study found that projects with plas were larger and more expensive than projects that did not use plas . it then describes president obama's eo and summarizes regulations to implement it . the report then examines arguments for and against the use of plas and reviews research on the economic effects of the agreements . most collective bargaining agreements are between an employer and a labor union and usually last for a specific period of time ( eg , for three years or five years ) . the nlra allows employers and unions in the construction industry to enter into pre - hire agreements , which are cbas between employers and unions that are reached before workers are hired for a project . under one type of pre - hire agreement , one or more unions negotiate a contract with one or more building contractors .