syria and the kurds . turkey's political stances and military operations in syria have fed u.s. - turkey tensions , particularly regarding kurdish - led militias supported by the united states against the islamic state ( is , also known as isis / isil ) over turkey's strong objections . turkey's domestic trajectory and financial distress . president erdogan rules in an increasingly authoritarian manner . presidential and parliamentary elections held in june 2018 consolidated erdogan's power pursuant to constitutional changes approved in a controversial 2017 referendum . meanwhile , even before the u.s. sanctions in august , turkey's currency had fallen considerably in value amid concerns about rule of law , regional and domestic political uncertainty , significant corporate debt , and a stronger dollar . turkey's large , diversified economy , muslim majority population , and geographic position straddling europe and the middle east make it a significant regional power . important political developments in turkey since 2002 have occurred within the context of significant socioeconomic changes that began in the 1980s . the military - guided governments that came to power after turkey's 1980 coup helped establish turkey's export - driven economy . this led to the gradual empowerment of a largely sunni muslim middle class from turkey's anatolian heartland . these socioeconomic changes helped fuel political transformation led by the islamist - leaning justice and development party ( adalet ve kalkinma partisi , or akp ) and president ( formerly prime minister ) recep tayyip erdogan . the akp won governing majorities four times — 2002 , 2007 , 2011 , and 2015 — during a period in which turkey's economy generally enjoyed growth and stability . for decades since its founding in the 1920s , the turkish republic had relied upon its military , judiciary , and other bastions of its kemalist ( a term inspired by turkey's republican founder , mustafa kemal ataturk ) "secular elite" to protect it from political and ideological extremes — sacrificing at least some of its democratic vitality in the process . erdogan has worked to reduce the political power of the "secular elite" and has clashed with other possible rival power centers , including previous allies in the fethullah gulen movement . domestic polarization has intensified since 2013: nationwide antigovernment protests that began in istanbul's gezi park took place that year , and corruption allegations later surfaced against a number of erdogan's colleagues in and out of government . after erdogan became president in august 2014 via turkey's first - ever popular presidential election , he claimed a mandate for increasing his power and pursuing a "presidential system" of governance . analyses of erdogan sometimes characterize him as one or more of the following: a pragmatic populist , a protector of the vulnerable , a budding authoritarian , an indispensable figure , an islamic ideologue . erdogan's consolidation of power has continued . he outlasted the july 2016 coup attempt , and then scored victories in the april 2017 constitutional referendum and the june 2018 presidential and parliamentary elections . u.s. and european union officials have expressed a number of concerns about rule of law and civil liberties in turkey , including the government's influence on media and turkey's reported status as the country with the most journalists in prison .