these criteria both lead to the hill method . the method that minimizes the absolute representational surplus among states ? this criterion leads to the adams method . the method that minimizes the absolute representational deficiency among states ? the federal government proposed the statistical test of variance as an appropriate means of computing a total for all the districts in the country in the 1992 litigation on this matter . the plaintiffs in massachusetts argued that the variance can be computed for different criteria than those proposed by the federal government — with different variance measures leading to different methods . the contention that one method or another best implements the "great compromise" is open to much discussion . all of the competing points suggest that congress would be faced with difficult choices if it decided to take this issue up prior to the 2020 census . which of the mathematical tests discussed in this report best approximates the constitutional requirement that representatives be apportioned among the states according to their respective number is , arguably , a matter of judgment — rather than an indisputable mathematical test . the method that minimizes the difference between the largest average district size in the country and the smallest ? which of these measures best approximates the one person , one vote concept ? the method that minimizes the difference in each person's individual share of his or her representative by subtracting the smallest such share for a state from the largest share ? this criterion leads to the webster method . this criterion leads to the dean method . the method that minimizes the difference in average district sizes , or in individual shares of a representative , when those differences are expressed as percentages ? this criterion leads to the jefferson method . in the absence of further information , it is not apparent which criterion ( if any ) best encompasses the principle of "one person , one vote. although the nas report endorsed as its preferred method of apportionment the one currently in use — the hill method — the report arguably does not make a clear - cut or conclusive case for one method of apportionment as fairest or most equitable . are there other factors that might provide additional guidance in making such an evaluation ? the remaining sections of this report examine three additional possibilities put forward by statisticians: ( 1 ) mathematical tests different from those examined in the nas report ; ( 2 ) standards of fairness derived from the concept of states' representational "quotas" ; and ( 3 ) the principles of the constitutional "great compromise" between large and small states that resulted in the establishment of a bicameral congress . if congress decides to revisit the matter of the apportionment formula , this report illustrates that there could be many alternative criteria from which it can choose as a basis for decision . among the competing mathematical tests are the pair - wise measures proposed by the national academy of sciences in 1929 . for example , the major issue raised in the montana case was , which formula best approximated the "one person , one vote" principle ?