id . practices and procedures of a particular office or legitimate regulations may reduce the expectation of privacy that government employees enjoy in their workplace . id . the circumstances of a particular case matter a great deal , and each fourth amendment claim in this context has to be examined on its own . "given the great variety of work environments in the public sector , the question whether an employee has a reasonable expectation of privacy must be addressed on a case - by - case basis. id . once an employee demonstrates a reasonable expectation of privacy , he must then demonstrate that the search was unreasonable . "[p]ublic employer intrusions on the constitutionally protected privacy interests of government employees for non - investigatory , work - related purposes , as well as for investigations of work - related misconduct , should be judged by the standard of reasonableness under all the circumstances. this standard has two requirements: first , the search must have been "justified at its inception," and second , it must have been "reasonably related in scope to the circumstances which justified the interference in the first place. id . in a number of special needs cases decided after o 'connor , however , the supreme court made it clear that a search need not be the least intrusive possible in order to considered reasonable in scope . the police officers sued alleging violations of the stored communications act as well as violations of the fourth amendment . the district court found no violation of the stored communications act . as for quon's fourth amendment allegations , it held that while the officers had a reasonable expectation of privacy in their text messages , the city's intrusion was reasonable in its inception and scope . finally , the court concluded that had there been a fourth amendment violation , the chief of police would not have been entitled to qualified immunity . the court of appeals found little in the district court opinion with which it could agree . the officers did have a reasonable expectation of privacy , but the search had been unreasonable both with respect to sergeant quon and to those who participated in his pager conversations . the chief of police , however , was entitled to qualified immunity . moreover , the stored communications act had been violated . the stored communications act ( sca ) permits providers of remote computing service to disclose the content of stored communications to subscribers , eg , the city , without the consent of the participants in the communication . those who provide electronic communications services , in contrast , enjoy no such prerogative . since arch wireless provided electronic communications services under its pager contract , when it "knowingly turned over the text - messaging transcripts to the city , which was a 'subscriber,' not an addressee or intended recipient of such communication , it violated the sca. the court felt the officers might have a reasonable expectation of privacy in their pager messages in the same way they might have a reasonable expectation of privacy in the content of their mail or e - mail .