it again provided funding for the program in fy2012 . separate from hud's housing counseling program , congress has appropriated additional housing counseling funding specifically for foreclosure mitigation counseling since fy2008 . congress has appropriated this funding to neighborworks america , a federally chartered nonprofit agency with a nationwide network of affiliated organizations . neighborworks administers this funding through the national foreclosure mitigation counseling program . housing counseling can also be considered part of the broader category of financial education . for example , nchec convened an advisory council to develop the national industry standards for homeownership education and counseling , which were created by , and have been adopted by , a number of prominent housing counseling organizations . neighborworks is also a leading provider of housing counseling training . finally , the national association of housing counselors and agencies ( nahca ) is an organization made up of housing counseling agencies that provides training , testing , certification , and technical assistance to housing counselors and counseling agencies nationwide . on september 2 , 2009 , hud published a final rule specifying requirements for counselors who provide hecm counseling . the rule established a hecm counselor roster and required that homeowners applying for hecms receive counseling from a counselor on the hecm counselor roster . in order to be eligible for the hecm counselor roster , a hecm counselor must ( 1 ) be employed by a hud - approved housing counseling agency ( or such an agency's affiliate ) or an shfa , ( 2 ) have passed a standardized hecm counseling exam within the last three years , and ( 3 ) have received hecm - related training within the past two years . hecm counselors must also have access to technology that allows hud to track counseling results , and they may not be on the general services administration's suspension and debarment list or on hud's limited denial of participation list or credit alert interactive response system . the secure and fair enforcement for mortgage licensing act of 2008 , or the safe mortgage licensing act , was passed as part of the housing and economic recovery act of 2008 ( p.l . the safe act requires states to set licensing and registration requirements for mortgage originators that meet minimum standards set forth in the law . the safe act also directs hud to implement a licensing and registration system for mortgage originators in any state that does not meet the minimum requirements of the law . on july 21 , 2011 , responsibility for the safe act transferred from hud and the federal banking regulators to the consumer financial protection bureau ( cfpb ) , which was established by the dodd - frank wall street reform and consumer protection act ( p.l . hud issued a proposed rule on the safe act on december 15 , 2009 , and a final rule on june 30 , 2011 , implementing the minimum standards for licensing and registration of mortgage originators in the law and the procedures hud would use in the event that a state is not compliant with the requirements .