grant renewal . toward the end of phase 1 ( first two years of implementation ) , the global fund evaluates each grant to ensure that funding is managed and spent efficiently and programs are achieving expected results . at this point , the fund decides whether to continue funding grants , reduce funding , direct investments in systems strengthening , or stop funding altogether . grants demonstrating potential for significant and sustainable impact can receive additional funding for up to six years through the "rolling continuation channel. proposal development . applicants develop and submit proposals to the global fund secretariat that include output , outcome and impact indicators , and targets defined by the countries themselves . if the proposal is approved , these form the basis for measuring the performance of a grant . grant negotiation . upon approval , the global fund negotiates the terms of grant agreements , legally binding contracts that clearly indicate time - bound targets to measure the performance of the grants . at this stage , monitoring and evaluation systems are also assessed . the global fund recommends that 5% - 10% of grant budgets are used for monitoring and evaluation . performance - based disbursements . over the course of a grant's life cycle , the principal recipient reports regularly to the global fund on results , expenditures , and any deviations from or corrective actions to program activities . the local fund agent , an independent contractor based in the country , verifies the principal recipient's programmatic and financial reports and makes recommendations to the global fund on the amount to be disbursed for the next period of implementation . the secretariat evaluates the overall performance of the grant , assigns a rating , and decides on the next disbursement amount . lack of progress triggers a request by the secretariat for corrective action and may also result in reduced disbursements . consistent with its performance - based model , the global fund reports that it has terminated , suspended , or discontinued grants or replaced principal recipients in cases of uncorrected inadequate performance . since the global fund was established , the united states has been a strong supporter of the organization . officials from the department of state , the united states agency for international development ( usaid ) , and the united states department of health and human services ( hhs ) were all engaged in the creation of the global fund , and former secretary of hhs tommy thompson was later elected as the second chair of the global fund's board . at present , u.s. officials from various agencies sit on several global fund boards . the obama administration has signaled its intention to maintain that support . in a march 2011 statement and at a house hearing , the u.s . global aids coordinator , ambassador eric goosby , linked the success of u.s. bilateral hiv / aids programs under the president's emergency plan for aids relief ( pepfar ) to the continuance of the global fund: our dependency on the global fund is a real one... .