it passed h.r . 112-33 ) on september 30 , 2011 , extending the general imports restriction in the 2003 bdfa through july 2012 . the consolidated appropriations act , 2012 ( p.l . 112-74 ) , passed on december 15 , 2011 , reaffirmed other existing sanctions by barring the use of funds for international military education and training , foreign military financing , excess defense articles , or section 1206 assistance ; restricting the use of the state department's economic support fund to humanitarian assistance in burma ; and restating the requirement that the u.s. executive directors to ifis vote against "any loan , agreement , or other financial support to burma. in 2012 , congress passed p.l . 112-163 renewing the general import ban , and p.l . 112-192 , described previously in the report . in general , the 112 th congress has allowed the obama administration to take the lead on deciding when to selectively ease or waive some of the existing sanctions ( see " recent u.s. sanctions policy " ) . the relative dearth of legislative action does not imply that the 112 th congress has not demonstrated an interest in u.s. policy in burma . the house committee on foreign affairs subcommittee on asia and the pacific and the senate committee on foreign relations held oversight hearings during the second session on u.s. policy in burma . several congressional delegations from both the house of representatives and the senate have traveled to burma to assess the extent of the political reforms and discuss u.s. policy with various political leaders . the obama administration frequently consults with key members of congress regarding possible policy options , as well as to inform congress of the administration's interpretation of the situation in burma . several members of congress have also released statements on burma , ranging from support for the removal of all sanctions to disapproval of "pragmatic engagement" and the endorsement of the maintenance of all sanctions . although presidential waivers permit the temporary suspension of sanctions , the actual removal of existing sanctions may be a more complex proposition because of the overlapping provisions of the laws governing the current sanction regime . in addition , because burma is subject to sanctions based on assessments related to certain functional issues ( eg , human trafficking , religious freedoms ) , the repeal of burma - specific sanction laws or e.o.s may not eliminate certain types of restrictions on burma . section 301 of u.s.c . title 3 , chapter 35 allows the president to delegate authority ( under certain conditions ) to other government officials to carry out responsibilities on behalf of the president . in most cases , this has been either the secretary of state or the treasury secretary . president obama gave official notice to congress on may 17 , 2012 , that he was continuing for another year ( may 21 , 2012-may 20 , 2013 ) the international emergency with respect to burma , and renewing the provisions of e.o . 13464 , which are still in force .