this is our war. his government repeatedly has asked the obama administration to strengthen pakistan's democracy and economic development in the interest of fighting extremism . despite pakistani hopes that president obama would more energetically engage diplomatic efforts to resolve the kashmir problem , the administration has offered no public expressions of support for such a shift . secretary of state clinton has recognized the dangers of rising tensions in kashmir while also deferring calls for greater u.s. involvement there , saying during her confirmation hearing that the u.s. role will continue to be as it was under the previous administration: settlement facilitation , but no mediation . in what many observers considered to be a bracing u.s. government wake - up call to islamabad , secretary clinton told a house panel in april 2009 that "the pakistani government is basically abdicating to the taliban and to the extremists. secretary of defense robert gates followed with his own warning that u.s. - pakistan relations could suffer if islamabad did not "take appropriate actions" to deal with the militant threat . days later , president obama himself expressed "grave concern" about the situation in pakistan , offering that the "very fragile" civilian government there did not appear to have the capacity to deliver basic services to the pakistani people . he did , however , acknowledge that the pakistani military was showing more seriousness in addressing the threat posed by militants . the administration's tone shifted considerably after pakistani forces launched major offensive operations against taliban militants in the swat valley . senior u.s. officials — including president obama in his december 1 , 2009 , speech — laud pakistan's military operations against indigenous taliban militants . yet these officials also want islamabad to enlarge the scope of such operations to include action against a broader array of extremist threats , including those of the greatest concern to india and western countries . as articulated by joint chiefs chairman admiral mike mullen , "we must help pakistan widen its aperture in seeking out and eliminating all forms of extremism and terrorism — those who threaten not only pakistan , but also afghanistan , the wider south asia region , and the globe. secretary gates paid an unannounced visit to pakistan in early 2010 with a central wish to "relinquish the grievances of the past ... and instead focus on the promise of the future. in speaking to an audience of pakistani military officers , he sought to push back against the rumors fuelling anti - americanism there , stating unequivocally that the united states "does not covet a single inch of pakistani soil [nor] military bases," nor does it "desire to control pakistan's nuclear weapons. more intensive diplomacy and u.s. assurances that pakistan will play a major role in the political future of afghanistan may have contributed to persuading pakistani leaders — especially military officers — that they need no longer rely on extremist groups to maintain influence . the u.s. special representative for afghanistan and pakistan , richard holbrooke , who died in december 2010 , attributed pakistan's early 2010 moves against the afghan taliban to the "cumulative effect" of hard work and multiple visits to pakistan by numerous senior u.s. officials .