location , iii . ยง2 , anyone who counsels , procures , aids , or abets a violation of section 2339b or any other federal crime is punishable as though he had committed the offense himself . "in order to aid and abet another to commit a crime it is necessary that a defendant in some sort associate himself with the venture , that he participate in it as in something that he wishes to bring about , [and] that he seek by his action to make it succeed. "typically , the same evidence will support both a conspiracy and an aiding and abetting conviction. source , or iv . ownership of material support or resources ( 5 ) knowing or intending that they be used ( a ) in preparation for , ( b ) in carrying out , ( c ) in preparation for concealment of an escape from , or ( d ) in carrying out the concealment of an escape from ( 5 ) an offense identified as a federal crime of terrorism . an attempt to provide material support in violation of section 2339b and actually providing such assistance are punished the same: imprisonment for not more than 20 years ( for any term of years or life , if death results from the commission of the offense ) , and / or a fine of not more than $250,000 ( not more than $500,000 for an organization ) ( or not more than twice the amount of gain or loss associated with the offense ) . conspiracy to provide material support in violation of section 2339b is the agreement to provide such support . the offense is complete upon assent ; the support need only be planned , not delivered . moreover , each of the conspirators is liable not only for the conspiracy , but for any other foreseeable offense committed by any of the conspirators in furtherance of the overall scheme . like attempt , conspiracy to provide material support carries the same penalties as the completed substantive offense: imprisonment for not more than 20 years ( for any term of years or life , if death results from the commission of the offense ) , and / or a fine of not more than $250,000 ( not more than $500,000 for an organization ) ( or not more than twice the amount of gain or loss associated with the offense ) . unlike attempt , conspirators may be punished for both conspiracy and for actually providing material support should their scheme succeed . under the provisions of 18 u.s.c . unlike conspiracy , however , liability under section 2 only attaches if someone else commits the substantive offense . conviction for a violation of section 2339b is punishable by imprisonment for not more than 20 years ( for any period of years or for life if death results from commission of the offense ) and / or a fine of not more than $250,000 ( not more than $500,000 for an organizational defendant ) . the sentencing guidelines assign a base offense level of 26 which translates , without more , to a sentencing range of 63 to 78 months imprisonment for offenders with a virtually pristine criminal record .