the crisis essentially reversed this view . the dodd - frank act ( p.l . 111-203 ) attempts to address the aspect of the otc market that appeared most troublesome in the crisis: the market permitted enormous exposure to risk to grow out of the sight of regulators and other traders . derivatives exposures that could not be readily quantified exacerbated panic and uncertainty about the true financial condition of other market participants , contributing to the freezing of credit markets . under dodd - frank , risk exposures of major financial institutions must be backed by capital , minimizing the shock to the financial system should such a firm fail . in addition , regulators will have information about the size and distribution of possible losses during periods of market volatility . the dodd - frank act requires that most derivatives contracts formerly traded exclusively in the otc market be cleared and traded on exchanges . traders in these products now are required to post margin in the fashion described above and have their contracts repriced at the close of each trading day . it is important to note that not all derivatives contracts are required to be traded in this way by the act . the dodd - frank act presumes that some derivatives contracts will still be traded in the otc market ; however , it grants regulators broader powers to obtain information about these derivatives and impose margin and capital requirements on them as well . the cftc and the sec have been working to issue regulations that implement these provisions . in 2008 , as energy and grain prices set new records , speculators in derivatives were blamed by some for price volatility and for price levels that many observers believed were not justified by the underlying economic fundamentals . although the cftc maintained that markets were functioning normally and that the price discovery process was not being distorted , the 110 th congress considered legislation intended to insulate commodity prices from the impact of excessive speculation and manipulation . congress implemented this goal by including a number of provisions in title vii of the dodd - frank act that enhanced the authority of the cftc to police these markets and impose limits where the agency saw a need . to this end , congress enhanced the cftc's power to set margin and position limits and also amended the cftc's authority to prohibit manipulation in markets for commodities and swaps . what follows is a brief description of the current status of these enhanced authorities . section 716 originated in the senate agriculture committee and was included in the bill that passed the senate in may 2010 . the section prohibited federal assistance , defined as the use of any funds to loan money to , buy the securities or other assets of , or to enter into "any assistance arrangement" with a "swaps entity. swaps entities included swap dealers and major swap participants ( and the equivalents in security - based swaps ) , securities and futures exchanges , sefs , and clearing organizations registered with the cftc , the sec , or any other federal or state agency .