the ita makes its determination first . the ita must determine whether or not a countervailable subsidy is being provided with respect to the merchandise . following the ita's final determination , the itc determines whether the domestic industry is materially injured or threatened with material injury or whether its establishment in the united states is materially retarded by reason of imports , sales , or likely sales of merchandise that the ita has deemed subsidized . the department of commerce's practice of using zeroing to calculate dumping margins generated complaints from other wto members . however , as with the preliminary injury determination , the itc will not engage in this final analysis if the allegedly subsidizing country is not a member of the wto . if the two agencies' final determinations conclude that a countervailable subsidy was provided with the effect of causing or threatening material injury to a domestic industry or its establishment , then , upon publishing its finding , the department of commerce issues a countervailing duty order . the duty levied in that order must be equal to the estimated amount of the government or other public subsidization . the u.s. customs and border protection is then required to collect cash deposits of cvd duties on the merchandise in question when it enters the united states . the cash deposits represent an estimate of the actual duties owed . the final amount of the duties collected will be either the cash deposit , or , if an administrative review is requested , the duty established by that review . generally , the final duty is determined by an administrative review . the process by which the united states investigates allegations of dumping — that is , allegations that a foreign manufacturer charges a price for its product that is "less than its fair value" — is similar to the process discussed above for investigating allegations of countervailable subsidies . the procedures for assessing and collecting antidumping ( ad ) duties are prescribed in title vii of the tariff act of 1930 . any interested party may petition the department of commerce to investigate allegations of dumping , and these investigations may also be self - initiated by commerce . the petitions must be filed "by or on behalf of the industry. like cvd investigations , ad investigations are jointly administered over the course of two rounds by the department of commerce and the itc . like countervailable subsidy investigations , the first round of an antidumping investigation requires preliminary determinations by the ita and the itc . if the itc determines that there is a reasonable indication of material injury , the ita assesses whether there is a reasonable basis to believe or suspect that the merchandise is being sold , or is likely to be sold , at less than its fair value . predictably , the second round is the round in which the ita and itc make their final determinations on these same questions .