some reasons for this status are economic . for example , the price of wheat flour in pakistan increased 95% from may 2007 to october 2009 while overall food inflation increased prices 28% in the year preceding october 2009 . an estimated 85% of pakistanis live on two dollars a day or less and spend at least 50% of their income on food . pakistan produces approximately 20 million tons of wheat while consuming 23 million tons , leading to the necessity of wheat imports . "without food , people do one of three things: revolt , migrate , or starve . when governments can no longer provide food security , states fail. from may 2007 to october 2009 ( when wheat flour increased in price ) , riots in pakistan reportedly led to the stealing of massive amounts of grain and flour . in january 2008 , pakistan deployed 6,000 soldiers to secure flour mills , food distribution centers , and to escort supply trucks . the food security situation is considered to be the worst in pakistan's northern and western border areas . in baluchistan 20 of 25 districts were considered food insecure while all of the federally administered tribal areas were considered food insecure . these areas are the same areas that are subject to much of pakistan's internal strife . refugees place added pressure on food security in pakistan . regional conflict in afghanistan has made pakistan one of the leading locations of refugees over the years . millions of afghans fled to pakistan to avoid fighting during both the soviet and american occupations of afghanistan . internal fighting between the pakistan government and taliban forces in northwest pakistan in 2009 led to an estimated 3 million internally displaced persons ( idps ) . such dislocated populations lack the resources of more stable populations and can contribute to food scarcity and overtaxed infrastructure , among other things . refugees have the effect of reducing the resilience of regional governments when facing environmental stress . further , environmental stress , such as food scarcity and limited water supplies , exacerbates the effect of refugees and lead to protests , crime , and potentially recruiting by militants . cross border migration appears to be less of an option for pakistan's populations than in other states due to pakistan's adversarial relationship with india and the ongoing conflict in afghanistan . strife among the political - military elites of pakistan is a key factor that prevents pakistan's leadership from effectively deploying state resources for environmental and other issues . changes made to the constitution in 2010 are not thought likely to cure tri - partite conflict between the military , judiciary , and the government . as a result , political infighting is expected to continue at the cost of effective governance . corruption remained a problem in 2009 as pakistan ranked as the 42 nd most corrupt of 180 states in a ranking by transparency international . resource scarcity has also evidently led to elite's control of resources that has ecologically marginalized many of pakistan's poor who are increasingly vulnerable . many of the urban poor are more vulnerable to price increases than the rural poor because they must buy all of their food .