similarly , in a.l.a . schechter poultry corp. v. united states , congress was found to have created an unauthorized delegation of legislative authority when it gave the president the authority to enact "codes of fair competition. modern delegation doctrine may trace its inception to j.w . the article's focus on the decisionmaker's identity as one trigger for chevron deference has been called "a significant departure from , and extension of," the court's decisions in chevron and mead . the piece also has been cited along with other literature for the proposition that "presumptions of congressional intent are simply judicially created proxies or fictions. two of the most substantive discussions of chevron's nondelegation doctrine evaluate it as one of several proposals that would alter the court's current application of chevron and mead . a 2003 law review article by university of chicago law professor adrian vermeule called barron and kagan's proposal "notable" and "a potentially important reframing of the mead court's project. however , vermeule finds that "the normative case for the [ chevron nondelegation doctrine] is undertheorized. the court has struck down two legislative delegations as lacking an "intelligible principle" under the nondelegation doctrine . in panama refining co. v. ryan , the court found no "intelligible principle" when congress provided the president with the authority to prohibit the interstate transfer of petroleum without providing any standards or limits constraining when such authority was to be exercised . he asserts that agency heads will easily skirt the chevron nondelegation doctrine by delegating decisionmaking authority but continuing to retain legal authority . he finds that courts will be unable to determine when the agency head has rubberstamped a lower - level official's decision and , as a result , the agency will receive chevron deference for those delegated decisions . noting that barron and kagan acknowledge this potential for rubberstamping by agency officials , but that they believe agency heads choose "to avoid nominal responsibility" for decisions of lower - level officials rather than receive chevron deference , vermeule finds that barron and kagan "undermin[e] the significance of their own proposal. that is , if chevron deference for agency interpretations is not desirable , then why are the authors concerned with providing a substitute for mead ? yet if chevron deference for agency interpretations is desirable enough that agency officials would rubberstamp lower - level decisions in contravention of the chevron nondelegation doctrine , then review of those decisions by the courts would be "just as costly and unmanageable a judicial inquiry as the excessively refined mead inquiry it is designed to replace. a later 2006 law review article by amy wildermuth commented on both chevron's nondelegation doctrine and vermeule's assessment of it . wildermuth finds vermeule's "most important critique" of barron and kagan's article to be that the chevron nondelegation doctrine may lead to rubberstamping by the statutory delegatee of decisions made by lower - level agency officials , thus "circumventing the requirement of personal responsibility for the larger benefit afforded by triggering chevron deference.