milk is also included . most of these commodities have a long history of government support dating back to the 1930s . in recent years , other crops such as dry peas and lentils have become eligible commodities . in contrast , producers of specialty crops ( eg , fruits , vegetables , horticulture crops ) and livestock have generally received little or no direct government support through commodity programs , and instead they must manage their own risk and / or rely on crop insurance and disaster assistance . payment limits control the overall level of payments made to individuals to some extent . also , some farmers have complained , both recently and prior to the 2008 farm bill , that mal benefits and counter - cyclical payments do not provide enough assistance because trigger levels are mostly below current and expected price levels . however , farm operators or landowners have avoided payment limits in the past by subdividing individual farms into multiple operators by use of certificate exchanges for marketing loan benefits and by other means . critics of farm programs have long questioned the need for farm subsidies , contending that resources for agriculture could be better spent advancing environmental goals or improving agricultural productivity . others cite an economic argument against the farm commodity programs: like any subsidy , farm programs distort production , capitalize benefits to the owners of the resources , encourage concentration of production , and comparatively harm smaller domestic producers and farmers in lower - income foreign nations . several issues might shape any potential changes to farm safety net programs in the next farm bill debate . managing farm risk — crop insurance has very high participation rates , a result driven in part by the high subsidization levels but also because the program in fact reduces both yield and revenue risks . some members of congress and policy observers have wondered if crop insurance might be the only element of the farm safety net that remains in the distant future if farm programs are rationalized and funding is reduced . farm policy observers have identified significant overlap between farm programs . for example , the acre program and crop insurance both address revenue variability . also , the current farm program mix has several variations of "counter - cyclical - style" payments , including marketing loan benefits , traditional ( price ) counter - cyclical payments , acre ( revenue ) payments , revenue - type crop insurance , and whole - farm insurance . in the view of some , a different array of programs might reduce farm risk in a more cost - effective way . commodity coverage — the extent of the current commodity coverage is primarily a result of the historical and evolving nature of farm policy . producers of major commodities such as wheat , corn , soybeans , rice , cotton , and milk have benefited the most from farm programs because farmers and policymakers representing those commodities shaped the programs from their inception . since then , most other commodity advocates have not had the interest or sufficient political power to add their commodities to the mix .