successive u.s . administrations have viewed senegal as an anchor of regional stability and a partner in combating transnational security threats such as terrorism , narcotics trafficking , and maritime piracy . president obama has cultivated ties with president sall , inviting him to a meeting at the white house in march 2013 and planning to visit senegal on an upcoming trip to africa . in both cases , the administration has emphasized senegal's democratic track - record . congress has played a role in shaping u.s. policy toward senegal through its authorization and appropriation of foreign assistance , and via its oversight of executive branch policies and strategies . bilateral aid administered by the state department and u.s. agency for international development ( usaid ) , totaling $109.6 million in fy2012 , is focused on health , food security , democratic governance , economic growth , rural development , conflict resolution in casamance , and military professionalism . in addition , a five - year , $540 million millennium challenge corporation ( mcc ) compact , signed in 2009 , is funding infrastructure and agricultural projects in the northern senegal river valley and in casamance . the administration has also provided emergency humanitarian aid since 2011 as part of efforts to address a regional food security crisis in the sahel . recent congressional interest has arisen over issues such as senegal's democracy and governance trajectory ; the country's role in confronting regional security threats ; and the management of bilateral development assistance , including support for senegal's socioeconomic development and oversight of senegal's mcc compact given past concerns over corruption . senegal's first post - independence leader , léopold senghor , was a poet and politician celebrated as one of post - colonial africa's most important intellectuals . although a self - described socialist and pan - africanist , senghor cultivated close ties with the west — in particular , france — and resisted the eastern bloc influence at times prevalent in the region . senghor presided over a de - facto one - party state through his ruling socialist party ( ps ) until 1981 , when he stepped down and was succeeded by the ps's abdou diouf . diouf continued senghor's pro - western policies and oversaw senegal's gradual political liberalization . still , elections under diouf were marred by alleged fraud , repression of anti - government activism , and in some cases violence . in 2000 , long - time opposition leader abdoulaye wade ( pronounced "wahd" ) won presidential elections widely seen as free and fair . wade's victory and diouf's peaceful transfer of power to wade's senegalese democratic party ( pds ) were hailed as a landmark for democracy in senegal and the region , which had seen few democratic transitions between civilian leaders . during wade's second term ( 2007-2012 ) , however , senegalese and international observers raised concerns over apparent democratic backsliding , amid wade's increasing efforts to concentrate power and growing concerns over high - level corruption and nepotism . in the 2012 presidential election , wade failed in his effort to win a third term in office , losing to one - time ally sall .