crs report rl33993 , veterans' health care issues , by [author name scrubbed] . construction of facilities in a fast - changing theater of war has presented dod with an extraordinarily complicated problem . in the normal appropriations and authorization process , plans for construction projects are drafted a year or more in advance of the date construction is to begin . experience on the ground in both iraq and afghanistan has shown that even the best of plans is likely to become outdated by the time the necessary legislation is passed and enacted . since fy2004 , in order to provide timely assistance to commanders in the field , congress has used the annual national defense authorization act to grant dod a temporary authorization , "contingency construction authority" ( cca ) , to permit the use of a limited amount of already appropriated operations and maintenance ( o&m ) funds from the defense appropriation for construction . reviewed and reauthorized every year since , the geographic areas where the cca may be employed , the purposes to which the funds may be put , and the ceiling imposed on the amount available have varied . under its current authority , dod may use up to $200 million of o&m appropriations in u.s. central command ( uscentcom ) , including those portions of u.s. africa command ( usafricom ) once part of uscentcom , for construction . if the secretary of defense certifies the need , he may use up to an additional $300 million for construction within afghanistan . the secretary of defense has long held authority to initiate military construction projects without waiting for specific authorization and appropriation . ยง2804 permits the secretary to begin construction using already appropriated funds if he "determines that deferral of the project for inclusion in the next military construction authorization act would be inconsistent with national security or national interest" and notifies congress of his action within a specified period . this section of title 10 is titled "contingency construction," but is permanent and distinct from the temporary authority mentioned above and should not be confused with it . ยง2805 ( "unspecified minor construction" ) permits the secretary to make very limited use of o&m funds for small construction projects . ยง2808 allows the secretary to initiate construction projects not otherwise authorized , using funds appropriated for military construction , after a declaration of war or of national emergency requiring the employment of armed forces . 111-559 , the house committee noted that the use of the temporary cca has given commanders in the field added flexibility to address urgent construction requirements and that almost $1.4 billion in o&m funding has been obligated under it to date . the committee also noted the o&m appropriations account is part of the defense appropriation , not the military construction appropriation , and its oversight lies with a subcommittee not responsible for defense construction . the committee also pointed out that o&m funds are appropriated for other uses , such as meeting operational requirements of armed forces in the field and , to the extent they are expended on construction , they are unavailable for those ends to which they were intended .