the study of progressivity was of this type . of the remaining five studies in this category , four found that higher tax rates increased self employment , and one found no effect . finally , three studies examined the effect of differential state tax rates , with two finding no effect and one a positive effect for higher taxes . how do taxes affect small business ? the federal income tax code is written in a way that reduces several costs related to the expansion of small businesses . first , as with all businesses , labor pay and benefits are deductible business expenses under section 162 ( a ) of the internal revenue code ( irc ) . second , the tax code contains provisions that reduce a small business owner's cost of acquiring additional capital ( eg , the cost of providing an additional computer for a new employee's workstation ) . section 179 expensing allowances allow taxpayers to immediately deduct the cost of a qualified depreciable asset , up to a dollar limit , rather than deducting the cost of a period of a year . several other tax incentives may directly or indirectly allow small businesses to expand by reducing their overall tax burden , decreasing compliance costs with federal regulations , and providing them with additional ways to attract capital . as of january 2012 , the federal government provides more than $15 billion in annual tax expenditures targeted toward small businesses . tax rate levels may not deter a small business from hiring an additional worker , as long as the business owner believes that worker will provide a positive contribution to the firm . the congressional budget office reports that increases in the after - tax income of businesses typically do not create much incentive for small businesses to hire additional workers , because production depends principally on the demand for their products or services . given the evidence that more job growth arises from new firms , evidence on the choice of self - employment may be more important than evidence on the behavior of existing firms . an extensive empirical literature on this issue is mixed , but largely suggests that higher tax rates are more likely to encourage , rather than discourage , self - employment . schuetze and bruce review 21 studies of the effects of taxes on employment using a variety of data sets and statistical approaches . of these studies , 11 found that higher tax rates increased self - employment , 2 found that they decreased self - employment , and 7 found no statistically significant relationship . one study focused on the degree of progressivity in the tax system rather than the level of taxes , and found that a progressive tax system discouraged self - employment . the studies cover a range of approaches . eight of the studies used aggregate time series data ( for the united states , in most cases ) with three studies finding positive effects on self employment for higher tax rates , two finding negative effects , and three finding no effect .