congress is continuing to fund and oversee the mérida initiative . the 115 th congress provided $139 million for the mérida initiative in the fy2017 consolidated appropriations act ( p.l . congress is now considering president trump's fy2018 budget request , which would cut funding for the mérida initiative by $54 million , or 38.8% , compared to the fy2017 estimated funding level ( see table 1 ) . congress may analyze how progress under the mérida initiative is being measured ; how u.s. funds have been used to advance mexico's police and judicial reform efforts ; and the degree to which u.s. programs in mexico complement other u.s. counterdrug and border security efforts . mexico invested some $100 billion of its own resources on security and public safety through 2017 . mexican president enrique peña nieto took office in december 2012 , vowing to reduce violence in mexico and adjust u.s. - mexican security efforts to focus on violence prevention . although mexico's public relations approach to security issues has changed , its operational approach has remained basically the same . that approach , commonly referred to as the kingpin strategy , has focused on taking out the top - and mid - level leadership of mexico's criminal organizations . critics maintain that this approach has fueled violence by encouraging succession struggles and turf wars . it begins with a brief discussion of security challenges in mexico and mexico's security strategy . it then provides information on the evolution of congressional funding and oversight of the mérida initiative before delving into its four pillars . the report concludes by raising policy issues facing congress , as it considers continued funding and as it oversees the mérida initiative and broader u.s. - mexican security cooperation . the mérida initiative has continued to advance , albeit slowly , despite changes in administrations and partisan control in both countries . there has been bipartisan support in the u.s. congress for the mérida initiative and , although funding has declined , appropriators provided more assistance than the previous administration requested in fy2015 , fy2016 , and fy2017 . congress is now considering the trump administration's fy2018 budget request and overseeing previously appropriated funding for the mérida initiative . most experts agree that mexico continues to require international support to address organized crime - related violence and reform its criminal justice system . prior to president trump's inauguration , some analysts urged the trump administration to return to the mérida initiative's original focus on law enforcement , whereas others argued for it to maintain a broad , multifaceted approach . thus far , the trump administration's rhetoric and budget request appear to prioritize combating transnational criminal organizations and addressing shared migration challenges , albeit with much less u.s. support than in years past . organized crime - related violence has resulted in more than 109,000 killings since december 2006 and contributed to 30,000 disappearances . for the first quarter of 2017 , organized crime - related violence in mexico reached levels not seen since the end of the felipe calderón administration ( 2006-2012 ; see figure 1 , below ) .