it also examines growth in maximum awards as a share of all awards . most dctag recipients choose to attend a public ihe , for which they can receive up to $10,000 per year towards the difference between in - and out - of - state tuition . the average in - and out - of - state tuition differential for these six most - attended regional ihes was $14,092 ; therefore , on average , a dctag recipient who attended one of these schools and who received the maximum annual award would still face a gap of an average of $4,092 in out - of - state tuition . even though the number of dctag recipients on the whole has remained relatively stable , there has been a noticeable increase in the number of $10,000 awards disbursed each year since 2004 , as shown in table 6 . the nationwide increase in tuition and fees may be contributing to this upturn in maximum awards received , although there may be other factors that impact this , such as students' choices to attend four - year ihes rather than two - year ihes . in ay2011-2012 , 66% of those dctag recipients who received the maximum annual dctag award of $10,000 enrolled at public four - year ihes in delaware , maryland , north carolina , pennsylvania , and virginia ( regional ihes ) . moreover , most of those students enrolled in a small number of those regional ihes . for instance , figure 2 shows that of the 978 students who received the maximum $10,000 dctag award and attended a regional ihe in ay2011-2012 , 528 ( 54% ) attended one of six schools: pennsylvania state university , university park ; bowie state university ; george mason university ; norfolk state university ; the university of maryland , college park ; and virginia commonwealth university ; the other 450 ( 46% ) students who received the maximum award attended 53 other regional ihes . to meet the program's stated purpose of providing access to a greater range of postsecondary educational options , congress could consider increasing the maximum annual dctag award to account for the in - and out - of - state tuition differential at popular regional public ihes at which many dctag recipients are receiving the maximum annual award , currently , a differential of approximately $14,100 per year . such a decision would likely be weighed in relation to competing demands for resources . dc adoption provides scholarships to students who were adopted from the dc child & family services agency after october 1 , 2001 , and students who lost one or both parents as a result of the events of september 11 , 2001 . students may receive up to $10,000 toward the cost of postsecondary education per year for up to six years . the mayor's scholars undergraduate fund provides need - based grants to eligible dc residents , which they can apply towards the cost of pursuing their first undergraduate degree at a public or private institution located within dc .