ยง1605a ) in one respect . the bill would change "personal injury" to "physical injury" and clarify that claims for emotional distress or other claims derived from injuries to another person that occur outside the united states are not part of the exception . ( it seems that the amended phrase "physical injury" would also exclude claims derived from injuries suffered by others within the united states. ) while a substantial number of claimants involved in lawsuits against iran and other designated countries involve indirect claims , for example , for solatium or emotional distress , s. 1535 would apparently limit claims to victims who are present during a terrorist attack and who suffer a direct injury , the estates of those killed , and owners of property damaged by the attack . another section of the bills would eliminate the anti - terrorism act ( ata ) provision exempting foreign officials and governments from the ata's civil remedy provision , while keeping the exemption intact for u.s. officials , agencies , or employees acting in an official capacity . the elimination of this exemption could effectively extend the terrorism exception to the fsia beyond the four currently designated terrorism - sponsoring countries by providing a new cause of action independent from the one found in 22 u.s.c . section 1605a ( c ) , even for attacks that occur overseas . in addition , the bill's amendment to the ata cause of action appears intended to permit the refiling of ata claims that were previously dismissed for failure to satisfy the requirement for an exception under the fsia , disallowing a defense based on the law of preclusion . a provision to permit the filing of cases where the dispute has already been litigated , however , could run afoul of the supreme court decision in plaut v. sprendthrift farms , in which the court held that congress had violated separation of powers principles by requiring courts to reopen settled cases . on the other hand , previous terrorism cases against foreign states have been revived on congress's enactment of new laws . the senate judiciary committee , subcommittee on crimes and drugs of the 111 th congress , held hearings on a similar measure , s. 2930 ( also titled the justice against sponsors of terrorism act ) . the proposed amendments to the fsia in that bill received mixed reaction from witnesses at the hearings . of particular concern was whether 1. such a provision could undermine the fsia's codification of important long - standing principles of international law that protect foreign governments and the united states from lawsuits in each other's courts based on government activities ; 2. such a provision could expose u.s. allies such as israel to lawsuits in u.s. courts ; 3. foreign governments could respond in kind and remove immunity provisions that currently protect u.s. officials from lawsuits abroad ; 4. courts could find themselves entangled in the assessment of foreign sovereign immunity , and with it foreign policy matters , which are viewed as best left to the state department .