the detroit 3 veba is an independent veba . the automobile companies have had no say in its operation since it became the active source of retiree health funding for the three firms on january 1 , 2010 . for example , the automotive veba was intended to last 80 years . the money currently in the veba will likely be able to pay for retiree health benefits in the near future . at some point before 80 years , however , the funds will probably dry up , given that the veba is not fully funded . 591 on june 26 , 2009 . among other provisions , this resolution would request that president obama transmit to the house of representatives details of the role of the presidential task force on the auto industry in any aspect relating to the levels of and reductions in the benefits of gm's employees and retirees . vebas historically belonged to a single firm . more recently , however , some vebas are structured as a trust independent of the firm . these trusts are sometimes termed independent vebas , new vebas or stand - alone vebas . an independent veba must be controlled by its membership , by independent trustees , or by other fiduciaries designated by the membership . trustees chosen by a collective bargaining agreement are considered designated by the membership . in all cases , the trust acts in the interest of the workers . like many independent vebas , the specific details of the detroit 3 veba were negotiated between the firms and the union . beginning with gm , uaw and management representatives bargained over the amount of funding needed to pay for health insurance for all ( eligible ) present and future retirees , their spouses , and their dependents for the remainder of their lifetimes . the parties also bargained over the sources of the funding . although unionized employees and retirees may experience reduced retirement health benefits during a chapter 11 reorganization , benefits do not automatically end when a company files for bankruptcy . the court may approve modifications to existing retiree health benefits , but may only do so after it has determined that the company has met the requirements for negotiating with an authorized representative of the affected retirees ; the authorized representative has , without good cause , rejected the proposal made by the company ; and the proposed modifications are necessary for successful reorganization ; the treatment of all affected parties , including creditors and the company , is fair and equitable ; and the balance of equities clearly favors the modification . thus , modification of retiree health benefits under chapter 11 is possible but is neither automatic nor easy . a strong protection for retiree health benefits , even in a financially troubled firm , is therefore a funded veba . although funds pledged for contribution by the firm to the veba can be reduced in bankruptcy , funds that are already in the veba are beyond the reach of the firm's creditors . forming and funding a veba can benefit both the firm and its workers . the firm improves its financial statements by reducing an unfunded liability .