this preemption authority is somewhat limited . 2609 in the 111 th congress . fio is to monitor all aspects of the insurance industry and coordinate and develop policy relating to international agreements . it has the authority to preempt state laws and regulations when these conflict with international agreements . it can only apply when the state measure ( 1 ) results in less favorable treatment of a non - u.s. insurer compared with a u.s. insurer , and ( 2 ) is inconsistent with a written international agreement regarding prudential measures . such an agreement must achieve a level of consumer protection that is "substantially equivalent" to the level afforded under state law . in addition to the language on annuities , section 913 of the act may affect some insurance producers who also sell security products . this section authorizes the sec to establish a fiduciary duty for broker - dealers who give personalized investment advice . sec - registered investment advisers are already subject to a fiduciary duty , which requires them to act in their customers' best interests . broker - dealer recommendations , on the other hand , must be suitable for customers ; the act directs the sec to harmonize the standards applicable to broker - dealers and investment advisers . this provision is of interest to the insurance industry because agents who sell securities products , such as mutual funds or variable annuities , have been required to register as broker - dealers , but not generally as investment advisers . if the sec issues rules creating a fiduciary duty , such agents will have to meet the best - interests standard that applies to advisers . the dodd - frank act provides for systemic risk provisions that affect the insurance industry primarily through oversight of firms deemed systemically significant and through specific financial resolution authority . financial companies , including insurers , judged to be systemically significant by the financial stability oversight council are to be subject to federal reserve oversight and higher prudential standards . the council includes a presidential appointee who is to be familiar with insurance issues , a state insurance commissioner , and the director of the federal insurance office with the latter two being non - voting members . section 619 of the dodd - frank act includes restrictions on proprietary trading by banking entities , a provision commonly known as the "volcker rule. insurers that have banking subsidiaries or who are under a holding company structure with other banking subsidiaries would be subject to these restrictions , potentially affecting the investment strategies of these insurers . the language , however , includes an exemption for trading done "by a regulated insurance company directly engaged in the business of insurance for the general account of the company by any affiliate of such regulated insurance company , provided that such activities by any affiliate are solely for the general account of the regulated insurance company. the transactions must also comply with applicable law , regulation , or guidance ; and there must be no determination by the regulators that a relevant law , regulation , or guidance is insufficient to protect the safety and soundness of the banking entity or the financial stability of the united states .