geoengineering is an emerging policy area . the decision of policymakers to either pursue or constrain geoengineering research and / or deployment activities may be based on a wide assortment of factors , including social , legal , and political factors as well as scientific and technical ones — not the least of which may be progress on other climate - related policies . other proposed srm methods are at the conceptualization stage . cdr methods include afforestation , ocean fertilization , and the use of biomass to capture and store carbon . prior to 2013 , neither the united nations framework convention on climate change ( unfccc ) nor the intergovernmental panel on climate change ( ipcc ) had made any official mention of geoengineering science or technology in their negotiation texts or their reports . however , in the ipcc's scientific - technical assessment for its fifth assessment report ( ar5 ) , released on september 26 , 2013 , the panel addressed for the first time the current status of geoengineering research and its potential impacts as follows: methods that aim to deliberately alter the climate system to counter climate change , termed geoengineering , have been proposed . limited evidence precludes a comprehensive quantitative assessment of both solar radiation management ( srm ) and carbon dioxide removal ( cdr ) and their impact on the climate system . cdr methods have biogeochemical and technological limitations to their potential on a global scale . there is insufficient knowledge to quantify how much co 2 emissions could be partially offset by cdr on a century timescale . modeling indicates that srm methods , if realizable , have the potential to substantially offset a global temperature rise , but they would also modify the global water cycle , and would not reduce ocean acidification . [additionally , scaling srm to substantial levels would carry the risk that if] srm were terminated for any reason , there is high confidence that global surface temperatures would rise very rapidly to values consistent with the greenhouse gas forcing . cdr and srm methods carry side effects and long - term consequences on a global scale . very few studies have been published documenting the cost , environmental effects , socio - political impacts , and legal implications of geoengineering . nevertheless , if geoengineering technologies are deployed , they are expected to have the potential to cause significant transboundary effects . some foreign governments and private entities have expressed an interest in pursuing geoengineering projects , largely out of concern over the slow progress of greenhouse gas reductions under the international climate change agreements , the possible existence of climate "tipping points," and the apparent political or economic obstacles to pursuing aggressive domestic greenhouse gas mitigation strategies . however , in the united states , there is limited federal involvement in , or oversight of , geoengineering . consequently , to the extent that some federal agencies and u.s. states have begun addressing geoengineering projects , they are doing so in a largely piecemeal fashion . if the u.s. government opts to address geoengineering at the federal level , there are several approaches that are immediately apparent .