appendix a . technical appendix this appendix shows in the first section the standard realization of revenues from a coefficient derived from a semi - log function . the second shows the method of calculating taxes under the look - back method . which results are most reliable ? the auten and joulfaian panel study , judging by problems with short panels in the 1980s , probably retains some transitory elasticity effects because it applied the same methodology . although it also reflects time series elements , the estimate is probably an overstatement of the permanent elasticity . it also substantially exceeds the upper limit estimated by gravelle . the dowd , mcclellan , and muthitacharoen study produced the largest elasticity and also uses adjacent periods to measure the transitory elasticity . it also indicates dramatically differing estimates from different subperiods , implying some fragility in the estimates . turning to time series , the eichner and sinai results include many more years than gillingham and greenlees , suggesting that this time series result should be preferred . cbo includes even more years . given the findings of the remaining studies and of gravelle's limit calculations , the elasticity is likely below 0.5 . these findings suggest that revenue - estimating assumptions retained from the 1990 debate may understate the revenue gain . in all cases , evidence from both post - 1980s econometric studies and the limits study indicates that there will be revenue gains from increasing the tax rate by five percentage points , although these gains are negligible relative to the static gain for the highest elasticity . assuming the lower elasticities ( and consistent with the gravelle constraints ) , revenue gained would be three times the amount likely to be projected by the jct . using the gravelle upper limit , revenues would be 45% larger . thus , the jct's projections , absent a change in their realizations response , may likely understate revenue gains from increasing capital gains tax rates . modeling realizations and revenues the elasticity of realizations with respect to taxes can be estimated with a variety of functional forms , but one of the most common , and the one on which the estimates in table 2 are based is a semi - log function of the form ( excluding the constant and other regressors , such as stock market values and gdp ) : ( 1 ) log g = bt where g is gains , t is the tax rate , and b is the tax rate coefficient to be estimated . if equation ( 1 ) is differentiated , and b is restated in absolute value , the result is: ( 2 ) dg / g = - b dt multiplying the right hand side top and bottom by t results in an elasticity ( dg / g divided by dt / t ) of bt . because the relationship is normally negative , but it is convenient to restate b in absolute value , a minus sign is added to b .