the report will not be updated . this report has sought to provide a realistic assessment of prospects for improved , lower - cost co 2 capture systems for use at power plants and other industrial facilities in order to mitigate emissions of greenhouse gases linked to global climate change . toward that end , the report first described each of the three current approaches to co 2 capture , namely , post - combustion capture from power plant flue gases using amine - based solvents such as monoethanolamine ( mea ) ; pre - combustion capture ( also via chemical solvents ) from the synthesis gas produced in an integrated coal gasification combined cycle power plant ; and oxy - combustion capture , in which high - purity oxygen is used for combustion to produce a flue gas with high co 2 concentration amenable to capture without a post - combustion chemical process . currently , post - combustion and pre - combustion capture technologies are commercial and widely used for gas stream purification in a variety of industrial processes , including several small - scale installations on power plant flue gases that produce commodity co 2 for sale . oxy - combustion capture is still under development and is not currently commercial . the advantages and limitations of each of these three methods are discussed in this report , along with plans for their continued development and demonstration in large - scale power plant applications . while all three approaches are capable of high co 2 capture efficiencies ( typically about 90% ) , major drawbacks of current processes are their high cost and large energy requirements for operation ( which contribute significantly to the high cost ) . this is especially true for the combustion - based capture processes , which have the highest incremental cost relative to a similar plant without co 2 capture . also discussed in this report are the substantial r&d activities underway in the united states and elsewhere to develop and commercialize improved solvents that can lower the cost of current post - combustion capture processes , as well as research on a variety of potential "breakthrough technologies" such as novel solvents , sorbents , membranes , and oxyfuel systems that hold promise for lower - cost capture systems . most of these processes , however , are still in the early stages of research and development ( i.e. , conceptual designs and laboratory - or bench - scale processes ) , so that credible estimates of their performance and ( especially ) cost are lacking at this time . even with an aggressive development schedule , the commercial availability of these technologies , should they prove successful , is at least a decade away based on past experience . processes at the more advanced pilot plant scale are , for the most part , new or improved solvent formulations ( such as ammonia and advanced amines ) that are undergoing testing and evaluation . these advanced solvents could be available for commercial use within several years if subsequent full - scale testing confirms their overall benefit .