this legislation had not been enacted as of the publication of this report . s. 1770 , the future of american innovation and research act of 2013 , provides another possibility for future reform efforts . this bill would establish a private cause of action against a person who misappropriates a trade secret while located outside the united states , provided that the misappropriation causes or is reasonably anticipated to cause an injury within the united states or to a u.s. person . this legislation had not been enacted as of the publication of this report . in addition , congress may wish to remain apprised of the potential effect of continuing patent reform efforts upon trade secrets . as this report has discussed , trade secrets and patents act in complementary ways to protect innovation in the united states . further , to some degree the two forms of intellectual property act as imperfect substitutes for each other . as a result , legislative reforms that are perceived to make patents more effective may reduce industrial reliance upon trade secrets . and intangible investment have become more important. one recent estimate placed the value of trade secrets owned by u.s. publicly traded companies at five trillion dollars . another way of measuring the increasing importance of intangible assets is by considering the value of the standard & poor's 500 . the "s&p 500" consists of the marketplace value of 500 large publicly held companies . in 1975 , 16.8% of the total value of the s&p 500 reportedly consisted of intangible assets . in 2005 , intangible assets reportedly constituted 79.7% of the total value of these firms . according to attorney r. mark halligan , "the vast bulk of intangible assets are trade secret assets. yet the rise of computer technology , the ubiquity of cell phones and the internet , and our transition to the information age have increased the difficulty that firms encounter in maintaining the confidentiality of their proprietary information . years ago , the theft of trade secrets may have involved the taking of laboratory notebooks , memoranda , or other papers from a competitor's office despite the presence of security personnel or surveillance cameras . today , a trade secret misappropriator can download proprietary information from company computers , or take photographs of confidential documents using a cell phone camera , within moments . as attorney victoria a. cundiff concisely states: "the digital world is no friend to trade secrets. as u.s. firms become increasingly immersed in global competition , some observers believe that foreign firms and even foreign governments have devoted significant resources towards industrial espionage . according to the office of the national counterintelligence executive , "[t]he united states remains the prime target for foreign economic collection and industrial espionage by virtue of its global technological leadership and innovation. these efforts have been linked not just to the economic competitiveness of the united states , but also to its national security . the legal concept of trade secrets addresses these circumstances . principles of trade secret law guard against the misappropriation of information that is not generally known .