, in bastnaesite ores ) . discussion of the u.s. government role focused on permitting timelines for domestic mineral development and the ability of the united states to meet its critical mineral needs . below is a summary of selected current research , development , information , and analysis activities on rare earth elements at federal agencies . the fy2014 budget request included funding for r&d on rare earth and other critical materials . is the united states vulnerable to supply disruptions ? are these elements essential to u.s. national security and economic well - being ? the examination of rees for new energy technologies reveals a concentrated and complex global supply chain and numerous end - use applications . placing the ree supply chain in the global context is unavoidable . the current goal of u.s. mineral policy is to promote an adequate , stable , and reliable supply of materials for u.s. national security , economic well - being , and industrial production . u.s. mineral policy emphasizes developing domestic supplies of critical materials and encourages the domestic private sector to produce and process those materials . but some raw materials do not exist in economic quantities in the united states , and processing , manufacturing , and other downstream ventures in the united states may not be cost competitive with facilities in other regions of the world . however , there may be public policies enacted or executive branch measures taken to offset the u.s. disadvantage of its potentially higher - cost operations . the private sector may achieve lower - cost operations with technology breakthroughs . aside from a small amount of recycling , the united states is 100% reliant on imports of rees and highly dependent on many other minerals that support its economy . for example , the united states is more than 90% import - reliant for the following minerals: manganese ( 100% ) , bauxite ( 100% ) , platinum ( 94% ) , and uranium ( 90% ) . while import reliance may be a cause for concern , high import reliance is not necessarily the best measure , or even a good measure , of supply risk . the supply risk for bauxite , for example , may not be the same as that for rees due to the multiplicity of potential sources . in the case of rees , the dominance of china as a single or dominant supplier of the raw material , downstream oxides , associated metals , and alloys may be a cause for concern because of china's export restrictions and growing internal demand for its rees . this report provides a discussion of the major issues and concerns of the global supply chain for rees , their major end uses , and legislative and other policy proposals that congress may consider to improve the u.s. rare earth position . based on this policy framework , congress and the administration are discussing the impact of china's near - monopoly position in rare earth elements and a range of potential federal investments that would support the development of a vertically integrated rare earth supply chain in the united states .