capital requirements . bank organizations fund themselves with liabilities and capital . capital can absorb losses while the bank continues to meet its obligations on liabilities , and hence avoid failure . safety and soundness regulations require banks to hold a certain amount of capital . following the crisis , some observers asserted that capital requirements should be more stringent , and requirements facing bhcs and certain nonbanks should be at least as stringent as those faced by depositories . proponents argued that bhcs should be a "source of strength" to support distressed depository subsidiaries . they further claimed that differing requirements allowed banking organizations to take on more risk . opponents argued that regulators should have discretion over what should be imposed across different company types to allow for differences in business models . they asserted this was especially true of nonbank institutions , with insurance companies in particular arguing those companies have substantially different risk profiles than banks . interchange fees . when a debit card is used to make a purchase , the merchant making the sale pays a fee — known as the interchange fee — to the bank that issued the debit card ( the issuer ) . the fee is compensation for services provided by the issuer , including facilitating authorization , clearance , and settlement and fraud prevention . the ratio of the value of the dif to domestic deposits is called the reserve ratio . at the onset of the crisis , the fdic insured up to $100,000 per account , and was required to maintain a reserve ratio between 1.15% and 1.5% . during this crisis , the fdic temporarily raised the maximum insured deposit amount to $250,000 , because many depositors held accounts larger than $100,000 . also , the rapid increase in bank failures depleted the dif . observers argued that the fdic needed greater latitude to collect assessments and maintain a higher reserve ratio . title iii also made changes to federal deposit insurance . a new assessment formula is based on the total assets minus the average tangible equity of the depository , rather than on deposits . the minimum dif reserve ratio was raised to 1.35% from 1.15% , and the 1.5% percent maximum was eliminated . the insured deposit limit was permanently raised to $250,000 from $100,000 . risky activities . section 619 of the dodd - frank act — also known as the volcker rule — has two main parts . it prohibits banks from proprietary trading of "risky" assets and from "certain relationships" with risky investment funds ; banks may not "acquire or retain any equity , partnership , or other ownership interest in or sponsor a hedge fund or a private equity fund. the statute carves out exemptions from the rule for trading activities that congress viewed as legitimate for banks to participate in , such as risk - mitigating hedging and market - making related to broker - dealer activities . it also exempts certain securities , including those issued by the federal government , government agencies , states , and municipalities , from the ban on proprietary trading .