appendix a . acronyms used in the report the following laws , agencies , programs , and funds are referred to in this report by their acronym . appendix b . annual spending reductions under the budget control act the budget control act of 2011 ( bca ) amended the balanced budget and emergency deficit control act of 1985 ( bbedca ) by establishing two budget enforcement mechanisms to reduce federal spending by at least $2.1 trillion over the 10-year period fy2012 through fy2021 . first , the bca established enforceable discretionary spending limits , or caps , for defense and nondefense spending for each of those years . second , the bca created a joint committee on deficit reduction to develop legislation to further limit federal spending . the failure of the joint committee to agree on deficit - reduction legislation triggered automatic annual spending reductions for each of fy2013 through fy2021 . the bca specified that a total of $109 billion must be cut each year from nonexempt budget accounts . that amount is equally divided between the categories of defense and nondefense spending . within each category , the spending cuts are allocated proportionately to discretionary spending and nonexempt mandatory ( i.e. , direct ) spending . under the bca , the spending reductions are achieved through two methods: ( 1 ) sequestration ( i.e. , an across - the - board cancellation of budgetary resources ) ; and ( 2 ) lowering the bca - imposed discretionary spending caps . the bca requires that the mandatory spending reductions in each category — defense and nondefense — must be executed in each of fy2013 through fy2021 by a sequestration of all nonexempt accounts , subject to the bbedca sequestration rules . discretionary spending in each category is also subject to sequestration , but only in fy2013 . for each of the remaining fiscal years ( i.e. , fy2014 through fy2021 ) , discretionary spending reductions are to be achieved by lowering the discretionary spending caps for defense and nondefense spending by the total dollar amount of the required reduction . thus , congressional appropriators get to decide how to apportion the cuts within the lowered spending caps rather than having the cuts applied across - the - board to all nonexempt discretionary spending accounts through sequestration . the office of management and budget ( omb ) is responsible for calculating the percentages and amounts by which mandatory and discretionary spending are required to be reduced each year , and for applying the bbedca's sequestration exemptions and rules . congress has amended the bca several times since its enactment in 2011 . the american taxpayer relief act of 2012 ( atra ) revised the discretionary spending caps for fy2013 and fy2014 and reduced the overall dollar amount that needed to be sequestered from fy2013 mandatory defense and nondefense spending . the bipartisan budget act of 2013 established new discretionary spending caps for fy2014 and fy2015 and eliminated the requirement for these caps to be lowered . it also extended the sequestration of mandatory spending in the defense and nondefense categories for two additional years — fy2022 and fy2023 — and specified that the percentage reduction calculated for fy2021 be applied to both those years .