these entities would not have to comply with the res . energy from algae would be eligible to receive triple recs . the res is focused on producing electrical energy . while most current algal biomass research seems to be leading to biofuels development , the opportunity to make a biofuel for producing electricity may exist ( for example , to produce a "synthetic" natural gas or fuel for combustion turbines ) . s. 1462 requires compliance with its renewable electricity standard to begin in 2011 , one year earlier than the house version . the state of hawaii is exempted from compliance in the senate bill . the senate requirement advances to a maximum of 15% renewable electricity ( of which energy efficiency may constitute as much as 26.67% ) ; the house requirement has a maximum of 20% renewable electricity , of which up to 25% may come from energy efficiency . the implementing agency is designated as doe in the senate bill , while the house version has ferc implementing the provision . retail electric suppliers may receive recs for complying with a state res by generating or buying renewable electricity under the senate bill , but not in the house bill . the senate energy bill has no parallel provision to the house bill's recognition of renewable energy programs implemented by states which centrally purchase renewable energy . the alternative compliance payment is 2.1 cents per kilowatt - hour ( kwh ) in the senate energy bill , compared with 2.5 cents per kwh in the house version . acp funds can be used for non - renewable energy deployment or energy efficiency under the senate energy bill , with generation from nuclear , coal with carbon sequestration and storage , and electric vehicle deployment being eligible . direct grants to customers to offset higher costs from the res are also allowed by the senate bill from acp funds . the house does not allow for a waiver of res requirements , while the senate energy bill allows for deferral due to extremes of weather or nature , to avoid utility rate incremental impacts of more than 4% in any year , or because of transmission constraints preventing delivery of service . there is no provision in the house bill for loans to help electric utilities comply with the res . the house bill increases the federal renewable energy purchase requirement beginning in 2012 to 6% , raising it to 20% by 2020 , where it would remain through 2039 . the senate energy bill version stays with the lesser requirements in the energy policy act 2005 . the house bill defines one renewable energy credit as representing one megawatt - hour of renewable electricity ; a similar definition appears to be implicit ( but is not specified ) in the senate energy version . both renewable energy and energy - efficiency credits can be traded under the senate bill , while only renewable electricity credits can be traded under the house legislation . triple credits are granted when electricity is provided through distributed generation ( dg ) . definitions of distributed generation eligible for triple recs differ between the two bills .