in this way the totals in the budget resolution are enforced . however , in some cases , for these revenue totals to be achieved , congress must pass legislation that alters current direct spending and revenue laws . in this situation , congress seeks to reconcile existing law with its current priorities . budget reconciliation is an optional process that assists congress in making these changes . many of the major tax measures enacted in the past few decades have been considered as reconciliation . congress has the option of including reconciliation directives in its annual budget resolution . these directives trigger the reconciliation process , and without their inclusion in a budget resolution , no measure would be eligible to be considered under expedited parliamentary procedures . when reconciliation directives are included in an annual budget resolution , their purpose is to require committees to develop and report legislation that will allow congress to achieve the budgetary goals set forth in the annual budget resolution . these directives detail which committee ( s ) should report reconciliation legislation , the date by which the committee ( s ) should report , the dollar amount of budgetary change that should exist within the legislation , and the time period over which the budgetary change should occur . in this way , the reconciliation process allows the budget committees to assist congress in implementing the budgetary changes outlined in the budget resolution while at the same time protecting legislative committee jurisdiction over direct spending and revenue laws by allowing them to report legislative changes of their choice . sometimes these directives instruct the house ways and means committee , the senate finance committee , or both to report legislation within their jurisdictions that would change current revenue law . in the house , the options for consideration of a measure under the reconciliation process do not differ substantially from those for the consideration of other major legislation . once a specified committee develops and reports legislation to satisfy its directive , the legislation is typically considered either under the terms of a special rule reported from the rules committee or , less frequently , under suspension of the rules . the only major difference in how the house treats measures considered as reconciliation is in how the legislative language is packaged . if a single committee is directed in the budget resolution to develop reconciliation legislation , it will likely be instructed to report this language directly to its full chamber . for example , in 2005 , the ways and means committee was instructed to report to the house a reconciliation bill reducing revenues . the executive branch often uses the term receipts or governmental receipts in place of the term revenues . revenue legislation is often considered under the budget reconciliation process that is governed by special procedures established in the budget act that serve to limit what may be included in reconciliation legislation , prohibit certain amendments , and encourage its timely completion . the collection of revenue is a fundamental component of the federal budget process that provides the government with the money necessary to fund agencies and programs .