111-148 , ppaca ) as amended . this could represent a new market for health insurance producers . given the lack of public data with respect to commission rates and the overall financial position of producers , it is not possible to independently assess the impact of the mlr provision nor is it possible to assess other potential sources of revenue for producers that may replace the reduced health insurance compensation ( eg , selling insurance products not subject to the mlr provision ) . on march 17 , 2011 , representative mike rogers introduced in the house the access to professional health insurance advisors act of 2011 ( h.r . little is known about these costs in relation to premiums . approximately 24 million americans are expected to enroll in individual and small group qualified health plans ( qhps ) offered through the health insurance exchanges established by the patient protection and affordable care act ( p.l . however , their role in the exchanges is not guaranteed by law , and other information sources , such as the mandated consumer web portal , could provide alternatives to the traditional relationship between producers and health insurance consumers . the exchange is to standardize information on insurance options and provide independent helpers for prospective enrollees called "navigators. one could argue therefore , that the exchange itself may reduce the demand for assistance from producers by making it easier to shop for different health insurance for individuals and small employers . moreover , the minimum medical loss ratio ( mlr ) requirements of ppaca will place downward pressures on administrative expenses , including the use of insurance producers . thus , there will be an incentive for insurance companies to cut back on the use of producers or reduce their commissions in order to rein in their administrative expenses . the mlr refers to the percentage of premium revenues spent on medical claims . thus , if a plan received $100 of premiums and spent $85 on medical claims its mlr would be 85% . beginning no later than january 1 , 2011 , ppaca requires a health insurance issuer to provide an annual rebate to each enrollee on a pro rata basis if the ratio of the amount of premium revenue expended by the issuer on clinical claims and health quality costs , after accounting for several factors such as certain taxes and reinsurance , is less than 85% in the large group market and 80% in the small group and individual markets . renewal commissions are usually less than the initial sales commission . large group sales are often conducted by captive agents compensated with a combination of salary , commissions , and bonuses . some observers , including associations of producers , have suggested that the regulatory and market changes resulting from ppaca could put producers out of business . this report provides a brief background on the federal and state roles in regulating insurance producers and the potential impact of the relevant ppaca provisions on the use of producers by health insurance companies .