the section then reviews the available data . literature search to locate the relevant articles , crs first searched the academic search indexes medline , jstor , econlit , and the websites of congressional and policy organizations . additional references were located from the citations within these articles . finally , the table of contents of health affairs for each issue since 2004 was scanned for relevant articles . the report describes many of the located articles . research was generally excluded if it met one or more of the following criteria: was a theoretical exercise designed to build mathematical models of insurance market , was primarily about health retirement accounts ( hras ) , covered post - health insurance reform in massachusetts , or did not describe the methodology used . data sources it has been difficult to calculate enrollment in hdhps and hsas because no comprehensive data source has information on hdhp enrollment , hsa enrollment , and the socioeconomic characteristics of the plan holder . in fact , many of the available data sources are uniquely organized . for example , each source can look at the characteristics , attitudes and / or behaviors of a different analytical "entity. the individual data sources therefore cannot be combined to provide a comprehensive data source . there is some evidence that those individuals who do open hsas have higher income than those who do not . there is almost no evidence that the widespread adoption of hdhps would lower the overall uninsurance rate or modify the operations of insurance markets . the latest data cover january 2010 . two types of data on hsas are available from the irs . first , the number of tax returns that took an hsa deduction and the average value of the deduction are publicly available . the hsa deduction is available to all filers with an hsa ; whether or not the filer itemizes deductions is irrelevant . second , the number of hsas and their aggregate market value are filed by banks ( and other account trustees ) . both the individual and trustee data are available with a considerable time lag , and only data through tax year 2008 have been released . another source of information on hsas is provided by a survey of employers conducted by the kaiser family foundation and the health research and educational trust ( kff - hret ) . this is an annual survey of employer - sponsored health insurance ( esi ) benefits . while this data source contains detailed information on those with esi , it has no information on those who purchase insurance in the non - group market , or those who are uninsured . the sample size in 2009 was 2,054 employers , and the sample is weighted to represent a population of about 3.4 million employers . turning to less general sources , data from the employee benefit research institute ( ebri ) can be used to answer a limited number of questions . in addition , a number of surveys of individual firms provide information on hdhps and hsas belonging to employees at those firms . these and other surveys are described as needed throughout the report . a final data issue concerns the characterization of insurance plan structures .