we have no problem with that at all . this strategy depends on israel's willingness to concede these changes and / or on the ability of the united states to exact concessions from israel . israel fears that hezbollah will characterize any concessions as "victories" and use them to consolidate public support , as it did both in 2000 following israeli withdrawal and again after the war in 2006 . others argue that any short - term gain by hezbollah in terms of popular support would be outweighed by the eventual erosion of its legitimacy . some analysts , observers , and former u.s. government officials have argued that the current u.s. approach to hezbollah is antiquated and that engagement may be the best way to contain and eventually disarm hezbollah . in his testimony before congress , retired ambassador ryan crocker advocated that the u.s. reconsider its policy: we should talk to hezbollah . one thing i learned in iraq is that engagement can be extremely valuable in ending an insurgency . sometimes persuasion and negotiation change minds . but in any case we would learn far more about the organization than we know now — personalities , differences , points of weakness . we cannot mess with our adversary's mind if we are not talking to him . this does not need to be styled as a dramatic change in policy ; simply a matter of fact engagement with those who hold official positions as members of parliament or the cabinet . hezbollah is a part of the lebanese political landscape , and we should deal with it directly . critics of this approach argue that hezbollah is still fundamentally a violent organization and that it remains committed to war with israel and to challenging u.s. interests in the region . observers recently have questioned whether the obama administration may be open to such an approach . in may 2010 , assistant to the president for homeland security and counterterrorism john brennan stated that "there are [sic] certainly the elements of hezbollah that are truly a concern to us what they're doing . and what we need to do is to find ways to diminish their influence within the organization and to try to build up the more moderate elements. the administration has since walked back these comments , and officials at all levels have reiterated that the united states does not engage with terrorist organizations . for the time being , u.s. policy makers at all levels appear to reject this option . syrian and iranian support for hezbollah is well documented ( see " syria " and " iran " above ) , and some analysts have argued that , given that reality , engaging directly with hezbollah will have little effect on the organization's willingness to renounce violence , recognize israel , or disarm , because the power center of the organization and its primary arms supplier are located , respectively , in tehran and damascus . in order to persuade the leadership in iran and syria , the united states could increase the costs of support for hezbollah in a number of ways .