public sector finance reform . transformation of state enterprises , which would privatize some parts of the state oil monopoly pemex . telecommunications sector reform to increase coverage and allow more competition in this sector . labor reform measures to bring more flexibility to the labor market by making it easier for companies to hire and fire . regulatory reform , with the aim of reducing unnecessary government regulations and making the government less bureaucratic . increase of government coordination and citizen participation in the war against organized crime . fundamental political reform , which would allow re - election for some public offices . the prospects for passage of president calderón's proposals by the mexican congress are not viewed as very likely . some of the proposals are viewed as highly controversial and have deep - seated political implications , and efforts to restructure the energy sector or to adopt labor and fiscal reforms have been strongly opposed by the major political parties . this report will be updated as events warrant . based on a nominal gdp of $1.7 trillion in 2009 ( at purchasing power parity or ppp ) mexico's economy is the 11 th - largest economy in the world and the second - largest in latin america , after brazil's . mexico has an open market economy with a strong export sector , though for many years it had strong protectionist trade policies to encourage industrial growth in the domestic economy . the global financial crisis that began in 2008 resulted in a deepening of the recession in the u.s. economy that began in 2007 . the u.s. economic contraction resulted in lower consumer demand in the united states and , consequently , lower demand for goods from mexico . this has adversely affected mexico's gdp growth , employment , production in the manufacturing industry , and investor confidence . though real gdp growth has resumed in the united states , there is concern that the u.s. economy will not return to its pre - recession growth path or will even remain permanently below it . this will likely continue to have effects on economic conditions in mexico . mexico's past economic reforms have helped the country modify its macroeconomic policies and restore policy credibility since the 1995 currency crisis . key reforms included measures to reduce public debt , the introduction of a balanced budget rule , an inflation targeting framework and a floating exchange rate policy . the measures have been successful in stabilizing inflation , achieving balanced federal budgets , reducing public debt , reducing exposures to currency risk , and lowering current account deficits and foreign financing needs . in addition , the government's actions to build up its foreign reserves helped the country to avoid the financial stress that other emerging markets experienced due to the 2008 global financial crisis . despite these improvements , numerous political analysts and economists agree that mexico needs significant political and economic structural reforms to improve its potential for long - term economic growth . the government's responses to the recent global financial crisis helped the country weather the 2009 recession and improve conditions in 2010 .