appendix a . presidential nominations , 110 th congress appendix b . nomination action , 110 th congress appendix c. senate intersession recesses and intrasession recesses of four or more days , 110 th congress appendix d. abbreviations of departments appendix e. change in methodology from previous tracking reports the calculations of nomination - to - confirmation intervals provided in this report counted all the days within the interval , including those during summer recesses and between sessions of the senate . the inclusion of all days differs from the methodology used in similar crs reports for previous congresses . in these earlier reports , days during august and intersession recesses were not included in calculations of nomination - to - confirmation intervals . the rationale for the earlier methodology was that the senate was unlikely to continue consideration of nominations during these periods ; committee hearings and votes , among other activities , typically do not occur during these times . the exclusion of days during only certain periods of adjournment — intersession recesses and august recesses , which are usually longer than 30 days — is suggested by senate rules regarding when nominations are to be returned to the president . these provide , nominations neither confirmed nor rejected during the session at which they are made shall not be acted upon at any succeeding session without being again made to the senate by the president ; and if the senate shall adjourn or take recess for more than thirty days , all nominations pending and not finally acted upon at the time of taking such adjournment or recess shall be returned by the secretary to the president . this earlier methodology was also consistent with the approach of some political scientists who study executive branch appointments . the methodology for this report is different from that which was used in previous similar reports for several reasons . first , as discussed above in the section on recess appointments , from the latter part of the first session through the end of the 110 th congress , the senate chose to break up what would otherwise have been longer recesses into shorter recesses separated by pro forma sessions . this introduced two options for this report with regard to the calculation of nomination - to - confirmation intervals . the first option would have been to treat each series of short recesses created in this fashion as one long recess and to subtract these days from the nomination - to - confirmation interval . the second option would have been to treat each recess in the series of short recesses created in this fashion as a short recess , and not to subtract these days from the nomination - to - confirmation interval . arguably , actions of the senate and the president were consistent with the latter construction — short recesses as short recesses . otherwise , senate rules would have required the return of pending nominations ( or the waiver of that rule ) and the president could have made recess appointments . the senate and the president did not take these actions .