these proposals were not enacted by congress . beginning in fy2005 , appropriations from the iwtf increased significantly as the bush administration requested and congress appropriated greater investments in iwtf - funded projects . previously , some of these options have included capping iwtf withdrawals at the level of current year fuel tax revenues or putting a temporary hold on all new contracts and focusing on ongoing work . both of these options would curtail investments on the inland waterway system to some extent . congress might also stipulate that some or all of the subset of iwtf investments be exempted from wrda 1986 cost - sharing requirements ( similar to the exemption provided by congress in fy2009 enacted appropriations ) . however , an exemption such as this would have an additional cost to taxpayers in the form of funds from the general revenue account . a related question before congress is whether the current cost - share arrangement for inland waterway projects is adequately balanced . the house and senate have also included changes related to inland waterways in recent appropriations bills . in its recommendation for fy2015 , the house appropriations committee funded the olmsted project under the newly enacted wrrda cost - sharing requirement of 15% ( rather than 50% ) from the iwtf . such a scenario would likely increase the current project backlog for corps inland waterways projects . long - term options and proposals to address this situation are discussed in the section below , " inland waterway financing proposals . concerns related to the solvency of the iwtf and the equity of the financing system for fuel - taxed inland waterways have led to a number of recent proposals , first by the bush administration in 2008 , then by the obama administration in 2009 and 2010 . while these proposals were rejected by congress , the administration has recently presented congress with a new recommendation that would raise revenues for the iwtf . the user industry , represented by the iwub , recently adopted its own proposal , which differs significantly from the administration's proposal . the bill would also authorize alterations to iwtf cost - sharing that would make the federal government responsible for 100% of dam construction and any rehabilitation expenditure less than $100 million . s. 407 , the reinvesting in vital economic rivers and waterways act of 2013 ( river act ) would , similar to h.r . 1149 , authorize the primary recommendations of the iwub proposal , except the fuel tax increase would be $0.09 per gallon . additionally , the report proposes to make all cost overruns for iwtf construction projects a 100% federal responsibility . while some note that this provides project managers within the corps an added incentive to keep projects within budget , critics note that the change represents an additional hidden cost to the federal government that is not reflected in the iwub report's estimates . the overall effect of the iwub's proposed changes would be to shift the overall costs for inland waterway projects toward the federal government .