appendix a . north korea — economic sanctions currently imposed in furtherance of u.s. foreign policy or national security objectives appendix b. dprk sanctions: comparison of u.n. security council requirements and u.s. sanction . financial transactions are prohibited . u.s. persons are prohibited from providing financial services for the purpose of evading sanctions , or from providing financial services to a person or entity designated for sanctions . the president , in september 2017 , authorized the secretary of the treasury to designate for sanctions any foreign financial institution that conducts or facilitates "any significant transaction on behalf of any [designated] person," or "in connection with trade with north korea. north korea is designated as a jurisdiction of primary money laundering concern by the department of the treasury's financial crimes enforcement network ( fincen ) , effective december 9 , 2016 . fincen had issued advisories and warnings about north korea's deceptive and illicit banking practices as early as 2005 . this rule is subject to review by the u.s. financial sector and other departments of the u.s. government . if fincen's recommendations are adopted , u.s. banks will be prohibited from providing u.s. correspondent accounts to third - country banks to process transactions for north korean financial institutions . u.s. new investment is prohibited , and investment in north korea's transportation , mining , energy , or financial sectors is prohibited . north korea is also ineligible to participate in any u.s. government program that makes credit , credit guarantees , or investment guarantees available . u.s. f oreign aid is minimal and mostly limited to refugees fleeing north korea ; broadcasting into the country ; nongovernmental organization programs dedicated to democracy promotion , human rights , and governance ; and emergency food aid . in past years , aid related to disabling and dismantling the country's nuclear weapons program has been made available . by law , u.s. representatives in the international financial institutions ( ifi ) are required to vote against any support for north korea due to its nuclear weapons ambitions and international terrorism . human rights and environmental activities would also likely result in u.s. objections to north korea's participation in the ifi . u.s. - based assets are blocked for north korean individuals , entities , and vessels designated by the department of the treasury's office of foreign assets control ( ofac ) . u.s. persons are prohibited from entering into trade and transaction with these designees and , most recently , foreign financial institutions could become subject to u.s. sanctions for facilitating transactions for designated persons . kim jong - un , the korean workers' party , and others — banks , shipping companies , seagoing vessels , state agencies , and other individuals affiliated with the state's security regime — are identified as being among those engaged in illicit and punishable activities , possibly including nuclear or ballistic missile programs , undermining cybersecurity , censorship , and sanctions evasion . as a result , effective march 15 , 2016 , any of their assets under u.s. jurisdiction are frozen , and u.s. persons and entities are prohibited from entering into trade and transactions with the designees . arms sales and arms transfers are fully denied .