for example , h.r . 5987 ( representative pomeroy ) , seniors protection act of 2010 , is likely to be considered before the end of the 111 th congress . 5987 would provide a one - time $250 payment to all social security beneficiaries , including children and disabled beneficiaries receiving ssdi , railroad retirees , ssi recipients , and certain veterans in the event that no social security cola is payable in 2011 . democratic congressional leaders have stated their intent to bring legislation to provide a one - time payment to social security and certain other beneficiaries to the floor when congress returns after the november elections . supporters of a one - time payment view it as a way to stimulate the economy . supporters also intend the payment to assist seniors who may be vulnerable to rising healthcare costs , particularly older seniors and women . others argue that a one - time payment is not necessary because most beneficiaries received an unusually high cola of 5.8% in 2009 and were protected against deflation in a subsequent period . the cpi - w remained below its 2008 peak during the measurement periods used to determine the 2010 and 2011 colas . opponents also cite the budget cost of providing a one - time payment , which would vary depending on who receives the payment . in addition , some research suggests that the provision would not be an effective stimulus measure , particularly when compared to other policy options . in august 2002 , bls introduced a supplemental new index , the chained cpi - u ( c - cpi - u ) , in response to concerns raised by the boskin commission about the methodology underlying the consumer price index for all urban consumers ( cpi - u ) . the goal of the c - cpi - u is to eliminate substitution bias , which affects the cpi - u because the latter index does not accurately capture how consumers change their buying habits in response to price changes . as a result , the cpi - u and related indices , such as the cpi - w ( used as the base for the social security cola ) , overestimate how much money is needed to maintain a constant standard of living . bls has issued a c - cpi - u series that begins in december 1999 . since 1999 , the c - cpi - u has generally increased more slowly than the cpi - u and other bls inflation indices . between the third quarter of 2000 and the third quarter of 2010 , the c - cpi - u increased by a total of 23.3% , the cpi - u increased 26.1% , the cpi - e increased 26.2% , and the cpi - w increased 27.5% . from the third quarter of 2008 to the third quarter of 2009 , however , the c - cpi - u rose 0.9 percentage point less than the cpi - u and 0.4 percentage point less than the cpi - w. to date , the c - cpi - u has not been incorporated into any indexing provisions of federal government programs .