111-147 ) , for example . members of congress nonetheless remain interested in the labor market's response to these measures to help them decide how well the legislation has worked and whether additional job creation as well as retraining legislation may be warranted in light of the pace and composition of job growth during the ongoing recovery . this report provides a snapshot of the current situation in the labor market to better inform policymakers with regard to further assisting the unemployed , such as workers laid off from industries that may have permanently downsized employment ( eg , construction ) . one way to assess the extent and nature of the recovery in the labor market is to compare employment data from the recession's end in june 2009 ( i.e. , the trough of the business cycle ) with more recent data gathered in surveys that the government regularly conducts . as shown in column 5 of table 2 , employment of black workers fell by 5.9% whereas employment of white workers fell by 4.1% between december 2007 and june 2009 . since then , the employment of black workers has rebounded more strongly than that of white workers . ( see columns 6 and 7. ) hispanics , who can be of any race , have experienced comparatively strong job growth during the recovery ( 12.3% ) after their employment fell by 4.1% during the recession . ( see columns 7 and 5 , respectively , in table 2 . ) in september 2012 , the employment of hispanics substantially exceeded its level at the recession's start , as shown in the table's last column . some might regard this as surprising because , according to bls data from the current population survey , one in four workers in the construction industry were of hispanic origin in 2006 ( the last full year before the recession's onset ) . however , hispanics also comprised over one in five workers in the accommodation and food services industry in that year . the industry is part of the leisure and hospitality group which , as of march 2012 , had recouped all of the jobs it lost during the recession . the lower a worker's educational attainment , the worse they typically fared between december 2007 and september 2012 . as shown in the last column of table 2 , employment over the 57-month period decreased by 12.3% among workers without a high school diploma and by 8.1% among those with a high school diploma . in contrast , employment increased by 0.6% among workers with some college or an associate's degree and by 6.7% among workers with a bachelor's or advanced diploma . ( see columns 6 through 9. ) in contrast , employment in the private sector did not start a sustained increase until 12 months into the recovery from the 1990-1991 recession , and until 21 months into the recovery from the 2001 recession . private - sector employment rebounded more strongly during all but one of the prior 10 recoveries . as shown in column 7 of table 1 , employment at private - sector firms in september 2012 was 3.3% above its level at the recovery's start .