as noted , hi and smi are financed very differently . hi is funded by current workers through a payroll tax , while smi is funded by premiums from current beneficiaries and federal general revenues . because of this financing , the smi trust fund's income is projected to equal expenditures for all future years . 113-67 ) extended sequestration for mandatory spending for an additional two years — through fy2023 . part d provides optional outpatient prescription drug coverage through private plans . 113-82 ) , which , among other things , included a provision to extend bca's sequester of mandatory spending through fy2024 . section 256 ( d ) of the balanced budget and emergency deficit control act of 1985 ( bbedca , p.l . 99-177 ) contains special rules for the medicare program in the event of a sequestration . medicare serves approximately one in six americans and virtually all of the population aged 65 and over . in 2013 , the program covered 52.3 million persons ( 43.5 million aged and 8.8 million disabled ) at a total cost of $583 billion , accounting for about 20% of national health spending and 3.5% of gross domestic product ( gdp ) . medicare is an entitlement program , which means that it is required to pay for covered services provided to enrollees so long as specific criteria are met . since 1965 , the medicare program has undergone considerable change . for example , the patient protection and affordable care act ( aca , p.l . 111-148 as amended ) , made numerous changes to the medicare program that modify provider reimbursements , provide incentives to increase the quality and efficiency of care , and enhance certain medicare benefits . for example , under the legislation , annual updates of the prices paid by medicare for almost all non - physician categories of health services are being reduced by the growth in economy - wide productivity ( productivity adjustments ) . the aca also established a new independent payment advisory board ( ipab ) , which is required to make recommendations to reduce medicare spending in years in which medicare costs are projected to exceed a target growth rate . the legislation did not , however , make changes to the physician sustainable growth rate ( sgr ) payment system ; unless congress takes action before april 1 , 2015 , reductions in physician payment rates of about 21% will be required . additionally , the budget control act of 2011 ( bca ; p.l . 112-25 ) provided for increases in the debt limit and established procedures designed to reduce the federal budget deficit , including the creation of a joint select committee on deficit reduction . the failure of the joint committee to propose deficit reduction legislation by its mandated deadline triggered automatic spending reductions ( "sequestration" of mandatory spending and reductions in discretionary spending ) in fiscal years 2013 through 2021 . it is possible that in the future , advances in medical technology , changes in consumer preferences , shifts in the health status of the population , or changes in the way health care services are delivered could result in very different financial outcomes from those estimated in the trustees report .