blackouts . some national football league teams are not selling out tickets to their home games . they often would prefer to televise those games to hometown fans in order to foster broad - based interest in and support for the team , but league rules impose a blackout on games when tickets are not sold out 72 hours in advance of the game . the nfl has made the determination that it is beneficial to the league to black out those games , even if the home team and its fans are harmed . nfl officials are concerned that if a stadium is only half full , it also harms the quality of the televised program because viewers prefer to see the frenzy of a full stadium of fans cheering on their team . in many cases , the team's stadium was directly or indirectly funded by a governmental entity , and taxpayers may feel deceived if they have borne some of the costs of the stadium but are denied television access to the games . if blackouts were prohibited and as a result stadium attendance fell because some fans chose to watch the games on television rather than at the stadium , team revenues and local tax revenues from ticket sales and food and parking concessions could fall . in the extreme case , a team's ability to make lease payments to the stadium owner could be impaired . in most situations , however , the fall in stadium attendance would be too small for the impact on team revenues and tax revenues to be substantial . is market intervention justified if a league's joint profit maximizing behavior is harmful to a team and that team's community and , if so , can an intervention be devised that is not itself harmful ? bundling . consider a major sports entity with programming that is so intensely valued by a sufficiently large minority of households ( who would threaten to abandon a multichannel video provider that does not carry that programming ) that the sports entity can insist that all multichannel video providers carry that programming on their tier with the largest subscriber base , even if the multichannel video provider would prefer to carry it on a special sports tier . this may maximize revenues for the sports entity but at the expense of a majority of multichannel video subscribers who do not watch that programming but must bear some of its cost . is market intervention justified if it can be shown that there is significant loss in consumer welfare as a result and , if so , can an intervention be devised that is not itself harmful ? "free" broadcasts . with more than 85% of all u.s. households subscribing to a multichannel video provider , and more than 90% of those households purchasing more than just a basic package of programming , is there any public policy basis for market intervention to keep sports programming on "free" broadcast television ? if so , can intervention be devised that is not itself harmful ? nbc news was quite profitable then and remains so .