for example , p.l . 98-162 authorized the commission on the eleanor roosevelt centennial to "accept donations of money , supplies , and services to carry out its responsibilities. in addition , some commissions , such as the centennial of flight commission , are provided with the authority to accept only nonmonetary donations . in that instance , the statutory language stated , donations. — the commission may accept donations of personal services and historic materials relating to the implementation of its responsibilities under the provisions of this act . none of the 21 commemorative commission statutes discussed in this report contain language specifically authorizing fundraising . commissions , however , could be provided with authority to fundraise . to provide statutory fundraising authority , a commemorative commission could be given language similar to the authority given to commissions charged with creating monuments and memorials under the commemorative works act , which requires the commission to raise a certain percentage of the total costs from private sources of a monument or memorial before construction can begin . for example , the national museum of african american history and culture plan for action presidential commission statute contains the following language authorizing fundraising: fundraising plan. — the commission shall develop a fundraising plan for supporting the creation and maintenance of the museum through contributions by the american people , and a separate plan on fundraising by the african american community . congressional commission costs vary widely . these appropriations have not appeared as specific line - items in appropriations acts . instead , they have been budgeted within agency appropriations under the headings "operations of the national park system" or "national recreation and preservation. for example , the jamestown 400 th commemoration commission was funded in fy2005 under the "national recreation and preservation" heading of the nps appropriations , as part of a larger appropriation for related activities for the jamestown 2007 celebration . in some cases , the operational expenses of the commission itself have been entirely funded through the appropriation of federal funds . however , legislation has authorized most commemorative commissions to accept donations , including donations of money , property , personal services , memorabilia , or volunteer labor . similarly , p.l . 106-550 authorized the james madison commemorative commission to accept donations of money , personal services , and property , both real and personal , including books , manuscripts , miscellaneous printed matter , memorabilia , relics , and other material related to james madison . in some cases , the authorizing language placed specific limitations on donations . for example , p.l . 98-375 authorized the christopher columbus quincentenary commission to accept donations of money , property , or personal services , except that the commission may not accept donations ( 1 ) the aggregate value of which exceeds $25,000 , in the case of an individual ; or ( 2 ) the aggregate value of which exceeds $50,000 in the case of donations from a foreign government , a corporation , a partnership , or any other person . in at least one case , the authorizing language specified that only donated funds could be used to pay for commission expenses . for example , p.l .