are the mdgs practical ? some experts contend that the goals provide unrealistic expectations for countries or regions , particularly those starting out at a lower economic threshold than others . moreover , some argue that the scope and breadth of the mdgs , and a lack of prioritization among them , have affected their progress . what is the role of foreign aid in the mdgs ? some maintain that in order for the mdgs to be fulfilled by 2015 , donor countries must fulfill existing aid commitments and make new ones . others , however , argue that higher aid levels do not necessarily lead to greater development impacts . who or what is held accountable for mdg progress ? on september 22 , the high - level meeting concluded with the adoption of general assembly resolution 65 / 1 , a "global action plan" to achieve the mdgs by 2015 . in the resolution , entitled keeping the promise: united to achieve the millennium development goals , governments reaffirmed the mdgs and welcomed progress made toward their achievement — recognizing that they can be met with "renewed commitments , effective implementation and intensified collective action by all member states. at the same time , governments recognized that progress toward the goals is uneven among regions and between and within countries , and expressed "deep concern" that progress toward the goals "falls short of what is needed. no new financial commitments were made by governments in the resolution . instead , governments called for the "expeditious delivery of [aid] commitments already made by developed countries" in the context of the monterrey consensus and the doha declaration . in the resolution , governments also committed to specific measures related to each of the eight goals in the next five years , and requested the general assembly to review progress made toward the goals , and the implementation of the resolution , on an annual basis . to follow up on these efforts , member states agreed to hold a general assembly special event on the mdgs in 2013 . countries also requested that the secretary - general continue to report annually to the general assembly on progress toward the goals , and to recommended steps for advancing the u.n. development agenda beyond 2015 . during the meeting , the united nations , governments , non - governmental organizations ( ngos ) , and private sector entities also announced individual development commitments . several organizations and governments , for example , pledged a combined $40 billion over the next five years to accelerate progress on women's and children's health through the secretary - general's global strategy for women's and children's health .