the aiib has generated controversy . some analysts say it will help asian countries meet their infrastructure investment needs . however , some analysts and policymakers have raised concerns about the transparency and governance of china - funded development projects and see the aiib proposal potentially undermining decades of efforts by the united states and others to improve governance , environmental , social , and procurement standards at the multilateral development banks . the united states and south korea have cooperated in the peaceful use of nuclear energy for nearly 60 years . this cooperation includes commercial projects as well as research and development work on safety , safeguards , advanced nuclear reactors , and fuel cycle technologies . on june 15 , 2015 , the united states and the republic of korea signed a renewal of their civilian nuclear cooperation agreement , known as a "123 agreement. the agreement provides the legal foundation for nuclear trade between the countries ; it provides the legal foundation for export licensing . the new agreement's duration is 20 years , after which it automatically will renew for an additional five - year period unless either or both parties choose to withdraw . the two governments initialed the text of the agreement in april 2015 . an agreement did not require an affirmative vote of approval from congress . it entered into force on november 25 , 2015 , after a mandatory congressional review period . during her october 2015 visit to washington , dc , former president park described the civilian nuclear cooperation agreement as one of the three "major institutional frameworks of our alliance," alongside the u.s. - south korea mutual defense treaty and the korus fta . the agreement provides for a new high - level bilateral commission ( hlbc ) where the two sides would review cooperation under the agreement . the hlbc held its most recent meeting in january 2017 , in washington , dc . the commission is to "serve as a senior - level forum to facilitate strategic dialogue and technical exchanges on peaceful nuclear cooperation between the two countries. it provides a discussion forum about "management of spent nuclear fuel , the promotion of nuclear exports and export control cooperation , assurances of nuclear fuel supply , and nuclear security. there are four working groups: spent fuel management , the promotion of nuclear exports and export control cooperation , assured fuel supply , and nuclear security . the hlbc meeting was co - chaired by u.s. deputy secretary of energy elizabeth sherwood - randall and second vice minister of foreign affairs ambassador ahn chong - ghee . both countries have called the new 123 agreement a success . south korean foreign minister yun byung - se said that the agreement was "future - oriented" and would facilitate "modern and mutually beneficial cooperation. former u.s. secretary of energy ernest moniz said that the agreement would solidify the alliance and would "enable expanded cooperation between our respective nuclear industries , and reaffirm our two governments' shared commitment to nonproliferation. the future of fuel cycle technology in south korea was a contentious issue during the negotiation of the new section 123 agreement .