appendix a . eligible countries and products imported by preference progra . leaving the programs largely as they are is one . it applies to developing countries as a whole . in addition , there are four regional programs that followed , created in the andean trade preference act ( apta ) , the caribbean basin economic recovery act ( cbera ) ; the caribbean basin trade partnership act ( cbtpa ) , the african growth and opportunity act ( agoa ) , and the haitian opportunity through partnership encouragement ( hope ) act ( discussed in detail below ) . many of these countries receive foreign investment based on u.s. trade preferences , resulting in increased employment in certain industries . the regional programs were built on the gsp concept , but are more targeted and tend to offer more generous and flexible access to the u.s. market . because these are complex programs with multiple design features , evaluating them is a challenging and complicated exercise . when the gt rate is 5% or less , the preferential rate is zero . other developed countries also offer regional preferences , or preferences that "reward" developing countries that comply with additional eligibility criteria such as anti - corruption measures , environmental sustainability goals , or core worker rights provisions . for example , the european union offers additional duty - free access to its market to ldc beneficiaries under the "everything but arms" preference , as well as an incentive - based program ( known as gsp+ ) that provides enhanced benefits for "vulnerable countries" ( in terms of size or limited diversification in its exports ) . gsp+ beneficiaries must have ratified and effectively implemented 27 specified international conventions in the fields of human rights , core labor standards , sustainable development , and good governance . also in the wto , as a part of the doha round of multilateral trade negotiations , developed country members and "developing country members declaring themselves in a position to do so" agreed to provide "duty - free and quota - free" ( dfqf ) market access for all products originating from all least - developed countries "in a manner that ensures stability , security , and predictability. members "facing difficulties" would be permitted to exempt 3% of all tariff lines , provided that steps are taken to build the list of covered products until total dfqf is reached . since the dda is a "single undertaking" ( which means that nothing is finally agreed until everything is agreed ) , the dfqf agreement reached in 2005 , will not be implemented until the negotiating round is concluded . like all public policies , the costs and benefits do not fall uniformly to all affected parties . this is reflected in various stakeholder responses to trade preferences . supporters include beneficiary developing country governments , producers , workers , and exporters . for these countries , jobs and related income created by u.s. trade preference programs have become an important element for economic growth and development . the multilateral trading system that has evolved since the end of world war ii is centered on the guiding tenet of non - discrimination .