appendix a . country counterterrorism profiles the profiles below provide an overview of u.s. counterterrorism priorities and related strategic concerns in east african countries , briefly describing u.s. efforts to counter terrorism and radicalization . hearings on al shabaab's recruitment efforts in the united states: senate homeland and governmental affairs committee , "violent islamist extremism: al - shabaab recruitment in america," march 11 , 2009 ; and "nine years after 9 / 11: confronting the terrorist threat to the homeland," september 22 , 2010 . house homeland security committee , "the evolving nature of terrorism," september 15 , 2010 . house homeland security subcommittee on intelligence , information sharing and terrorism risk assessment , series of hearings held by the on may 26 , 2010 ; march 17 , 2010 ; december 15 , 2009 ; and november 19 , 2009 . hearings on political instability and terrorist activities in somalia: house foreign affairs subcommittee on africa and global health , "the horn of africa: current conditions and u.s. policy," june 17 , 2010 ; and "somalia: prospects for a lasting peace and a unified response to extremism and terrorism," june 25 , 2009 senate foreign relations committee , "developing a coordinated and sustainable strategy for somalia," may 20 , 2009 hearing by the senate armed services committee , "u.s. policy toward yemen and somalia," april 29 , 2010 . hearings on u.s. efforts to counter terrorism: senate armed services subcommittee on emerging threats and capabilities , "strategies for countering violent extremist ideologies," march 10 , 2010 house armed services subcommittee on terrorism , unconventional threats and capabilities , "strategies for countering violent extremism," february 12 , 2009 senate foreign relations committee , "engaging with muslim communities around the world," february 26 , 2009 . house foreign affairs committee , "u.s. strategy for countering jihadist websites," september 29 , 2010 . house financial services subcommittee on oversight and investigations , "a review of current and evolving trends in terrorism financing," september 28 , 2010 . what challenges remain ? to what extent are counterterrorism programs accompanied by effective communications and public affairs strategies to explain their aims ? how are u.s. counterterrorism efforts perceived by host country populations ? is there a comprehensive counter - radicalization strategy guiding counterterrorism - related development and civil affairs interventions ? how are counterterrorism programs balanced between military and law enforcement or judicial assistance , and between security assistance and "development" programs , such as efforts to counter extremist ideologies ? are these programs effective in countering or preventing extremism ? could they be improved ? in november 2001 , the chairman of the house subcommittee on africa declared in a hearing on africa and the war on global terrorism , "it is clear that in the fight against terrorism , no region can be ignored , especially not africa. in that hearing , former assistant secretary of state for african affairs susan rice , who is now the u.s . ambassador to the united nations , testified that africa was "the world's soft underbelly for global terrorism. congress has maintained an active interest in terrorist threats over the past decade , and has focused increasingly on the growing capabilities of aq affiliates .