the cpgs capability would provide that choice . in the 2010 nuclear posture review , the obama administration extended this logic to regional deterrence and the assurance of u.s. allies . if the united states had a wider range of credible conventional weapons that it could turn to when defending its allies and forces overseas , there could be fewer circumstances in which the united states might feel compelled to resort to nuclear weapons for regional deterrence . this would not only reduce the role of nuclear weapons in regional deterrence , it might also increase the credibility of the u.s. deterrent . details on funding for this account are described below . the original prompt global strike mission requirements were based on the assumption that a future conflict would take place far from existing u.s. bases overseas , and possibly far from ocean areas where the united states had deployed most of its sea - based forces . however , even shorter - range prompt strike weapons can raise concerns about crisis stability , particularly if they can maneuver to avoid defenses and change direction to conceal their intended targets . a nation facing an attack with such weapons may believe it has to respond promptly , or even preemptively , during a crisis . if u.s. forces faced the same calculation , both parties could face the risk of a crisis escalating to conflict with little notice . it was also assumed that a future conflict could develop quickly , allowing too little time for the united states to move its forces into the region , either by acquiring basing rights on land or by moving sea - based forces closer to the theater of conflict . further , the concern about hidden or relocatable targets reflected an assumption that targets could appear with little notice and remain vulnerable for a short period of time , factors that placed a premium on the ability to launch quickly and arrive on target quickly . the requirements also assumed that u.s. forces were likely to face an "anti - access" threat , or air defense capabilities that would impede operations by u.s. aircraft . many of these characteristics were present in afghanistan in 2001 , when the united states attacked al qaeda training camps and the taliban government after the september 11 terrorist attacks . the attacks on the united states came without warning , and , although the united states took several weeks to plan its response and acquire the needed intelligence information on target areas , speed was of the essence if the united states hoped to trap and destroy leaders at the training camps in afghanistan . the united states had no military bases in the region and had to take the time to acquire basing rights in nearby nations and to move u.s. naval forces into the region . further , the mountainous terrain offered the enemy areas where their leadership could hide and hope to evade attack . however , these characteristics may not be present in most , or even many , future conflicts .