as such , it does not have a binding effect on school curricula . the debate over curriculum restrictions has continued over the years . as recently as 2005 , a federal district court held that a pennsylvania school district policy that mandated teaching "intelligent design" as an alternative explanation to the theory of evolution violated the first amendment . the court found that the policy communicated a message of endorsement of a particular religious belief in violation of the establishment clause because , according to the court , the theory of intelligent design was an outgrowth of creationism and was not science . the court explained that the school district implemented the policy to advance religion , relying on the policy's plain language , its legislative history , and the historical context of intelligent design . as mentioned earlier , curriculum decisions are typically within the purview of state and local governing bodies , not congress . however , in the congressional debate over reauthorization of esea in 2001 , the senate passed what is often referred to as the santorum amendment , which stated that: it is the sense of the senate that —     ( 1 ) good science education should prepare students to distinguish the data or testable theories of science from philosophical or religious claims that are made in the name of science ; and     ( 2 ) where biological evolution is taught , the curriculum should help students to understand why this subject generates so much continuing controversy , and should prepare the students to be informed participants in public discussions regarding the subject . worded generally to express the senate's policy perspective , the amendment did not introduce any requirements for curriculum choices in schools . constitutional rules governing prayer in public schools vary depending upon the context of the particular religious expression at issue . generally , schools , administrators , and teachers may not require or lead students in religious activities , but students may engage in private religious observances while in school . that is , the court has made explicit a constitutional distinction between the sponsorship of religious activities in the schools by government and the conduct of such activities by students on their own initiative . leas are required to provide students who transfer to different schools with transportation and must give priority in choosing schools to the lowest - achieving children from low - income families . if , after being identified for school improvement , a school does not make ayp for another year , it must be identified for a second year of school improvement by the end of that school year . all students attending a school identified for a second year of school improvement must continue to be offered the option of attending another eligible public school within the same lea . this report will highlight the legal and policy issues that arise in the context of elementary and secondary education programs .