section 744 of h.r . 2112 , as passed by the house on june 16 , 2011 , would have prohibited the food and drug administration from spending fy2012 funds to approve any application for genetically engineered salmon . on september 7 , 2011 , the senate committee on appropriations reported h.r . 2112 , without the prohibition on fda related to genetically engineered salmon ( s.rept . 112-73 ) , and this provision was not in the subsequently enacted p.l . s. 1717 would have prohibited the sale of genetically altered salmon . on december 15 , 2011 , the senate commerce , science , and transportation subcommittee on oceans , atmosphere , fisheries , and coast guard held an oversight hearing on the environmental risks of genetically engineered fish . on may 24 , 2012 , s.amdt . 2108 to s. 3187 was defeated , proposing to prohibit approval by fda of genetically engineered fish unless noaa concurred with such approval . no further action was taken on any of these bills by the 112 th congress . one gm fish has been marketed to date . farmers and scientists have a history of modifying animals to maximize desirable traits . genetic modification is one of the current approaches for modifying animals to increase their beneficial traits . in the broadest sense , genetic modification refers to changes in an organism's genetic makeup not occurring in nature , including the production of conventional hybrids . with the advent of modern biotechnology ( eg , genetic engineering or bioengineering ) , it is now possible to take the gene ( or genes ) for a specific trait either from an organism of the same species or from an entirely different one and transfer it to create an organism having a unique genetic code . this technique can add both speed and efficiency to the development of new foods and products . genetically engineered plant varieties , such as herbicide - resistant corn and soybeans , have already been widely adopted by u.s. farmers , and some advocate using similar techniques to produce genetically engineered fish or seafood for the aquaculture industry . a number of environmental concerns have been raised related to the development of genetically modified ( gm ) fish , including the potential for detrimental competition with wild fish , and possible interbreeding with wild fish so as to allow the modified genetic material to escape into the wild fish population . sterilization and bioconfinement have been proposed as means of isolating gm fish to minimize the potential for harming wild fish populations . in the process of congressional oversight of executive agency regulatory action , concerns have been raised about the adequacy of the u.s. food and drug administration's review of applications for approval of gm animals , with respect to the potential for environmental harm . in response to these concerns , several bills were introduced in the 112 th congress seeking to declare gm fish unsafe or require that gm fish be specifically labeled as such . no final action was taken on these bills in the 112 th congress . scientists are seeking ways to genetically engineer fish and other seafood species to introduce or amplify economically valuable traits .