these projects are known as small starts . the rest of the funding authorized over the five - year life of safetea , about $7.4 billion of the overall $8 billion for fy2005 through fy2009 , was for major new starts projects . federal funding for major new starts projects is typically committed in a full funding grant agreement ( ffga ) , usually a multi - year agreement between the federal government and a transit agency . an ffga establishes the terms and conditions for federal financial participation , including the maximum amount of federal funding being committed . to obtain an ffga , a project must be authorized in law , and a project sponsor must pass through a series of steps that make up the new starts approval process ( figure 1 ) . according to federal law , the process for obtaining an ffga begins with a regional , multimodal planning process that includes systems planning and alternatives analysis . systems planning examines the transportation needs of a region . alternatives analysis examines the benefits and costs of different options , such as light rail or bus rapid transit ( brt ) , in a specific transportation corridor or regional subarea . one of the alternatives that must be included is the "baseline alternative," which is defined by fta as "the best that can be done to address identified transportation needs in the corridor without a major capital investment in new infrastructure. the conclusion of the alternatives analysis is the selection of a locally preferred alternative ( lpa ) , which is submitted by the project sponsor to fta for evaluation and approval for entry into preliminary engineering . new starts projects must also fulfill the requirements of the national environmental policy act of 1969 ( nepa ) because they involve a proposed major federal action significantly affecting the environment . fta requires a project to have moved beyond the nepa scoping phase before entering preliminary engineering . nepa scoping involves identifying the alternatives that will be examined in the nepa documents and the significant environmental issues that arise from the proposed project . preliminary engineering involves the project sponsor refining the project by examining the costs , benefits , and impacts of different design alternatives , and completing an analysis of environmental impacts as required by nepa . once preliminary engineering is complete , fta may approve the project for final design . final design includes the preparation of final construction plans and cost estimates , and may also include right - of - way acquisition and utility relocation . after final design is complete , fta may approve the project for an ffga , at which point the project may move into the construction phase . fta retains some oversight of a project as it is constructed . moreover , fta must request the funding that is to be provided under the terms of the ffga for each approved project from congress each fiscal year . in some cases , fta may assure a project sponsor of its intention to obligate funds for a project through what is known as a letter of intent ( 49 u.s.c . ยง5309 ( g ) ( 1 ) ) .