bioenergy is renewable energy derived from biomass . 96-294 ) §203 ( 4 ) ( b ) — defines biomass energy , in part , as energy or steam derived from the direct combustion of biomass for the generation of electricity , mechanical power , or industrial process heat . there are several types of biomass feedstock available as a fuel source for electric power generation ( see table 1 ) . these sources include land - and water - based vegetation ( eg , trees , algae ) , as well as other organic wastes . the type , amount , and costs of biomass feedstocks will largely determine whether biopower can thrive as a major renewable energy alternative . stakeholders differ on what are ideal feedstocks for biopower and what are feasible locations to grow and harvest feedstock . biomass feedstock plays a critical role in biopower plant feasibility studies , especially feedstock storage and transport and other economic and environmental criteria . these issues contribute to uncertainty about the biopower market . comprehensive , national - level data on the current and future biomass feedstock supply is not available . in the future , the potential inclusion of genetically modified dedicated energy crops or selective breeding for bioenergy purposes may alter the amount of biomass feedstock available for biopower production ( and could impact water quantity and quality , air quality , and land use ) . biomass is converted to biopower via thermochemical and biochemical conversion processes . these processes include combustion ( or firing ) , pyrolysis , gasification , and anaerobic digestion ( see box below and figure 1 ) . essentially , plants use photosynthesis to store energy ( carbon - based molecules ) within cell walls , and that energy is released , or converted , when the biomass undergoes a chemical process ( such as combustion ) or a biological process ( such as anaerobic digestion ) . the type of conversion technology selected for a specific biomass feedstock results in differing amounts of useful energy recovered and forms for that energy . the technologies are at varying stages of maturity , with combustion ( eg , co - firing ) being the most established . small - scale systems ( or modular units ) may be an optimal choice for rural areas with limited electricity demand . large - scale systems may be more economically suitable in urbanized areas or near grid connections if feedstocks are ample . the federal government supports biopower with multiple initiatives including tax incentives , grant programs , research and development efforts , and more . additionally , there are state initiatives that support biopower . some of the federal biopower initiatives that have been available to industry are described below . biopower potentially straddles at least three policy areas: agriculture , energy , and the environment . articulated perspectives on biopower thus far generally have focused on biopower's s. 1294 impact on one of the aforementioned policy areas . this section discusses , in general terms , some of the reasons for the support and opposition . although significant challenges remain regarding any future large - scale development , biopower production could increase in the coming years to satisfy state renewable portfolio standards .