111-212 respectively ) . to date , the united states is providing a total of $561.9 million for pakistan relief and recovery , largely coming from international disaster assistance ( ida ) and food for peace ( ffp ) funds . ( see table 2 . ) in - kind civilian and military support , such as the pre - fabricated steel bridges , halal meals , and air transport , amounts to another $89.1 million , according to usaid . prior to the flooding emergency , the united states provided humanitarian aid to pakistan to address the january 2010 landslides , conflict - affected displaced people ( referred to as complex emergency funds ) , and pre - 2010 earthquake expenses . ( see table 3 . ) a potential issue for congress is whether the purpose of these funds , as well as the authorized economic development funds from the eppa 2009 , should be changed to reflect flood relief efforts and changed circumstances caused by the flood . if the funds are redirected , then there could be concerns as to how the original objectives of the funding will be met . the united states agency for international development ( usaid ) is leading all u.s. government humanitarian response efforts to pakistan . nearly 30 u.s. military helicopters and four c - 130 planes were involved in delivering humanitarian supplies . these included emergency food supplies , plastic sheeting , inflatable rescue boats , concrete - cutting saw kits , shelters , blankets , water storage bladders , and water filtration units among other things . twenty - six u.s. mobile medical teams were providing health care services , which were needed because about 450 health facilities were destroyed or damaged by the floods , according to ocha . the humanitarian implications of the flooding in pakistan are vast . humanitarian issues such as health , sufficient food , water , and shelter , and displaced populations exist . various offices under the united nations are coordinating with the government of pakistan to address humanitarian needs in the country . the united nations released the pakistan initial floods emergency response plan ( piferp ) on august 11 , 2010 , seeking approximately $460 million to respond to the immediate relief needs of flood - affected people . the money is to be used to enable international partners ( u.n. and non - governmental organizations ) help the pakistani government address residual relief needs and recovery needs for the next year . this plan covered 12 humanitarian clusters including water and sanitation , health , shelter , agriculture , food , community restoration , protection , education , nutrition , logistics , coordination , and camp management . funding needs for each cluster are identified in the plan , and planned activities under each cluster are listed . coordinating entities for each cluster are listed and range from the food and agriculture organization ( fao ) for agricultural needs to the united nations development program ( undp ) for community restoration needs . monitoring and methods for evaluating progress are also included in the plan . in november 2010 , a revised plan was issued by the u.n .