section 783 ) . it would have been the first law to penalize disclosure of information to entities other than foreign governments or their equivalent solely because it is classified , without a more specific definition of the type of information covered . in short , the provision would have made it a crime to disclose or attempt to disclose classified information to any person who does not have authorized access to such information , with exceptions covering disclosures to article iii courts , or to the senate or house committees or members , and authorized disclosures to persons acting on behalf of a foreign power ( including an international organization ) . the provision would have amended the espionage laws in title 18 by expanding the scope of information they cover . the proposed language was intended to make it easier for the government to prosecute unauthorized disclosures of classified information , or "leaks" of information , that might not amount to a violation of current statutes . the language was also intended to ease the government's burden of proof in such cases by eliminating the need "to prove that damage to the national security has or will result from the unauthorized disclosure," substituting a requirement to show that the unauthorized disclosure was of information that "is or has been properly classified" under a statute or executive order . the 106 th congress passed the measure as part of the intelligence authorization act for fiscal year 2001 . president clinton , however , vetoed it , calling it "well - intentioned" as an effort to deal with legitimate concerns about the damage caused by unauthorized disclosures , but "badly flawed" in that it was "overbroad" and posed a risk of "unnecessarily chill[ing] legitimate activities that are at the heart of a democracy. president clinton explained his view that [a] desire to avoid the risk that their good faith choice of words — their exercise of judgment — could become the subject of a criminal referral for prosecution might discourage government officials from engaging even in appropriate public discussion , press briefings , or other legitimate official activities . similarly , the legislation may unduly restrain the ability of former government officials to teach , write , or engage in any activity aimed at building public understanding of complex issues . incurring such risks is unnecessary and inappropriate in a society built on freedom of expression and the consent of the governed and is particularly inadvisable in a context in which the range of classified materials is so extensive . in such circumstances , this criminal provision would , in my view , create an undue chilling effect . the 107 th congress considered passing an identical provision , but instead directed the attorney general and heads of other departments to undertake a review of the current protections against the unauthorized disclosure of classified information and to issue a report recommending legislative or administrative actions . an identical measure was introduced late in the 109 th congress , but was not reported out of committee .