the suit seeks monetary damages . in 2009 , the district court held that the federal nuisance claim was barred by political question doctrine and lack of standing . the village appealed to the ninth circuit , which stayed the case pending the supreme court decision in american electric power . the reactivation of this case is the first judicial development following that decision . private nuisance actions are brought by the aggrieved landowner . and should the defendants' contribution to worldwide ghg emissions be viewed as de minimis — too small for a court to bother with ? questions of remedy are likely to be particularly intractable: what amount of emission reduction , or monetary compensation , should be required of a defendant given the likely miniscule fraction of worldwide ghg emissions contributed by that defendant ? nonetheless , the use of nuisance lawsuits to attack climate change has its defenders . they argue with some merit that even though nuisance law has never been used to deal with a problem as complex as climate change , many harms attributed to climate change — ecosystem and weather modifications , increased flooding , and harm to human health — are of a type traditionally covered by nuisance doctrine . and the supreme court has recognized that "public nuisance law , like common law generally , adapts to changing factual and scientific circumstances. by way of background , a nuisance may be either a private nuisance or a public nuisance . an activity constitutes a private nuisance if it is a substantial and unreasonable invasion of another's interest in the private use and enjoyment of land , without involving trespass . an activity is a public nuisance if it creates an "unreasonable" interference with a right common to the general public . unreasonableness may rest on the activity significantly interfering with , among other things , public health and safety . public nuisance cases are usually brought by the government rather than private entities , but may be brought by the latter if they suffer special injury . most of the common - law nuisance actions based on climate change have involved public nuisance . part ii of this report notes the recurring threshold issues raised in nuisance litigation involving ghg emissions and climate change: "displacement" of federal common law , standing , and political question doctrine . by upholding the displacement barrier to suit , american electric power seems to have reduced the importance of the other two threshold issues . part iii describes the american electric power decision and speculates as to its likely aftermath and impact on climate change litigation generally . part iv summarizes the other common law nuisance cases based on climate change , of which two remain active . part v reviews the public trust doctrine suits , a recently filed group of cases that add a new common law theory to the litigation dealing with climate change . as the court decisions in parts iii and iv show , the use of a nuisance action to address ghg emissions presents the plaintiff with daunting threshold hurdles — that is , issues that must be resolved at the outset of the litigation .