this report focuses on these regulatory requirements . generally , a public entity ( title ii ) or a place of public accommodation ( title iii ) must modify its policies , practices , and procedures to allow an individual with a disability to use a service animal . more specifically , individuals with disabilities must be permitted to be accompanied by their service animal in areas where other members of the public , or participants in programs or activities are allowed . a public entity or place of public accommodation may not ask or require a surcharge for a service animal , even if people with pets must pay an additional fee . however , there are certain limitations on these requirements , and , as noted previously , these limitations also apply to miniature horses . the animal must be under its handler's control and the public entity or place of public accommodation is not responsible for the care or supervision of the animal . the regulations specifically allow a public entity or a place of public accommodation to ask an individual with a disability to remove a service animal from the premises when the animal is out of control and its handler does not take effective action to control it , or the animal is not housebroken . in its discussion of these exceptions , doj observes that an animal may misbehave when provoked or injured . if there is reason to suspect this has occurred , a public entity or a place of public accommodation should determine the facts and , if provocation or injury has occurred , take steps to prevent any similar actions . when the service animal is properly excluded , the public entity or a place of public accommodation must give the individual with a disability the opportunity to participate in the service , program , or activity without the animal . a public entity or place of public accommodation may not ask about the nature or extent of an individual's disability but may ask two questions to determine if the animal is a service animal , when it is not readily apparent . these two questions are if the animal is required because of a disability , and what work or task the animal is trained to do . although the doj title ii and iii regulations provide significant guidance regarding service animals , there are still some issues remaining . for example , the exact interaction between the ada's requirements and those of other statutes , such as the fair housing act , is somewhat uncertain . when a facility has a mixed use — such as a hotel which allows both residential and short - term stays but does not allocate space for these different uses in separate , discrete units — both the ada and the fair housing act may apply to the facility . exactly how the differing service animal requirements would apply in this situation is unclear and will most likely await judicial determinations . similarly , doj regulations do not address the issues involved when an individual with allergies to dogs and an individual with a disability using a service animal both attempt to use a place of public accommodation .