, at a loss ) . what is the situation today ? what do we know about the technical and economic potential of the various feedstocks and conversion processes ? what are the likely impacts of the government mandates and incentives related to cellulosic biofuels ? this report attempts to answer these questions based on published literature and model simulations . recent changes in the renewable fuel standard ( rfs ) in the united states will require renewable fuels production to more than triple in the next 12 years ( by 2022 ) , and those increases are expected to come largely from cellulosic biofuels , an industry in its infancy and not yet economically viable . cellulosic feedstocks of interest include agricultural residues from such crops as corn , wheat , rice , and sugarcane , perennial grasses such as switchgrass and miscanthus , short - rotation woody crops such as poplar and willow , and forest residues removed directly from the forest or taken from mills after processing , just to name a few . current research on feedstocks focuses on maximizing yields , harvesting and collecting efficiently , and testing various supply chains to minimize losses and overall delivered costs ( figure 1 ) . cellulosic conversion technologies are not the same as for corn ethanol , as this biomass material is much more complicated than starch - based feedstocks . conversion technologies receiving the most attention include the biochemical and the thermochemical approaches . these technologies are not completely new , but their previous applications differ greatly from cellulosic biofuels . with both the supply of feedstocks and conversion technologies still in the early stages of development and neither having yet arrived at a commercial scale , future progress in both areas is uncertain . it remains to be seen whether the development of one will come to dominate the development of the other , or whether the two can evolve simultaneously while still arriving at a workable outcome to fulfill the advanced biofuels requirements of the rfs . the primary theme for both feedstocks and conversion technologies is cost reduction in order to make commercialization a reality and to make cellulosic biofuels competitive with other energy sources . research and development must make cellulosic biofuels production as flexible as possible in order to accommodate future improvements . governments and universities will play an important role in reducing risk and providing guidance as feedstock producers and biofuels plants break ground on cellulosic biofuels production . this report focuses on feedstock production , feedstock logistics , and biofuel production ; however , challenges and obstacles to the distribution infrastructure and end use of biofuels in vehicles are also discussed . the remainder of the report is divided into three sections . the first section ( " chapter 3: lignocellulosic feedstocks " ) covers the various types of lignocellulosic feedstocks , their respective characteristics , and a brief summary of how each feedstock is established and maintained . then yields and production costs are outlined from a variety of studies to show the potential market effect of location , input costs , and assumptions . next is a discussion of supply logistics and the challenges this new type of feedstock presents with respect to storage , quality , and transportation .