through diplomatic negotiation ? or with or without overt endorsement from president karzai and other top - level afghan officials ? on the one hand , obama administration policy , as articulated in two major afghanistan policy addresses on march 27 , 2009 , and december 1 , 2009 , emphasizes the need for more to be done to combat corruption within the afghan government . the latter obama statement , for example , specified that "the days of providing a blank check are over" for the afghan government if it does not reduce corruption and deliver services . supporters of such a policy approach have emphasized the importance of anti - corruption efforts in an overall counterinsurgency ( coin ) strategy in afghanistan , focused on improving afghan perceptions of the afghan government's legitimacy and transparency . supporters would also emphasize the importance of anti - corruption efforts in plugging some of the most serious corruption - related leaks , including , potentially , the recently reported bulk cash movements out of the kabul airport . recent afghan investigations involving several u.s. - supported anti - corruption and oversight agencies may also be indicative of improvements in afghan government capacity to combat corruption . others , however , have questioned whether the benefits of anti - corruption efforts in afghanistan outweigh several drawbacks . for example , recent high - profile corruption investigations targeting prominent karzai supports have had the unintended consequence of aggravating u.s. - karzai relations and also potentially undermining recent u.s. successes in strengthening afghan anti - corruption capabilities . some observers have discussed the possible need to avoid investigating and prosecuting particular high - level afghan officials to avoid future complications in the u.s. government's relationship with president karzai . observers suggest that such an approach , while potentially beneficial from a diplomatic perspective , may risk facilitating the existing perceptions among many afghans that high - level corrupt officials are exempt from the full force of afghan law . other observers have also argued that meaningful improvements in combating corruption in afghanistan require a long - term u.s. commitment to stay in afghanistan for potentially decades . short of that , such observers predict that prioritizing anti - corruption will yield limited success . as congress conducts oversight and appropriates funding for u.s. assistance programs to support rol in afghanistan , an issue to consider is the extent to which the afghan government can absorb and effectively use such assistance . such sentiments have been variously confirmed by the special inspector general for afghanistan reconstruction ( sigar ) , u.s. government accountability office ( gao ) , the state department's office of the inspector general ( oig ) , and others in legislatively mandated reports to congress on the status of u.s. rol efforts in afghanistan . collectively , these reports indicate that although significant progress in establishing rol in afghanistan have been achieved , there appear to be several fundamental limitations on the ability of the u.s. government and other donors to strengthen the afghan justice sector in the short term .