, sea robbery. the court then turned its attention to contemporary international law and international agreements to determine if the definition of piracy under the law of nations has evolved . after examining various international sources , including the convention on the high seas and unclos , discussed above , the court found "that despite the fact that the crime of piracy is generally recognized in the international community , smith is the only clear , undisputed precedent that interprets the statute at issue. the only question is , has the legislature enacted such a law ? again examining the intent of congress in enacting the legislation , the court concluded that nations provide for offenses and punishments based on their own policies , but that no general words of a statute should be construed in a manner to make acts by foreigners against a foreign government unlawful under u.s. law . as such , the court held that: the court is of the opinion that the crime of robbery , committed by a person on the high seas , on board of any ship or vessel belonging exclusively to subjects of a foreign state , on persons within a vessel belonging exclusively to subjects of a foreign state , is not a piracy within the true intent and meaning of the act for the punishment of certain crimes against the united states . the sua convention calls on parties to the agreement to make its enumerated offenses "punishable by appropriate penalties which take into account the grave nature of those offenses. the united states criminalizes acts of piracy , and foreigners or u.s. citizens who commit acts of piracy are subject to imprisonment for life . the international community has responded to the threat of piracy in the waters off the horn of africa with multinational naval patrols , diplomatic coordination efforts , and enhanced private security efforts by members of the commercial shipping industry . however , questions regarding legal jurisdiction , due process for detained pirate suspects , and the role of foreign military forces in anti - piracy law enforcement activities may complicate current u.s. and international operations against pirates in the horn of africa region . the most immediate legal concern associated with anti - piracy operations is jurisdictional questions that arise based on the location of pirate attacks and / or international naval interventions , the nationalities of crew members , and the countries of registry and / or ownership of any seized vessels . multiple governments may be able to assert legal jurisdiction depending on the specifics of the incident . political will may be present in some countries , but many governments lack sufficient laws and judicial capacity to effectively prosecute suspected pirates . the disposition of property and insurance claims for vessels involved in piracy also raises complex legal questions . a developing legal issue concerns the prosecution of juveniles participating in acts of piracy . recent reports suggest that some of the somali pirates are teenage minors , and therefore could have a defense of infancy in certain jurisdictions that may assert jurisdiction over the offense . the challenge of locating and sustaining jurisdictions willing and able to prosecute piracy suspects and detain pirate convicts persists .