appendix a . disease conditions presumptively service - connected appendix b . summary of va's review of iom reports the va has not adopted formal procedures governing its internal review of iom reports . however , practice has been it involves a three - tiered review . is this presumption fully supported by medical evidence ? what amount of increase in occurrence rate is enough to warrant compensation ? what approaches could be considered to alleviate this costly result ? the purpose of disability compensation is to assist currently disabled veterans whose injuries are connected to military service although a veteran may have been ill or sustained an injury while in service , the mere fact that this occurred is not compensable . through direct service connection — that is , the facts , shown by evidence , establish that a particular injury or disease resulting in a disability was incurred while in service in the armed forces ; 2 . through aggravation during service — that is , a preexisting injury or disease will be considered to have been aggravated while in service in the armed forces ; 3 . through proximity — that is , a disability , which is proximately due to , or the result of a service - connected disease or injury which is itself considered to be service - connected . an example would be a veteran developing cardiovascular disease due to a service - connected amputation of a lower limb . through a finding that the disability was caused by medical care or vocational rehabilitation provided by the department of veterans affairs ( va ) — disabilities caused by va provided medical care or vocational rehabilitation are treated as if they are service - connected . through the application of statutory presumptions — that is , certain diseases as established by law or regulation are considered to have been incurred in or aggravated by service in the armed forces even though there is no evidence of such disease during the period of service . va has the authority to provide disability compensation to veterans by bypassing the first four criteria . the next section discusses what a presumption is , and provides a brief legislative history of establishing presumptive service connection . nearly 40 years after the american military presence in vietnam ended , the controversy surrounding agent orange and its possible association with various illnesses of vietnam veterans and their offspring continues unabated . in general , no other presumption of service connection has had so many congressional hearings , or has been so extensively studied and debated as has establishment of presumption of service connection for diseases associated with exposure to agent orange . therefore , this section provides a brief legislative history leading up to the passage of the agent orange act in 1991 ( p.l . it is followed by a discussion of the agent orange act of 1991 . the current process for establishing presumptive disability decisions involves four major entities: congress , the va , the institute of medicine ( iom ) , and other stakeholders , which include — among others — veterans service organizations ( vsos ) ( see figure 1 ) .