appendix a . identification of programs in the 2008 farm bill without budget baseline after fy2012 the programs without baseline in the 2008 farm bill can be grouped in several ways: by title of the farm bill , by the degree of uncertainty in the cost , and by the duration of the use of mandatory funding . additional details about the provision of mandatory funding for each program are provided in table a - 1 . programs grouped by title of the 2008 farm bill programs without baseline beyond fy2012 are spread among 12 of the 2008 farm bill's 15 titles ( table a - 1 ) . the title with the most such provisions is the energy title ( 8 ) , followed by conservation ( 5 ) , nutrition ( 5 ) , and horticulture and organic agriculture ( 5 ) . the ranking among the titles is much different based on the dollar amounts that might be needed to continue the provisions in the next farm bill . the title with the largest cost to extend programs without baseline is agricultural disaster assistance ( $4.8 billion to $9 billion , depending on the estimation approach ) , followed by conservation ( $2.1 billion to $2.7 billion ) , energy ( $1.1 billion to $1.2 billion ) , and research ( $383 million ) . programs grouped by degree of cost uncertainty farm bill funding typically is specified as either ( 1 ) a fixed dollar amount or ( 2 ) "such sums as necessary" to operate a program under specified provisions ( the "type" column in table a - 1 ) . for the fixed dollar amount programs ( type = "fixed" ) , the five - year cost to continue a provision is assumed to equal the five - year sum of the funding specified in the 2008 farm bill . given the likelihood of a "baseline farm bill" — that is , a farm bill without additional funding to increase spending — or a farm bill facing deficit reduction , many people believe that it is unlikely that any or many of these programs could see an increase above what they received in the 2008 farm bill . fixed - dollar funding was specified for 33 of the 37 provisions in the 2008 farm that do not have baselines beyond 2012 . the total five - year amount for these 33 programs was about $2.4 billion , which is about one - fourth of the total of the provisions without baseline ( table a - 1 ) . six of them are bioenergy programs , and five affect specialty crops or beginning and minority farmers . others are relatively established programs , such as the wetlands reserve and grasslands reserve programs in conservation . in summary , 37 programs received mandatory funding in the 2008 farm bill , but do not have any baseline for a new farm bill because their funding stopped before fy2012 , their amounts are below scoring thresholds , or they were intentionally unfunded for future years . for the "such sums as necessary" programs ( type = "estimated" ) , cbo estimates how much the provision is expected to cost .