appendix a . crude oil properties light oil , also called conventional oil , has an api gravity of at least 22° and a viscosity less than 100 centipoise ( cp ) . viscosity is a measure of the fluid's resistance to flow . it varies greatly with temperature . viscosity matters to producers because the oil's viscosity at reservoir temperature determines how easily oil flows to the well for extraction . heavy oil is an asphaltic , dense ( low api gravity ) , and viscous oil that is chemically characterized by its content of asphaltenes ( very large molecules incorporating most of the sulfur and perhaps 90% of the metals in the oil ) . although variously defined , the upper limit for heavy oil has been set at 22 °api gravity and a viscosity of 100 cp . extra - heavy oil is that portion of heavy oil having an api gravity of less than 10° . natural bitumen , also called tar sands or oil sands , shares the attributes of heavy oil but is yet more dense and viscous . natural bitumen is oil having a viscosity greater than 10,000 cp . sour crude contains sulfur present as hydrogen sulfide ( h2s ) , which is generated at temperatures greater than 392°f ( 200°c ) by thermolysis of carbon - sulfur bonds in sulfur - containing compounds in the crude . part of crude oil refining involves removing sulfur by converting it to hydrogen sulfide ( h2s ) . until the 1970s , refineries burned h2s as a fuel and along with the other gaseous hydrocarbons released during refining . in response to the clean air act , refineries had to add processes that converted the h2s to elemental sulfur . natural bitumen is a very viscous crude oil that may be up to 50% by weight of asphaltenes — a general class of aromatic - type hydrocarbons that are very high in molecular weight , highly viscous , and lack a specific melting point . asphaltenes have a pronounced tendency to "self - aggregate" ( self - join ) , and thus cause problems in crude oil processing and refining . the same property lends itself well to making asphalt ( a mixture of asphaltenes and petrolenes ) useful for road paving . syncrude has no formal definition but typically represents a blend of naphtha , distillate , and gas oil range materials , containing no resid , with a boiling range of 1050°f+ ( 565°c ) . canada began producing oil - sand bitumen in the 1960s by partially refining the bitumen into "synthetic crude" ( or "syncrude" ) . in 1967 , suncor ( then great canadian oil sands ) started producing a light sweet syncrude by hydrotreating the naphtha , distillate , and gas oil generated in a refinery delayed coking unit ; marketed today as suncor oil sands blend a ( osa ) . syncrude canada ltd. started producing a fully hydrotreated syncrude blend in 1978 , using fluidized - bed coking technology as the primary upgrading step , marketed today as syncrude sweet blend ( ssb ) .