art . i , sec . 8 , cl . 12 ) and to declare war ( art . i , sec . 8 , cl . the purpose of the act is to provide for , strengthen , and expedite the national defense by protecting servicemembers , enabling them to "devote their entire energy to the defense needs of the nation" by providing for the temporary suspension of judicial and administrative proceedings and transactions that may adversely affect their legal rights during military service . forgiving of all debts or the extinguishment of contractual obligations on behalf of servicemembers who have been called up for active duty is not required , nor is absolute immunity from civil lawsuits provided . instead , the act provides for the suspension of claims and protection from default judgments . in this way , it seeks to balance the interests of servicemembers and their creditors , spreading the burden of national military service to a broader portion of the citizenry . in engstrom v. national bank of eagle lake , the united states court of appeals for the fifth circuit acknowledged the balancing required when it stated "[a]lthough the act is to be liberally construed it is not to be used as a sword against persons with legitimate claims. many of the scra provisions are especially beneficial for reservists activated to respond to a national crisis , but many provisions may be useful for career military personnel . one of the measures that affects many who are called to active duty is the limit on the interest rate that may be charged on debts incurred prior to a person's entry into active duty military service . other measures protect military families from being evicted from rental or mortgaged property ; from cancellation of life insurance ; from taxation in multiple jurisdictions ; from foreclosure of property to pay taxes that are due ; and from losing certain rights to public land . in order to receive protections afforded under the scra , servicemembers are generally required to provide notice of their desire to invoke the protection . for example , with respect to the interest rate limitation , the servicemember is required to provide written notification to the creditor with a copy of his / her orders establishing a period of active duty service . the importance of servicemembers knowing and understanding their rights is evidenced by the requirement in the act that all servicemembers be provided written notice of their rights by the secretary of each of the armed services . in the event that a servicemember feels that he / she is not receiving the statutory protections , the servicemember may request assistance from military legal assistance officers , civilian lawyers , and in some circumstances the united states department of justice ( doj ) . the doj civil rights division will investigate specific complaints and , if necessary , institute legal proceedings to protect the rights of servicemembers . the doj civil rights division filed its first lawsuit under the scra on december 10 , 2008 , alleging a towing company in norfolk , va , participated in unlawful enforcements of storage liens .