in addition , h.r . the house passed h.r . 4041 , as amended , and referred the bill to the senate . the senate version of the bill was s. 2171 . 2988 would have required the secretary of commerce to establish a public directory for foreign buyers to identify u.s. manufacturers and service providers prepared to export clean and efficient energy and environmental products and services ; required the secretary of commerce to establish a governmental database on foreign sales opportunities in such products and services ; required the secretary of commerce to monitor and evaluate u.s. export promotion activities with respect to such products and services ; and required the gao to submit reports to congress comparing the effectiveness of u.s. export promotion activities in this area with those of other major trade competitors . 3976 would have , among other things , directed the sba office of international trade to compile and update annually a document for small businesses that contains tariff schedules of foreign countries and other trade and market data . it also would have directed the oit to identify and advertise programs and services to small businesses , including federal assistance , that facilitate the matching of foreign customers to small businesses . 3976 would have increased ex - im bank financing for small business exports and opic financing for small business investment . the lead agency in such efforts is the ustr . other agencies , including the departments of commerce and state , also play a role in fta negotiations and enforcement . in addition , the u.s. government conducts activities that may help to promote exports indirectly . government programs , such as opic , that are not charged directly with the promotion of u.s. exports may contribute to the expansion of exports through their activities . the export promotion functions of the federal government are distributed across a range of agencies . this section focuses on 9 key agencies involved in federal export promotion activities . in previous years , the tpcc , in its national export strategy reports , published government funding levels for activities of federal agencies deemed to constitute "trade promotion. the individual agencies and the tpcc determine which programs or activities are considered to constitute trade promotion and therefore included in the annual report of trade promotion budget authority . the tpcc does not have an independent budget , nor does it have any specific authority to direct member agencies' allocation of resources . the tpcc secretariat does not review member agency budgets in relation to the annual national export strategy and its budgetary needs . each federal agency has its own statutory requirements and budgets appropriated by various congressional committees . as a result , each agency submits its annual budget request separately to the president . the tpcc has not published trade promotion spending levels in the national export strategy reports for 2011 and 2012 . in part , this may be because of difficulties in identifying trade promotion activities that have emerged in recent years . although recent trade promotion spending levels are not available , the budgets for prior years in earlier reports may shed light on some trends in the federal government's trade promotion budget authority .