roth iras have been popular . although roth iras were authorized in 1997 — 23 years after traditional iras — table 3 shows that there were two - thirds as many roth iras as traditional iras in 2007 . because roth iras have not had as long to accrue contributions and investment earnings , the median roth ira account balance was $10,000 , which was 63% lower than the median account balance of traditional iras ( $27,000 ) . in 2007 , ira assets totaled $3.0 trillion . income in retirement comes from several sources . most workers participate in the social security system , which pays retirement income as early as 62 years old . retirement income security can also be provided by non - government sources , such as employer - sponsored pensions and participant - initiated retirement accounts . about half of the u.s. workforce participates in one or both of two kinds of employer - sponsored pensions . the two kinds of employer - sponsored pensions are defined benefit ( db ) and defined contribution ( dc ) pensions . db pensions provide retirees with monthly benefits in which the amount is calculated using a formula based on the number of years of employment and final salary . dc pensions , of which the 401 ( k ) plan is the most common , provide participants individual accounts in which contributions from individual employees — and often their employers — are placed in tax - advantaged accounts that accrue investment returns . the accumulated contributions and investment earnings are then used for participants' retirement income . this suggests that opportunities may exist for financial institutions to charge higher fees than necessary . a direct comparison of ira and 401 ( k ) fees is not possible because of the different structures of the plans . iras are likely administratively costly , as each separate account requires separate record keeping , whereas 401 ( k ) plan administrators can take advantage of economies of scale . although employers choose whether to offer dc plans , individual employees decide the contribution amounts ( subject to an annual limit ) and investment allocations of the contributions . over the past 30 years , fewer employers have been providing db plans and instead have offered dc plans . one consequence of this shift is that workers have had increasing responsibility for their retirement income security . individual retirement accounts ( iras ) can play an important role by providing workers with tax - advantaged savings accounts in which to accumulate retirement savings . although enrollment in a dc or db plan is contingent on employer sponsorship of such a plan , most individuals ( or married couples ) who have taxable compensation can establish and contribute to an ira . similar to 401 ( k ) plans , iras are tax - advantaged accounts in which contributions and investment earnings accumulate , which are then used for retirement income . depending on the type of ira , contributions may be made on a pre - or post - tax basis and investment earnings are either tax - deferred or tax - free .