if so , why , or why not nationwide ? how does reuse contribute to national well - being ? how does , or could , the title xvi program mesh with other federal activities ( eg , interior's water smart grant initiative or water reuse and storage activities under calfed or the california water plan ) ? should the program be tied to alleviating demand or reducing existing diversions where endangered species or other fish and wildlife or water quality concerns are at issue ? should reuse be used to help communities "drought - proof" their supplies , or to slow pressure on agricultural water supplies , by possibly slowing conversion of "agriculture - to - urban" water transfers ? will promoting water reclamation and reuse simply encourage more growth in already water scarce areas ? will growth or development come at the expense of federal investment in other economically depressed areas with plentiful water resources , or in other projects that might produce more water ? these questions are just a few that arise when discussing the future of title xvi . reclamation's new funding criteria and other programmatic actions attempt to answer some of these questions ; whether congress agrees with reclamation's approach and appropriates the lump sum funding for the administration to allocate has yet to be decided . growing demands on water resources in the west and elsewhere make it likely that interest in federal assistance for water reuse projects will continue . depending on perceptions of problems with the title xvi program , different solutions to resolving program issues will be sought . different stakeholders will have different opinions on the magnitude , importance , and scope of the broad policy , program criteria , project evaluation , and funding issues identified in this report . resolution of title xvi issues will depend on many factors , including to what degree congressional and administration priorities for the program can be articulated and balanced . title xvi has been amended multiple times since 1992 , resulting in a total of 53 authorized projects . ( see table a - 1 . ) active projects as noted earlier , title xvi funding obligations for 16 projects are complete , and nearly complete for 3 additional projects . title xvi projects were yielding an estimated 245,111 acre - feet of water annually as of fy2009 – double the production of 121,678 acre - feet annually as of september 20 , 2005 . because water yield figures are based on total design capacity , actual water yield at full build out will likely be slightly less than depicted in the last column of table a - 1 . unfunded projects eleven projects have not received funding to date and appear to be inactive ; however , to clarify this situation , reclamation is surveying sponsors of authorized projects to determine the status of each project . results from the survey and an analysis of new data are expected in early 2011 . projects unfunded by reclamation are shown in bold in table a - 1 . the other title xvi projects are considered active .