then , they were an excellent benefit . more than 93 percent of military members adopted the maximum coverage of $10,000 because they knew that in the event of their death , their family members would have the financial resources available to pay for the cost of a home and also to cover the cost of living for a considerable amount of time . for example , sears , roebuck and co. sold prefabricated houses in the early 1900's . this report is structured into three major sections . the first section provides an overview of the va's different life insurance programs , including eligibility requirements , premium rates , and benefits . the second section describes the va's management and administrative structure , as well as how policy proceeds to beneficiaries are currently paid out for sgli , vgli , and s - dvi . the third section discusses major areas of congressional interest and policy issues as they pertain to sgli , vgli , and s - dvi . in september 1965 , congress established the servicemembers' group life insurance program in p.l . 89-214 by mandating the va to enter into an agreement with the private insurance industry to meet the insurance needs of vietnam era servicemembers . since 1965 , congress has amended sgli to include all eligible servicemembers in the uniformed services . the sgli program , through a group policy issued by the prudential insurance company of america , provides low - cost term insurance protection to servicemembers . it is administered by the department of veterans affairs regional office and insurance center's office of servicemembers' group life insurance , located in philadelphia , pa . when first enacted , the sgli program provided up to $10,000 in coverage for members . today , all servicemembers can receive a maximum of $400,000 insurance coverage under the program . as of september 30 , 2012 , about 2.4 million members of the uniformed services were covered under the program . under the veterans' survivor benefits improvement act of 2001 ( p.l . 107-14 ) , congress extended coverage to the spouses and children of servicemembers covered under the sgli program . the fy2005 emergency supplemental appropriations act for defense , the global war on terror , and tsunami relief ( p.l . 109-13 ) added traumatic injury protection insurance to sgli , which extended the program to provide short - term financial assistance to servicemembers suffering from traumatic injuries . on august 1 , 1974 , veterans' group life insurance ( vgli ) became available to former servicemembers ( p.l . vgli provides for the conversion of sgli after separation from active duty . the administration of the vgli program is handled by the osgli , a division of the prudential insurance company of america . vgli is a five - year renewable term policy which provides a maximum of $400,000 of coverage . vgli policyholders have the right to renew their coverage at the end of each five - year term period . policyholders may also convert vgli to an individual commercial policy at any time with any of the participating private companies without proof of insurability . vgli has no cash , loan , paid up , or extended values and does not pay dividends .