appendix a . data sources on childhood overweight and obesity appendix b . overweight and obesity , by age and sex appendix c. overweight and obesity , by race / ethnicity and se . children with these conditions also have a higher risk of disability . increasing rates of childhood chronic conditions may also lead to increases in long - term health burdens among adults , along with increasing medical and disability costs , and decreased work force participation . after age 6 , obese children may have a 50% greater chance of becoming obese adults , regardless of their parents' obesity status . obesity in adults is associated with increased risk of a number of conditions , including diabetes , cardiovascular disease , hypertension , and certain cancers . in 2011 , heart disease , cancer , and diabetes mellitus were among the leading causes of death in the united states , and modifiable risk factors ( eg , poor diet , overweight , and lack of physical activity ) are cited as largely responsible for these deaths . in one study , poor diet and physical inactivity were found to be the second - highest actual cause of death , behind tobacco use . another recent study of american indians showed that elevated bmi in childhood was associated with a higher risk of premature death . this long - term study of american indian children found that those in the highest bmi quartile had more than double the risk of premature death than those in the lowest quartile . finally , children and adolescents who are overweight may also have social issues ; they may be subject to social discrimination , which has long - term effects on self - esteem . overweight and obese children are less likely to be engaged in school , more likely to repeat a grade in school , and more likely to miss two or more weeks of school per year . the patient protection and affordable care act ( p.l . 111-148 ) appropriated $25 million for a childhood obesity research demonstration ( cord ) project that was authorized in the 2009 chip reauthorization ( p.l . funded through september 2015 , cord provides funding for the development of a comprehensive and systematic model for reducing childhood obesity , through targeted support to families , the identification of behavioral risk factors , identification of needed clinical preventive , screening benefits , and medical assistance . other approaches have addressed collection of program participant data on student fitness levels , nutrition behavior , and physical activity , in addition to higher physical education standards and required activity time in schools and child care settings . additionally , congress has expressed interest in coordination of these activities with private sector efforts . some have suggested requirements for local education agencies to integrate fitness into the school environment and to disseminate information on physical activity to families . others have called for nationwide physical education requirements in schools , which are currently determined at the local level .