these cases will be discussed below . in a case concerning statutory damages in copyright cases ( although not involving peer - to - peer file sharing ) , the u.s. court of appeals for the sixth circuit emphasized that the u.s. supreme court has never decided whether its recent punitive damages jurisprudence ( bmw and its progeny ) applies to awards of statutory damages . the appellate court stated that until the supreme court applies bmw to an award of statutory damages , the earlier williams standard is to be used when evaluating the constitutionality of statutory damage awards . however , this appellate decision from 2007 was not binding on the thomas - rasset or tenenbaum courts , as neither of those courts are within the sixth circuit ( they are within the eighth and first , respectively — the appellate courts of which have not yet directly addressed the issue ) . some observers have been critical of the legal reasoning of the tenenbaum opinion — in particular , three assumptions that had been made by the judge in reaching her conclusions: 1 . there is no constitutional difference between punitive damages and statutory damages ; thus , the bmw case is relevant to a case involving an award of statutory damages . congress did not intend statutory damages to be imposed on non - commercial infringers whose infringement only caused minimal economic harm on copyright holders . three times the minimum statutory damages amount is the constitutional limit in peer - to - peer file sharing cases . critics of the opinion argue that the tenenbaum decision "significantly erodes congress' power to set the acceptable range of damages in copyright and indeed all civil cases. others , however , have praised the tenenbaum decision as one that "helps bring copyright infringement damages awards back down to earth. while tenenbaum is on appeal , the lower court's decision may have several immediate consequences for copyright infringement cases . those that involve statutory damages may well require more time and money of the litigants , as "every copyright infringement defendant can advance a non - frivolous argument that statutory damages in [his / her] case would be unconstitutional. also , because the tenenbaum ( and thomas - rasset ) court had ruled that there must be some relationship between actual damages and the amount of statutory damages that is awarded , it may be difficult for some copyright plaintiffs to enforce their rights , as they must make some showing of the actual harm that they have suffered from the infringement — a potentially difficult and expensive task , especially in the context of digital media and file sharing . thus , some copyright holders may be more reluctant to bring cases against non - commercial file sharers . another possible impact of tenenbaum is that courts may choose to follow the "three times the statutory minimum damages" formulation as a de facto standard in determining statutory damages in certain copyright cases — perhaps limited only to the context of peer - to - peer file sharing , although some courts may extend this standard to other infringing activity .