there has also been controversy about some of the usdp candidates . on april 29 , 2010 , spdc prime minister thein sein and 26 ministers and senior officials joined the newly formed usdp . opposition groups pointed to provisions in the election laws that precluded government employees from joining political parties or running as candidates in the upcoming parliamentary election . the uec , however , ruled that ministers and officials were political appointees and not government employees , and therefore could join the usdp . on august 27 , 2010 , the spdc chief , senior general than shwe , his deputy , general maung aye , and six other top military officers resigned from their military posts , allegedly so they could run as candidates in the upcoming election . virtually all observers view this as a symbolic move to circumvent laws limiting military officials from running in the polls . there have been repeated allegations that the spdc is using various mechanisms to control the campaign to ensure its victory in the november elections . opposition figures claim that five election laws include provisions that prohibit the candidacy of many opposition leaders , including aung san suu kyi , as well as disenfranchise voters inclined to support opposition parties . in addition , the uec has also been characterized as a mechanism for controlling the elections , as its members were appointed by the spdc and the uec's decisions are not subject to appeal . critics also point to specific uec decisions as part of a spdc strategy to control the campaign and influence the election . for example , the uec's refusal to allow five political parties associated with ethnic minorities to participate in the election is viewed as a way of preventing minority kachin opposition groups from being represented in the new parliament . another example is the relatively short time period — 20 days — in which parties had to select and register candidates . the cost of registering candidates — a non - refundable fee of 500,000 kyat , or $510 at the official exchange rate — has also been criticized as a means of blocking opposition candidates . more recently , the uec announced that the elections would not be held in portions of the kachin , kayah , kayin , mon , and shan states "as they are in no position to host free and fair elections. these regions are locations largely under the control of armed opposition groups with populations generally opposed to the spdc . the number of members in the regional and state assemblies varies . on march 9 , 2010 , the spdc released five new laws for the pending parliamentary elections . other parties still contesting the election have requested that the vote be delayed to mid - december to allow more time to campaign and raise funds . some election observers report little interest in the election , as many voters presume the usdc and other pro - junta parties will be declared the official winners , either because of a lack of opposition or fraud . it is too early to make precise predictions for the election results .