how big is this ? a coal - fired boiler subject to the mact would be one that is capable of burning roughly 1,000 pounds ( a half - ton ) of coal per hour . wood has less energy per pound than coal: a biomass - fired boiler burning wood might require as much as 1,500 pounds of wood per hour to produce 10 million btus . a boiler burning fuel oil would need to burn about 70 gallons per hour . many of the boilers to be regulated are substantially larger than this . an analysis released by the council of industrial boiler owners ( cibo ) , for example , used a 250 million btu / hour boiler as the base for its cost estimates . for a boiler burning fuel oil , this would mean burning 1,750 gallons per hour . in order to comply with the rule's emission limits , these facilities may need to install fabric filters ( also known as baghouses ) to achieve pm and mercury control ; wet scrubbers to meet the hydrochloric acid limits ; replacement burners , tune - ups , and combustion controls for carbon monoxide and organic haps ; and carbon injection for mercury control . these are the available technologies for maximum control of the relevant emissions . some observers maintain that , because epa weakened the standards as compared to what it originally proposed , the vast majority of facilities won't have to install these technologies . the national association of clean air agencies ( nacaa ) , the association that represents most state and local air pollution control officials , surveyed its members in 2008 to determine what should be defined as mact . using the data it obtained from state officials , nacaa concluded that epa's 2011 final mercury emission standard for coal - fired boilers was almost 16 times higher than the average of the best performing 12% ; the carbon monoxide standard was 213 times what the mact floor should be , according to nacaa . the problem according to nacaa's executive director , is that "compliance test results provided by state and local permitting officials were not used [in setting the mact standards] ; instead epa relied on industry data. epa explained that some of the data that nacaa provided could not be used , because the test reports were incomplete . the agency also noted that its process for setting a standard is more complicated than simply averaging the best test results . specifically , the agency subjects the emissions data to what is called a "variability analysis. this type of analysis attempts to recognize that operating conditions and resulting emissions vary over time , yet facilities need to be in compliance with emissions limits at all times . emissions can change for several reasons: there is variation in the amount of contaminants in fuel , for example ; the boiler will sometimes be operating at less than full load ; and statistical tests applied to the data are used to set the actual standard . the agency first identifies the best 12% by ranking the units based on their best test results . in the next step , they add all available test results for those units .