ยง 230 ) , are satisfied . the 111 th congress considered several proposals to address libel tourism , and ultimately passed the securing the protection of our enduring and established constitutional heritage act ( or the "speech act" ) , which was signed into law on august 10 , 2010 . the speech act avoided the constitutional questions that accompanied some of the other proposals . for example , s. 449 and h.r . 1304 , which were collectively referred to as the free speech protection act , would have authorized counter - suits and a basis for exercising personal jurisdiction over a person who served documents related to a foreign defamation lawsuit on a u.s. person . accordingly , the speech act does not authorize counter - suits against plaintiffs in foreign libel cases . instead , the speech act bars u.s. courts from recognizing or enforcing a foreign judgment for defamation unless certain requirements are satisfied . u.s. courts interpret the first amendment to protect speech that would be considered defamatory under traditional common law and in many other countries . as a result , although england is not the only country with plaintiff - friendly libel laws , english courts have been an especially popular venue for defamation suits against u.s. nationals . because obtaining a judgment and actually receiving the money awarded constitute two separate components of a successful lawsuit , winning a judgment in a foreign court does not end the discussion . the practice has affected u.s. persons in several suits brought by litigants who wish to avoid the relatively high burden of proof necessary to win defamation claims in the united states . for that reason , u.s. authors and publishers have been especially vulnerable to the possibility that a foreign libel judgment will impose penalties for speech that is protected in the author's home country . although a committee of the english house of commons has recommended reforms , england has a long history of providing redress for reputational injuries . modern english law appeals to potential libel tourists primarily because it offers a dual advantage to plaintiffs: plaintiff - friendly libel laws and a relatively low bar for personal jurisdiction in libel suits . if a defendant chooses not to appear in a foreign court , the court will typically award a default judgment against the defendant . in such circumstances , plaintiffs in foreign libel suits might involve u.s. courts when they seek to enforce judgments against u.s. defendants because foreign courts typically lack jurisdiction over assets located in the united states . however , advocates of a federal cause of action have argued that , without the threat of a counter - suit , bars on enforcement like the one created by the speech act are insufficient to prevent a chilling effect on the speech of u.s. persons . the speech act prohibits domestic courts from recognizing or enforcing foreign judgments for defamation in any one of three circumstances: 1 . when the party opposing recognition or enforcement claims that the judgment is inconsistent with the first amendment to the constitution , until and unless the domestic court determines that the judgment is consistent with the first amendment , 2 .