many of these measures are the subject of ongoing litigation . the u.s. department of justice ( doj ) , in particular , has challenged measures enacted by several states which are intended to deter the presence of unlawfully present aliens within their jurisdiction . in a 2012 ruling in the case of arizona v. united states , the supreme court ruled that one such measure enacted by arizona , commonly referred to as s.b . 1070 , was largely preempted by federal immigration law . in the course of its decision , the court indicated that states' ability to enforce federal immigration law , at least as it pertains to non - criminal immigration status violations , is limited in the absence of either direct authorization by federal law or coordination of enforcement efforts with federal authorities . this report discusses the authority of state and local law enforcement to assist in the enforcement of federal immigration law through the investigation and arrest of persons believed to have violated such laws . it describes current provisions in federal law that permit state and local police to enforce immigration law directly ; analyzes major cases concerning the ability of states and localities to assist in immigration enforcement , including the supreme court's ruling in arizona v. united states ; and briefly examines opinions on the issue by the office of legal counsel ( olc ) within the department of justice . this report does not discuss legal issues raised by state and local measures intended to supplement federal immigration laws through the imposition of additional criminal or civil penalties . for more discussion of the legal implications of such measures , see crs report r42719 , arizona v. united states: a limited role for states in immigration enforcement , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] , and crs report r41991 , state and local restrictions on employing unauthorized aliens , by [author name scrubbed] . the enforcement of federal immigration law by state and local police is most clearly permissible when congress has evidenced intent to authorize such activity . in exercising its power to regulate immigration , congress is free to delegate to the states , among other things , the authority to arrest , hold , and transport aliens into federal custody . indeed , congress has created several avenues for states and localities to assist in the enforcement of federal immigration law . the following sections discuss notable provisions in federal statutes that expressly authorize state and local law enforcement to directly engage in immigration enforcement activities , including arresting persons who have violated federal immigration law . this section does not discuss those provisions of federal law that , while contemplating participation by state and local authorities in immigration enforcement matters ( such as the sharing of immigration status information between federal , state , and local authorities ) , do not directly authorize state and local police to perform immigration enforcement duties . at least until the supreme court's decision in arizona v. united states , there had been considerable debate concerning the power of state and local police to enforce federal immigration law in the absence of express authorization in federal statute .