appendix a . networks of individual practices of aco professionals . acos are collaborations that integrate groups of providers , such as physicians ( particularly primary care physicians ) , hospitals , and others ( eg , durable medical equipment suppliers , rehabilitation hospitals , and home health agencies ) around the ability to receive shared - saving bonuses from a payer by achieving measured quality targets and demonstrating real reductions in overall spending growth for a defined population of patients . terms and term of agreement while there are provisions for terminating an agreement earlier , the statute and proposed regulations require that the aco commit to a three - year agreement with cms . in addition , all contracts or arrangements between or among the aco , aco participants , aco providers / suppliers , and other entities providing services related to aco activities must require compliance with the regulations and the terms of the agreement between cms and the aco . the aco , aco participants , aco providers / suppliers , and other entities providing services on behalf of the aco must also agree to comply with federal criminal law , the false claims act , the anti - kickback statute , the civil monetary penalties law , and the physician self - referral law . certifications by aco the aco must certify the accuracy , completeness and truthfulness of its aco application , the three - year agreement , and all submissions to cms including quality data or other information that cms relies on in calculating shared savings payments or losses . this certification is by an individual with the legal authority to bind the aco . if the data or information is generated by an entity other than the aco , that entity must certify the accuracy , completeness and truthfulness of the data it generated . how are medicare beneficiaries assigned to an aco ? medicare fee - for - service beneficiaries are assigned to an aco based on their utilization of primary care services provided by a primary care physician who is an aco provider / supplier during the performance year for which shared savings are to be determined . for each aco , assignment involves a five - stage process: 1 . identify all primary care physicians who were an aco participant during the performance year . determine all beneficiaries who received services from primary care physicians in the aco . determine the total allowed charges for the primary care services that each of the beneficiaries received from any provider or supplier during the performance year . for each beneficiary , add together the allowed charges for the primary care services provided by the primary care physicians in each aco . assign a beneficiary to an aco if the beneficiary has received a plurality of his or her primary care services , as determined by the sum of allowed charges for those services , from primary care physicians who are aco participants . the aco to which they are assigned is the one with which their primary care physician is affiliated . medicare beneficiaries enrolled in a medicare advantage plan ( medicare part c ) cannot be enrolled in an aco . can an aco improve its performance by avoiding risky medicare beneficiaries ?