in other cases , delays may be more significant . all delays will come at an administrative cost to mortgage holders and servicers , and in some instances , these entities and their representatives could be subject to civil or criminal penalties . these systems date back to colonial times . if a member of her staff raised issues with a particular file , cottrell would review the firm's electronic systems herself to ensure the accuracy of the information on the affidavits . when no issues were raised by staff , cottrell would spend less time reviewing the accuracy of the information provided in the affidavits of the files . cottrell also stated in the deposition that notaries were in the room with her when she signed affidavits . these and several other depositions call into question whether employees and attorneys for major mortgage servicers who signed affidavits attesting to have personally researched or to have personal knowledge of the underlying facts set out in the affidavits actually had done so . at least one of these depositions also raised questions about whether the affidavits were properly notarized , and thus whether they met the technical evidentiary standards to be properly filed with the court . if these procedural issues existed in a few large mortgage servicers , concern is raised that other large mortgage servicers with comparable foreclosure workloads may suffer from similar procedural deficiencies . there is little doubt that state laws requiring individuals who sign affidavits to have personal knowledge of the information to which they are attesting , notaries witness the signatures of documents they notarize , and similar evidentiary standards serve important functions , such as fraud prevention . there also is little doubt that mortgage servicers should follow proper legal procedures when foreclosing on a borrower's home . if affidavits with improper signatures or notarizations were submitted to courts , the signers could face perjury charges , among others , and courts could force the signer , his employer , or the attorneys representing them to pay sanctions . parties could face a number of other civil or administrative penalties , as well , depending on the facts and circumstances of each case . for example , notary publics who fail to follow state notary laws could have their licenses revoked and be forced to pay fines , and attorneys who submitted faulty documents to a court could be reprimanded by their state bars' disciplinary entities . while these issues are serious , even if they are proven true , they , in and of themselves , do not mean that the facts in the affidavit were untrue or that the foreclosing entity does not have the legal basis to foreclose on properties . in judicial foreclosure proceedings where affidavits that are improperly signed or notarized have been submitted as evidence , new affidavits can be submitted that are not defective . charges could be more serious if it were shown that the affidavits were purposefully forged or affiants knowingly lied for the purpose of covering up defects in the prerequisites to instituting a valid foreclosure . if evidence did surface of this type of behavior , then it would raise the possibility that individuals had committed civil or criminal fraud .