appendix a . major changes in social security auxiliary benefits appendix b . summary of possible adjustments to social security spousal and widow ( er ) 's benefits under current law social security benefits for spouses and widow ( er ) s are based on a percentage of the worker's primary insurance amount ( pia ) , with various adjustments for age at entitlement and other factors . the following section describes some of the adjustments that apply to benefits for spouses and widow ( er ) s. age - related benefit adjustment for spouses spousal benefits ( including those for divorced spouses ) are reduced when the spouse claims benefits before full retirement age ( fra ) to take into account the longer expected period of benefit receipt ( assuming the individual lives to average life expectancy ) . a spouse who claims benefits at the age of 62 ( the earliest eligibility age for retirement benefits ) may receive a benefit that is as little as 32.5% of the worker's pia . age - related benefit adjustments for widow ( er ) s the earliest age a widow ( er ) can claim benefits is age 60 . if a widow or widower ( including divorced and disabled widow ( er ) s ) claims survivors benefits before fra , his or her monthly benefit is reduced by a maximum of 28.5% to take into account the longer expected period of benefit receipt ( assuming he or she lives to average life expectancy ) . in addition , survivors benefits may be affected by the deceased worker's decision to claim benefits before fra . if the deceased worker claimed benefits before fra ( and therefore was receiving a reduced benefit ) and the widow ( er ) claims survivors benefits at fra , the widow ( er ) 's benefit is reduced under the widow ( er ) 's limit provision . under the widow ( er ) 's limit provision , which is intended to prevent the widow ( er ) 's benefit from exceeding the deceased worker's retirement benefit , the widow ( er ) 's benefit is limited to ( 1 ) the benefit the worker would be receiving if he or she were still alive , or ( 2 ) 82.5% of the worker's pia , whichever is higher . benefit adjustments based on other factors benefits for spouses and widow ( er ) s may be subject to other reductions , in addition to those based on entitlement before fra . for example , under the dual entitlement rule , a social security spousal or widow ( er ) 's benefit is reduced or fully offset if the person also receives a social security retired - worker or disabled - worker benefit ( see " dually entitled beneficiaries " above ) . similarly , under the g overnment p ension o ffset ( gpo ) , a social security spousal or widow ( er ) 's benefit is reduced or fully offset if the person also receives a pension based on his or her own employment in certain federal , state , or local government positions that are not covered by social security .