there is a scarcity of data on the economic and demographic characteristics of noncustodial fathers . over recent decades , the wages of men have stagnated and even fallen . while women and single mothers increased their labor force participation , work and labor force participation among men actually declined . additionally , incarceration rates for men , especially low - income men , have risen considerably over the past several decades . efforts to help fathers , especially low - income fathers , play a successful role in improving the well - being of their children may prove to be challenging given that the financial situation of many men is precarious and their living situations are often complicated . the census bureau's major household surveys that produce official employment and income statistics , the current population survey ( cps ) and the american community survey ( acs ) do not capture information to determine whether a man living in a household without children is a noncustodial father . the report also examines federal programs that have the purposes of preventing teen pregnancy and helping disadvantaged youth obtain the skills and support they need to make the transition to adulthood . yet noncustodial fathers , many of whom are low - income , could benefit from policies that would help them be positively involved in the lives of their children . social policy might play a role across several policy domains: economic assistance , including the temporary assistance for needy families ( tanf ) block grant , the earned income tax credit ( eitc ) , and the supplemental nutrition assistance program ( snap ) ; family support , including the child support enforcement ( cse ) program and the healthy marriage and responsible fatherhood programs ; and human capital , including workforce programs . this section provides information on these programs and also examines federal programs that have the purposes of preventing teen pregnancy and helping disadvantaged youth obtain the skills and support they need to become positive , productive , self - sufficient members of their communities . as noted earlier , the underlying premise is that the aid or services received from these programs by low - income , disadvantaged men may help them overcome economic and emotional barriers and aid them in becoming productive members of society in a number of ways — by giving them job training and employment opportunities ( and thereby the ability to make regular child support payments ) , educational information and emotional support to promote positive interaction between them and their children , and supportive services and counseling that can help them stay connected to their communities and families ( and thereby potentially avoid criminal activity ) . while not comprehensive , this section discusses several federal policy options that may reduce some of the economic and other barriers faced by low - income men , many of whom are fathers . this section highlights one or two policy options from each of the four policy domains discussed earlier: economic assistance , family support , human capital , and disadvantaged youth .