section 201 . the "knowing" requirement was retained , and the "recklessly disregarding" standard was abandoned in conference . however , the "knowing" requirement was intended to encompass the "conscious disregard" and "willful blindness" standards , including a conscious purpose to avoid learning the truth . [t]he conferees agreed that "simple negligence" or "mere foolishness" should not be the basis for liability . however , the conferees also agreed that the so - called "head - in - the - sand" problem — variously described in the pertinent authorities as "conscious disregard," "willful blindness" or "deliberate ignorance" — should be covered so that management officials could not take refuge from the act's prohibitions by their unwarranted obliviousness to any action ( or inaction ) , language or other "signalling device" that should reasonably alert them of the "high probability" of an fcpa violation . the major changes which section 5003 of the trade act made in the 1977 foreign corrupt practices act had to do with when the bribery provisions apply to an american business or person acting on behalf of an american business . for example , the anti - bribery provisions under the 1988 amendments did not apply to any facilitating or expediting payment to a foreign official , political party , or party official . further , an american business or individual may use one of the "affirmative defenses" in urging that no violation of the fcpa occurred . the first of these enumerated affirmative defenses is that the payment , gift , offer , or promise of anything of value that was made was lawful under the written laws and regulations of the foreign official's , political party's , party official's , or candidate's country . another affirmative defense is that the payment , gift , offer , or promise of anything of value that was made was a reasonable and bona fide expenditure , such as travel and lodging expenses which were incurred by or on behalf of a foreign official , party , party official , or candidate , and was directly related to the promotion , demonstration , or explanation of products or services or the execution or performance of a contract with a foreign government or agency . this defense does not apply , however , if a payment or gift is corruptly made in return for an official act or omission because it is then not considered a bona fide , good faith payment . in the definitional sections of the 1988 amendments , the terms "knowing" and "routine governmental action" are especially important . a person's state of mind is "knowing" with respect to conduct , a circumstance , or a result if the person is aware of engaging in the conduct , that the circumstance exists , or that the result is substantially certain to occur or if the person has a firm belief that the circumstance exists or that the result is substantially certain to occur . when knowledge of the existence of a particular circumstance is required for an offense , the knowledge is established if a person is aware of a high probability of the existence of the circumstance , unless the person actually believes that the circumstance does not exist .