section 262 . because the fda licenses most biologics via the phsa , rather than the ffdca , prior to the enactment of the bpcia no generally applicable abbreviated statutory pathway for follow - on versions of biologics existed . further , because of the increased complexity of biologics in comparison with chemically based drugs , many experts believed that the expedited approval process available under the hatch - waxman act could not simply be incorporated into the phsa . in particular , some follow - on manufacturers might not be able to show that their product is the "same" as that offered by the brand - name firm , as the hatch - waxman act requires . congress intended to address these concerns with the 2010 enactment of the biologics price competition and innovation act ( bpcia ) . the bpcia is a complex statute that principally amends section 351 of the public health service act . the 2010 legislation establishes a regulatory regime for two sorts of follow - on biologics , termed "biosimilar" and "interchangeable" biologics respectively . the fda is afforded a prominent role in determining the particular standards for biosimilarity and interchangeability for individual products . the bpcia provides for regulatory exclusivities for both brand - name products and the first interchangeable follow - on biologic . with respect to brand - name products , the bpcia offers two sorts of regulatory exclusivity , one with a duration of 4 years , and the other 12 years . the bpcia specifically provides: ( 7 ) exclusivity for reference product. — ( a ) effective date of biosimilar application approval. — approval of an application under this subsection may not be made effective by the secretary until the date that is 12 years after the date on which the reference product was first licensed under subsection ( a ) .

' ( b ) filing period. — an application under this subsection may not be submitted to the secretary until the date that is 4 years after the date on which the reference product was first licensed under subsection ( a ) . some discussion has occurred about whether the 12-year regulatory exclusivity period identified in the statute operates as "data protection" or as a "marketing exclusivity. in the fda's public hearing notice , the agency referred to a "12-year period of marketing exclusivity. several members of congress drafted letters to the fda explaining that the 12-year period instead acted as a data exclusivity . one letter explained: the act does not provide market exclusivity for innovator products . it provides data exclusivity , which prohibits fda from allowing another manufacturer of a highly similar biologic to rely on the agency's prior finding of safety , purity and potency for the innovator product for a limited period of time . it does not prohibit or prevent another manufacturer from developing its own data to justify fda approval of a full biologics license application rather than an abbreviated application that relies on the prior approval of a reference product . similarly , other members of congress explained that the 12-year regulatory exclusivity acts as data exclusivity that "only protects the fda from allowing another manufacturer to rely on the data of an innovator to support another product .