national. specifically , the complaint affidavit alleges that mehanna and co - conspirators discussed their desire to participate in violent jihad against american interests and that they would talk about fighting jihad and their desire to die on the battlefield . the complaint further alleges that the co - conspirators attempted to radicalize others and inspire each other by , among other things , watching and distributing jihadi videos . at the time of his 2009 arrest mehanna was free on bail from an earlier arrest that occurred in november 2008 , at logan international airport in boston . in the prior incident , he was charged with lying to federal investigators during a 2006 interview about his ties to daniel maldonado , who subsequently pled guilty to participating in terrorism training in somalia . how serious is the threat of homegrown , violent jihadists in the united states ? experts differ in their opinions . appendix a . summary of post - 9 / 11 homegrown violent jihadist terrorist plots terry lee loewen — plot to detonate car bomb at wichita mid - continent airport , december 2013 in december 2013 , law enforcement officers arrested terry lee loewen on charges of attempting to use a weapon of mass destruction , damage property by means of an explosive , and provide material support to a designated foreign terrorist organization . the department of justice ( doj ) alleges that loewen had plotted to trigger an explosive device at wichita mid - continent airport . as reported , the 58-year - old avionics technician and u.s. citizen worked at the airport . the federal bureau of investigation's ( fbi , the bureau ) case on the would - be bomber began in the early summer of 2013 . it evolved into a sting operation culminating in loewen's failed attempt to drive what he thought was a functional car bomb into a secure area of the airport and detonate the explosive while still in the vehicle . the plot started with an online interchange . it is unclear if and when he became a muslim , but doj asserts that by the summer of 2013 , the would - be terrorist was conversing online with an fbi undercover employee about violent jihad . investigators claim that loewen believed that this acquaintance was an individual tied to al qaeda in the arabian peninsula ( aqap ) . according to the criminal complaint in the case , in october 2013 , loewen sent his ersatz friend "photographs of his airport access badge , entrance gates to the tarmac , and the devices used to access the gates. loewen also allegedly claimed that osama bin laden and anwar al - awlaki were "a great inspiration" to him and that he had read significant screeds related to violent jihad . the pen pals began fleshing out details for an attack at the airport and also worked through at least one misgiving loewen had — the killing of children . loewen's online companion eventually placed him in direct contact with another fbi undercover employee who posed as a member of aqap .