authorized by p.l . 85-699 , the small business investment act of 1958 , as amended , the sbic program is designed to "improve and stimulate the national economy in general and the small - business segment thereof in particular" by stimulating and supplementing "the flow of private equity capital and long - term loan funds which small - business concerns need for the sound financing of their business operations and for their growth , expansion , and modernization , and which are not available in adequate supply. the sbic program was created to address concerns raised in a federal reserve board report to congress that identified a gap in the capital markets for long - term funding for growth - oriented small businesses . the report noted that the sba's loan programs were "limited to providing short - term and intermediate - term credit when such loans are unavailable from private institutions" and that the sba "did not provide equity financing. equity financing ( or equity capital ) is money raised by a company in exchange for a share of ownership in the business . ownership is represented by owning shares of stock outright or having the right to convert other financial instruments into stock . equity financing allows a business to obtain funds without incurring debt , or without having to repay a specific amount of money at a particular time . the federal reserve board's report concluded there was a need for a federal government program to "stimulate the availability of capital funds to small business" to assist these businesses in gaining access to long - term financing and equity financing . facilitating the flow of capital to small businesses to stimulate the national economy was , and remains , the sbic program's primary objective . the sba does not make direct investments in small businesses . it partners with privately owned and managed sbics licensed by the sba to provide financing to small businesses with private capital the sbic has raised ( called regulatory capital ) and with funds ( called leverage ) the sbic borrows at favorable rates because the sba guarantees the debenture ( loan obligation ) . as of december 31 , 2018 , there were 305 licensed sbics participating in the sbic program . in fy2018 , the sba provided $2.52 billion in leverage to sbics . in recent years , some members of congress have argued that the program should be expanded as a means to stimulate economic activity and create jobs . for example , p.l . 113-76 , the consolidated appropriations act , 2014 , increased the annual amount of leverage the sba is authorized to provide to sbics to $4 billion from $3 billion and p.l . 114-113 , the consolidated appropriations act , 2016 , increased the amount of outstanding leverage allowed for two or more sbic licenses under common control ( the multiple licenses / family of funds limit ) to $350 million from $225 million . in addition , p.l . 115-187 , the small business investment opportunity act of 2017 , increased the amount of outstanding leverage allowed for individual sbics to $175 million from $150 million . others worry that an expanded sbic program could result in losses and increase the federal deficit .