mandate or facilitate recycling . actions to reduce demand: fund or encourage the development of alternative technologies . require or provide incentives for the use of alternative technologies . choices about how the supply should be allocated: establish or modify a process and criteria for prioritized allocation by the government . establish a market - based process for allocation . see figure 2 . these projections contain many variables and therefore considerable uncertainty . early estimates projected much higher non - governmental demand , perhaps more than 100,000 liters in fy2011 and fy2012 . some estimates appear to measure helium - 3 quantities at nonstandard pressures . because liters are a volume measure , and all gases change volume depending on their pressure , inconsistency in measurement has the potential to create confusion when amounts projected by different analysts are added . perhaps most important , given such a large mismatch between supply and demand , users are likely to seek out alternative technologies , reschedule planned projects , and make other changes that reduce demand below what it would be in the absence of a shortage . it is unclear whether the available estimates reflect ( or indeed , could reflect ) these likely changes . similarly , it is unclear whether federal agencies and the private sector can reduce demand sufficiently to match the current helium - 3 supply and still meet priorities for security , science , and other applications . as described above , nnsa extracts helium - 3 during the maintenance of the nation's tritium supply and transfers it to the doe office of isotope production and research . that office disburses helium - 3 to users . previously , it disbursed helium - 3 through two mechanisms: public auctions and interagency transfers . at present , users can receive helium - 3 only if they have an allocation approved by the interagency policy committee ( ipc ) . congress may wish to consider the criteria that the ipc uses to prioritize these allocations and set the allocated helium - 3 price . alternatively , it could choose to move to a market - based system in which , as with other commodities , the market price of helium - 3 establishes the balance between supply and demand and determines the allocation of the limited supply . in summary , congress could address the helium - 3 shortage in a variety of ways: oversight of the current situation , how it arose , and the processes currently in place for addressing it . actions to increase supply: mandate or encourage increased tritium manufacture by the government or by the private sector through measures such as subsidies or tax incentives . facilitate access to international sources , perhaps through support for international agreements . seek alternative sources: commission studies , fund r&d projects or demonstration plants , provide subsidies or incentives . scientists have expressed concern that the shortage may threaten certain fields of research .