legislation ( h.r . 678 ) to require that dividends fall under eesa requirements was introduced , but not enacted , in the 112 th congress . table 3 summarizes tarp funds that have been disbursed but not repaid . most of these funds are classified by treasury as "outstanding. this does not mean , however , that the recipient of these funds is obligated to repay them , as is typically the case with , for example , a loan that is outstanding from a bank to a borrower . most of the outstanding tarp funds are embodied in assets , such as common stock , that recipients are not obligated to repay ; instead , treasury is expected to sell these assets at a future date and hopefully recoup the funds that were disbursed . tarp funds that are classified as a recognized loss , or as written off , are typically cases where either the asset sales were not sufficient to repay the initial tarp disbursement or a tarp recipient has failed and thus is unable repay the funds . in arriving at an overall cost to the government of tarp , or any similar program , it is important to account for the difference in time between initial outlay of funds and the receipt of any income . some tarp contracts run for many years , and the difference in value between a dollar in 2008 and 2013 , for example , could be significant . to compare dollar values over time , economists use present value calculations that reduce costs or income in the future relative to the present by a discount rate . present value calculations can be very sensitive to the rate used if the amount of time involved is large . in preparing the budget cost estimates for tarp , the office of management and budget ( omb ) and the congressional budget office ( cbo ) are directed by section 123 of eesa to adjust their estimates by current market borrowing rates , as opposed to the borrowing rate paid by treasury . using market rates instead of government borrowing rates increases the net calculated cost of these investments and is meant to better represent the true economic costs of the programs . the cost estimates for tarp have fallen dramatically since the program was started . for example , in march 2009 , cbo estimated a $356 billion budgetary cost for tarp . this number fell to $109 billion in march 2010 , and the latest cbo estimate is for a total budgetary cost of $21 billion . the various programs under tarp have had very different estimated costs . the average sales price for the treasury shares was $4.14 per share compared with an initial conversion price of $3.25 per share . the gain from the common stock sales was approximately $6.9 billion , along with approximately $2.2 billion from the sales of the remaining trust preferred securities granted as a fee from the agp , $2.9 billion in interest and dividends , and $54 million from the sale of warrants for a total nominal gain ( i.e. this authority granted in eesa was very broad .