now it is vital. thus , the call for a reduction of nonessential federal expenditures served many purposes . spending that was eliminated would save money that could be applied to the war effort . additionally , it was argued , american taxpayers would be more willing to shoulder the high taxes needed to fund the war if they saw that the federal government was acting frugally . finally , reduced federal deficit spending could help control potentially damaging rates of inflation . either chamber can direct one or more of its committees to undertake an activity or set of activities or series of activities , and party conferences can condition chairmanships on adherence to an oversight or legislative agenda . coordination of many actors in a large legislative purpose , however , can be a complex exercise . the first 25 years of the joint committee's existence preceded the modern era's expansion of the federal government's role and responsibilities , including the creation and growth of health - care entitlements . in designing a new committee or harnessing congressional committees to scale back federal spending , the complexity of today's society , economy , and federal programs and activities would need to be taken into account . ( a ) there is hereby established a committee to investigate federal expenditures ( hereinafter referred to as the "committee" ) , to be composed of ( 1 ) three members of the senate committee on finance and three members of the senate committee on appropriations , to be appointed by the president of the senate ; ( 2 ) three members of the house committee on ways and means and three members of the house committee on appropriations , to be appointed by the speaker of the house of representatives ; and ( 3 ) the secretary of the treasury , and the director of the bureau of the budget . a vacancy in the committee shall not affect the power of the remaining members to execute the functions of the committee , and shall be filled in the same manner as the original selection . a majority of the committee shall constitute a quorum , and the powers conferred upon them by this section may be exercised by a majority vote . ( b ) it shall be the duty of the committee to make a full and complete study and investigation of all expenditures of the federal government with a view to recommending the elimination or reduction of all such expenditures deemed by the committee to be nonessential . the committee shall report to the president and to the congress the results of its study , together with its recommendations , at the earliest practicable date . ( c ) the committee , or any duly authorized subcommittee thereof , is authorized to hold such hearings , to sit and act at such times and places , to employ such experts and such clerical and other assistants , to require by subpena or otherwise the attendance of such witnesses and the production of such books , papers , and documents , to administer such oaths , to take such testimony , and to make such expenditures , as it deems advisable .