the state council has not made a decision on the request . because of the separation of management between the cic and central huijin , the investment activities of each entity should be examined independently . in general , the cic's major investments have been made overseas , while central huijin has focused on domestic investments . in addition , central huijin's primary objective is to support china's financial institutions ; the cic is supposed to make commercially based investments . starting in the summer of 2008 , the cic's poor overseas investment performance , plus internal and external administrative tensions , gave rise to discussions about reforming the cic . some observers see a contradiction between the missions of the cic and central huijin . externally , the state administration of foreign exchange ( safe ) , which reports directly to the people's bank of china ( pboc ) , made an apparent bid in 2008 to challenge the cic's role as the chinese government's leading overseas investment fund . these concerns can be generally divided into two main issues . the first issue is whether the cic's investments are being made on commercial merit , or are being made for strategic reasons as part of a larger government policy . the second issue is the cic's commitment to "passive" investment . the shift in the cic's direct investments that began in the summer of 2009 from financial entities to energy and natural resources companies caught the attention of investors and analysts alike . some speculated that the shift indicated a change in the cic's investment strategy and could be part of a larger chinese government effort to secure access to natural resources for china's rapidly expanding economy . this speculation was partially fueled by statements from the cic's officials , who indicated that these investments were hedges against inflation , implying that the investments were made for macroeconomic reasons . the investment activities of central huijin also have been questioned . although central huijin has not made direct investments in non - financial entities , it has been speculated that by providing additional capital to major chinese banks , central huijin is indirectly financing state - owned enterprises and large private companies and their overseas acquisitions and investments . for example , central huijin is a major shareholder of cdb , which reportedly provided financing for chinalco's bid to take over the australian mining company , rio tinto . during her confirmation hearing , marisa lago , nominee for assistant secretary for international markets and development for the u.s. department of the treasury , responded to a question about sovereign investments by saying , "sovereign wealth funds are not just a private sector investor , but rather are arms of government. the cic's investments in the united states are currently subject to two main forms of regulatory review , one by cfius and the other by the sec . in addition , inward fdi in specific industries or markets – including investments by the cic – may be subject to laws and regulations governing those particular industries and / or markets . the foreign investment and national security act of 2007 ( p.l .