appendix a . global natural gas consumption ( 2015 ) appendix b . numerous bills have been introduced in both houses . this report highlights key aspects of global natural gas markets , including supply and demand , and major u.s. developments . select statutes of u.s. law related to natural gas can be found in appendix g . some consider natural gas a potential bridge fuel to a lower - carbon economy , because it is cleaner burning than coal and oil . natural gas combustion emits about one - half less carbon dioxide than coal and one - quarter less than oil when consumed in a typical electric power plant , offset somewhat by fugitive emissions . fugitive emissions , which can be intentional ( i.e. , vented ) or unintentional ( i.e. , leaked ) , are natural gas that is released to the atmosphere during industry operations . natural gas combustion also emits less particulate matter , sulfur dioxide , and nitrogen oxides than coal or oil . in recent years , the united states has become the home to the shale gas revolution , as improved methods to extract natural gas from certain shale formations have significantly increased the resource profile of the united states . this has spurred other countries to try to develop shale gas , but progress is slow outside of north america . if the united states continues to and other countries can bring large new volumes of natural gas to market at a competitive price , then natural gas could play a larger role in the world's economy . in 2016 , the united states started exporting liquefied natural gas ( lng ) from the lower 48 states . several key factors will determine whether significant new quantities of natural gas come to market , particularly unconventional natural gas resources . these factors include price , technical capability , environmental concerns , and political considerations . production and growth is projected in every region except europe . unconventional gas resources — coal bed methane , shale gas , and tight gas — account for about 60% of growth in the global gas supply . however , outside of north america unconventional resource development is slower and uneven . china does have policies that encourage production , but limited water availability , geology , and population density in resource - rich areas may hinder any attempts to fully realize its capacity . global natural gas reserves ( 2015 ) appendix c. global natural gas production ( 2015 ) appendix d. u.s. natural gas imports and exports appendix e. global natural gas exporters ( 2015 ) appendix f. major global gas companies ( 2014 ) appendix g. select u.s . statutes related to natural ga . many countries , both producing and consuming , are watching how the development of u.s. unconventional natural gas resources evolves . although most natural gas is consumed in the country where it is produced , global and regional markets are becoming more integrated ( see figure 6 ) . about 30% of natural gas is traded internationally , mostly within regional markets , and the amount of natural gas traded is increasing .