there is no formal nomination of any other ustld delegate . many members have attended past meetings , but participation in the ustld — at least until recently — often seemed to be on an ad hoc basis , with little continuity of participants and , in some instances , largely dependent on the ability of the ustld chair to convince members to attend the semi - annual meetings . moreover , the ustld has no equivalent "steering committee" to help plan future tld meetings , set agendas , or encourage members to participate . some observers have suggested that the eu caucus , created in the house in 2005 , could serve as the umbrella organization from which tld delegates could be drawn . however , there has been little association between the two , even though several members of the house participate in both the caucus and the tld . there is still concern among some observers that without some additional level of formality in the house , the ustld could continue to have difficulty attracting and maintaining a broad group of members willing to participate on a regular basis . tld supporters worry that the lack of sustained participation by u.s. members hinders the development of personal relationships between legislators , seen as essential for a truly frank and open exchange of views and as necessary ultimately for greater legislative consultation and coordination . similarly , while the eutld has representation from most of its key parliamentary committees , the ustld is not structured to guarantee the inclusion of members from all of the major congressional committees . combined with the uncertainty over which members will actually participate in the u.s. delegation each time the tld meets , some meps have observed that the tld sessions do not necessarily provide them with good u.s. contacts with who they can discuss issues of mutual interest on a regular basis . another difference between the u.s. congress and the ep in relation to the tld involves staffing . traditionally , on the u.s. side , three principal staffers have operated as the "u.s. secretariat" for the tld: an administrator and one representative from the majority and minority . and many members of congress may believe that the tld , although never intended to be anything more than a mechanism for exchanging views among parliamentarians , currently wields little influence or authority as a transatlantic policy resource . the initial involvement of the tld in the tec's efforts to move regulatory cooperation toward the ultimate goal of an unencumbered transatlantic marketplace did appear to raise the tld's visibility in the u.s. congress . since then , however , there has been little evidence that the ustld's role has generated any additional congressional interest in the tld , the tec , or closer cooperation and collaboration with the european parliament . while the creation of the tec raised several questions about the role that congress and the ep will or should play in the promotion of greater transatlantic economic integration and regulatory cooperation , on the u.s. side , those questions still appear unanswered .