circuit for further action . in light of the supreme court decision , the stay on implementation of csapr was lifted: the first phase of the rule was implemented in 2015 , with a second phase scheduled for 2017 . because of the earlier cair requirements , which remained in effect pending their replacement and , more recently , because power companies have replaced substantial amounts of coal - fired generation with cheaper ( and cleaner ) natural - gas - fired units , electric generators had already ( in 2012 ) achieved more than two - thirds of the pollution reductions necessary to comply with the 2017 standards . for additional information , contact jim mccarthy ( [phone number scrubbed] , [email address scrubbed] ) . cross - state air pollution rule updat e. on october 26 , 2016 , epa promulgated updates to the cross - state air pollution rule ( csapr ) . the csapr rule was first promulgated in august 2011 , and took effect in january 2015 . as explained above , csapr is designed to address what are called the "good neighbor" provisions of the clean air act by requiring states to limit emissions of pollution that cause air quality problems in other , downwind states . the rule established cap - and - trade programs for sulfur dioxide ( so 2 ) and nitrogen oxide ( nox ) emissions from coal - fired electric power plants in 28 eastern states . on july 28 , 2015 , the d.c . circuit court of appeals remanded csapr's ozone - season nox emission budgets for 11 states and the annual so 2 budgets of four states to epa for modification . the updated rule , in part , addresses the court's remand of the ozone - season nox emission budgets . the updated rule also sets new requirements for 22 states to limit nox pollution that is contributing to nonattainment of the 2008 ambient ozone standard in downwind states ; the 2011 csapr rule was designed to achieve an earlier , less stringent version of the ozone standard . the updated rule will take effect in may 2017 . epa estimates the annual cost of the rule at $68 million , with benefits of $880 million annually . the agency expects that the rule's requirements can be met quickly and at low cost by optimizing operation of existing pollution control technology , turning on existing pollution controls that are currently idled , upgrading to state - of - the - art low - nox combustion controls , and shifting generation to lower - emitting power plants . nox emissions from power plants in the eastern united states will be lowered by 20% in 2017 under the update and "other changes already underway in the power sector," with three - fourths of the reductions occurring in pennsylvania , indiana , west virginia , ohio , alabama , and kentucky . for additional information , contact jim mccarthy ( [phone number scrubbed] , [email address scrubbed] ) . mer cury and air toxics standards / mact for electric generating units ( "utility mact" or mats rule ) .