appendix a . energy's water consumption trends ideally , policy and decision makers should know how energy choices and policies compare across a wide array of parameters ( eg , cost , reliability , dispatchability , emissions , land requirements , water use ) under different scenarios . that is , informed decisions would require water use data , analyses of least - cost water and energy conservation and efficiency actions , understanding of other water uses and their costs and benefits , life - cycle assessments of energy's water uses and risks , and more . such assessments are not available . while not addressing this shortfall , table a - 1 and table a - 2 summarize the freshwater impacts of numerous shifts in transportation fuels and the electricity sector , respectively . will water hamper adoption of some renewable energy alternatives ? quantification of energy's water demand and its significance is limited by significant gaps in available data and analyses . water has no federal data agency comparable to the energy information administration that projects alternative demand scenarios . there is no authoritative government source to cite for the level of water use by the energy sector or for projections of how that use may change in future decades . for example , there are no forecasts that use multiple scenarios to identify sensitivity of water demand to multiple factors and policies , or that analyze energy's water use and water vulnerability in the context of factors significant to energy choices and policies , such as energy and transmission costs , emissions , and reliability . for over 50 years , the u.s. geological survey ( usgs ) of the department of the interior has collected and published water use data every five years ; however , the agency stopped collecting water consumption data after its 1995 survey due to funding constraints and data reliability problems . ( usgs continues to collect water withdrawal data. ) the 1995 usgs data are the basis of most projections of future water consumption in the united states . in the secure water act of 2009 , congress authorized the usgs to perform a water use and availability assessment that includes water use trends in the energy sector ; however , to date the agency had received no congressional appropriations for this program . every 10 years the forest service forecasts water resources trends based largely on extrapolations of the usgs data and using the usgs data categories . the energy sector falls into a number of usgs water use categories , and it is impossible to disaggregate the categories to determine a value for the energy sector's water use . ( except for thermoelectric water withdrawals , the usgs water use data and forest service projections do not break out energy water use from other agricultural and industrial water uses. ) because of these limitations , the analysis herein relies on the most comprehensive projections available on the energy sector's water consumption , with the main source being a 2010 article by deborah elcock , an argonne national laboratory researcher , based on an updated and refined analysis from a report published by the lab in 2008 .