there was no action on this bill . separate legislation , in title v of h.r . 1262 , also would have reauthorized the contaminated sediment remediation program with $150 million per year in funding through fy2014 . the house passed h.r . 1262 , including title v , in march 2009 . 4845 , great lakes provisions were included in division j , title cii , subtitle f. these provisions were based on the committee - reported version of s. 3073 but included a number of modifications to that bill . the legislation would have established a great lakes leadership council , which , together with the existing great lakes interagency task force , would be known as the great lakes collaboration partnership . the partnership would be responsible for developing a great lakes restoration blueprint , a strategy for protecting water quality and the ecosystem of the great lakes basin . the leadership council also would be responsible for developing annual priority lists of projects to advance the goals and objectives of the blueprint or the great lakes restoration initiative action plan . the legislation would have authorized to be appropriated $475 million per year through fy2017 and authorized epa to transfer not more than $475 million to other federal agencies to carry out activities under the blueprint , the action plan , or the great lakes water quality agreement between canada and the united states . it would have codified the great lakes interagency task force , and it would have established new reporting requirements , as well as preparation of a crosscut budget for great lakes funding . finally , the provisions in s.amdt . long island sound , bordering new york and connecticut , is one of the 28 estuaries included in the national estuary program ; it was one of the original estuaries designated for priority when the nep was established in law in 1987 . in 2000 , congress amended the cwa to add section 119 , which established a long island sound program office providing federal leadership for developing a conservation management plan for long island sound and authorized grants for related projects and activities . it also authorized grants to coastal states to support monitoring and public notification programs . in the 110 th congress senate and house committees held hearings on implementation of the beach act , and bills to extend authorization of appropriations for beach monitoring grants were introduced , but none was enacted . the 111 th congress considered similar bills . in june 2009 the senate environment and public works committee approved s. 878 , the clean coastal environment and public health act ( s.rept . 111-170 ) , which would have required the use of more rapid testing of beach waters for contamination and faster notification to the public to warn of contamination . it also would have increased grants to states for beach monitoring and testing , from $30 million annually to $60 million annually , and extended the authorization of appropriations for five years , through fy2013 . the house passed similar legislation , h.r . 2093 , in july 2009 . 4845 , provisions concerning water quality of coastal recreation waters were included in division j , title ciii , subtitle a .