number of assignments ." will there be an enforcement mechanism ? how might party rules supplement or supplant an existing or new rule ? numerous house rules address the committee system , including committee and subcommittee membership , and committee jurisdiction and referral . other house rules addressing the committee system have changed in the last few years , such as those affecting committee and subcommittee leadership tenure . many democratic caucus and republican conference rules also govern the organization , structure , and procedures of house committees , and many party rules , in addition , supplement or even circumvent house rules to reflect , for example , the size of the majority and the political and other needs of both the majority party and its members . appointment of members to committees is essentially a party rather than a chamber function , with the democratic steering and policy committee and the republican steering committee having primary responsibility for making their party's respective committee assignments . with some degree of input from the minority party , the majority party has the further responsibility of determining the size and party ratio of each panel . a member might retain throughout his or her legislative service the committee assignments that he or she initially receives , although some members subsequently seek appointment to a committee with greater subject - matter relevance to their constituency or to a more prestigious exclusive committee , a slot becoming available . by remaining on a committee , a member accrues seniority and may eventually be elected as a subcommittee or committee chair or ranking minority member . since each party , and the house , imposes limitations on the number of committees and subcommittees on which a member may serve , members gain expertise in the issue areas handled by their committees . members' specialized knowledge has been viewed as one of the hallmarks of the house committee system . waivers for additional assignments , nonetheless , are often granted on a case - by - case basis . as the number of committees , subcommittees , and informal groups and task forces have increased , and the number of waivers and temporary assignments has expanded , the average number of assignments for members has also risen . further , as the party caucus or conference attempts to grant member requests for specific assignments , committee sizes have increased , often to accommodate a requested assignment . the majority party has also occasionally changed a committee's majority - minority ratio to alter the political makeup of the committee . ( see below , " ii . these developments have created problems for committees in managing their workloads . they have given rise to concerns that members' capacity is spread too thin , that minority - party members are underrepresented , and that there are in general too many committees and subcommittees . these developments also suggest that specialized knowledge is no longer seen as important as it formerly was within the house committee system . some members have called for removing the decisions on committee size and ratio from the party caucus or conference , and making them decisions for the house .