the proportion of costs incurred by the u.s . attorneys related to prosecuting drug - related crimes was not included in the previous budget . attorneys prosecute the entire spectrum of federal crimes ; while some cases may be entirely drug - related , others may only have a drug component , while still others may not be related to drugs at all . under the revised budget structure , some drug - related prosecution costs are included ; the u.s . attorneys' drug budget is determined by calculating the costs of attorneys and non - attorneys that are dedicated to non - organized crime drug enforcement task force drug prosecutions . a similar story holds true for the federal bureau of prisons ( bop ) . bop is responsible for housing federal inmates — not solely those incarcerated for drug crimes . while bop was previously included in the unrevised budget , the resources accounted for were only those for inmate treatment programs . prior to fy2012 , the budget did not include funds for the housing of inmates incarcerated for drug - related crimes , but the revised budget now includes these associated costs . while experts have expressed concern about drug control policy elements omitted from the budget , some have also questioned whether certain elements included in the current budget may be overly broad and may not directly tackle the nation's drug problems . for instance , some have argued that policies such as those assisting the afghan government in combating the drug trade and those funding colombian rule of law programs do not directly reduce the supply of drugs to the united states . on the other hand , some may argue that these programs impacting drug source countries can , in turn , reduce the availability of illicit drugs at home . thus , policy makers may also debate whether the current budget elements , such as those under the international supply - reduction strategy , are directly related to the national drug control strategy and should be maintained as part of the budget . when congress reauthorized ondcp in 1998 ( title vii of p.l . 105-277 ) , policy makers made it a requirement for ondcp to create and report on a national drug control performance measurement system , as discussed above . before the recent national drug control budget restructure , ondcp measured performance by using data from individual agencies — data collected as required by the government performance and results act ( p.l . 103-62 ) — and from national research . critics of this measurement system argued that while it allowed ondcp to evaluate individual programs and agencies , the performance measurement system did not allow ondcp to holistically assess whether the strategy's goals and objectives were truly being accomplished . ondcp addressed this concern by developing the performance reporting system ( prs ) . when debating issues surrounding ondcp's reauthorization , congress may exercise oversight regarding the new prs and whether this system allows for evaluation of individual programs and agencies as well as whether it allows for evaluation of each agency's contribution to the strategy's goals . the first prs assessment report was released in 2012 , and a second assessment was released in 2014 .