tolling . congress could choose to expand the role of tolling in federal highway policy . currently most interstate system highways are under a tolling prohibition . tolling could help pay for the rebuilding or reconstruction of congested urban interstate highways . tolling could also be encouraged to provide the funding flows often needed to support public private partnerships . raising tolling to greater prominence in federal highway policy faces significant obstacles , notably the general public hostility to tolls and the difficulty of garnering political support . revenue issues . the two commissions established in safetea both recommended increases in the motor fuel tax to meet the immediate funding needs of surface transportation programs . both urged an eventual shift to charges based on vehicle miles traveled as a longer - term funding source . vmt charges represent one type of user fee , but alternatives such as tolls and weight - distance taxes , which are already imposed in some instances on trucks , also might be employed to force road users to pay the costs of surface transportation programs . ( crs contacts: bob kirk and will mallett ) . the federal government provides support for transit agencies' capital investments and operating costs . although federal transit programs direct most funding to capital investment , transit agencies have some discretion over the use of their federal funds among capital and operating purposes . the mass transit account of the highway trust fund is the source of approximately 80% of federal transit program monies , with the remaining 20% drawn from the general fund of the u.s. treasury . although the transit account is in somewhat better financial shape than the highway account , the unexpended balance is projected to reach zero in fy2014 . despite uncertainty surrounding this projection , it is clear that current revenue into the transit account will not sustain federal transit administration programs and activities at current levels through another four - to six - year authorization period . within this context , there are both funding and programmatic issues that could arise during reauthorization . the prospect of constrained federal transit funding is occurring in conjunction with financial problems in the transit industry itself . the immediate causes are flat or declining government assistance at the state and local levels due to budget conditions and lower patronage due to a high unemployment rate . but financial problems in public transit are a long - term issue , primarily caused by declining transit system productivity , that results in an increasing requirement for government support from all levels of government . fares and other operating revenue were only 26% of capital and operating funding sources in 2009 . for that reason , congress may want to consider whether modifications in the federal transit program might boost ridership at a lower cost per rider to the government . historically intercity passenger rail transportation programs have been a very minor part of surface transportation program authorization legislation , if present at all . in safetea - lu , for example , the major initiative was to rename the high - speed rail corridor planning program as the high - speed rail corridor development program , with acquisition of tracks and equipment added as an eligible expense .