the leading pipeline industry associations have concurred . the american gas association has expressed support for these ntsb recommendations , stating that "pipeline safety and integrity is the top priority for the natural gas industry. these systems are vulnerable to accidents and terrorist attack . recent pipeline accidents in marshall , mi , san bruno , ca , allentown , pa , and laurel , mt , have demonstrated this vulnerability and have heightened congressional concern about pipeline risks . the federal program for pipeline safety resides primarily within the department of transportation ( dot ) , although its inspection and enforcement activities rely heavily upon partnerships with state pipeline safety agencies . the federal pipeline security program began with the dot as well , immediately after the terror attacks of september 11 , 2001 , but pipeline security authority was subsequently transferred to the department of homeland security ( dhs ) when the latter department was created . the dot and dhs have distinct missions , but they cooperate to protect the nation's pipelines . the federal energy regulatory commission is not operationally involved in pipeline safety or security , but it can examine safety issues under its siting authority for interstate natural gas pipelines , and can allow pipeline companies under its rate jurisdiction to recover pipeline security costs . collectively , these agencies administer a comprehensive and complex set of regulatory authorities which has been changing significantly over the last decade and continues to do so . the federal pipeline safety program is authorized through the fiscal year ending september 30 , 2015 , under the pipeline safety , regulatory certainty , and job creation act of 2011 ( p.l . 112-90 ) , which was signed by president obama on january 3 , 2012 . this report reviews the history of federal programs for pipeline safety and security , key policy issues , and recent developments leading up to p.l . although the act contains over 30 substantive sections , this report focuses only on a subset of provisions of key interest in recent congressional debate . of the nation's approximately half million miles of transmission pipeline , roughly 180,000 miles carry hazardous liquids — over 75% of the nation's crude oil and around 60% of its refined petroleum products , along with other products . within this network , there are nearly 200 inter state crude oil and liquid fuel pipelines , which account for roughly 80% of total pipeline mileage and transported volume . the u.s. natural gas pipeline network consists of around 300,000 miles of inter state and intra state transmission . it also contains some 14,000 miles of onshore field and gathering pipeline , which connect gas extraction wells to processing facilities . around 120 systems make up the inter state gas transmission network ; another 90 or so systems operate strictly within individual states . these inter state and intra state gas transmission pipelines feed around 900,000 miles of regional pipelines in some 1,400 local distribution networks serving over 66 million customers . natural gas pipelines also connect to 127 active liquefied natural gas ( lng ) storage sites , which can augment pipeline gas supplies during peak demand periods .