each implementing bill sets two tasks before congress . first , for the agreement to "enter into force" — that is , constitute binding international commitments — for the united states , it must receive congressional approval . second , for those commitments to have legal effect domestically , congress must "implement" them by repealing or amending relevant u.s. law or enacting new statutory authorities to ensure u.s. compliance with the agreement . to do this , the changes must be treated as self - executing . a self - executing agreement requires no changes to the u.s. code to become enforceable in a u.s. court by private parties or capable of being performed by u.s. agencies , and therefore it does not need to be submitted to congress for implementation . ultimately , if , in its entirety , the "supplementary agreement" constitutes a self - executing executive agreement , the 2010 changes may have no implications for the fast track consideration of the korus fta because they would not be included in the implementing bill . the executive and congress will decide whether to treat these changes as part of an executive and / or self - executing agreement , and their decision is unlikely to be disturbed by a u.s. court . accordingly , this report is primarily focused on the fast track eligibility of an implementing bill for the korus fta that either treats the 2010 changes as part of the agreement that was "entered into" in 2007 or effectively includes them in the provisions implementing the 2007 agreement . fast track procedures ensure timely committee and floor action on a particular piece of legislation . it modifies a portion of both u.s. and south korean commitments under the 2007 agreement and adopts new obligations for both parties . for example , the "supplementary deal" modifies three of the 2007 time frames for the elimination of u.s. duties on certain automotive goods and , for some goods , sets a different deadline for elimination . in the "exchange of letters," the united states and south korea also agreed to establish a special auto safeguard mechanism for unexpected import surges of motor vehicles . one of the purposes of these expedited procedures in the trade area is to prevent the legislation from being blocked by filibuster or amended to an extent that forces the two countries to reenter negotiations . the authority to apply fast track procedures to legislation approving and implementing a free trade agreement often goes by the name "trade promotion authority" ( tpa ) , a label that reflects the title of the trade act of 2002 . as signed on june 30 , 2007 , the korus fta was entered into before the july 1 , 2007 deadline . therefore , assuming that its implementing bill satisfies the remaining statutory requirements , it will be eligible for consideration under the fast track procedures . however , the bill's eligibility for tpa may be complicated by the inclusion of the recently negotiated changes to the agreement . in the summer of 2010 , the obama administration announced plans to reengage in talks with south korea over aspects of the korus fta , particularly its provisions involving market access for u.s. autos .