postal service . the core requirement of section 504 is articulated in subsection ( a ) , which states: no otherwise qualified individual with a disability in the united states , as defined in section 705 ( 20 ) , shall , solely by reason of her or his disability , be excluded from the participation in , be denied the benefits of , or be subjected to discrimination under any program or activity receiving federal financial assistance or under any program or activity conducted by any executive agency or by the united states postal service... . the purpose of the rehabilitation act is to ensure that individuals with disabilities can be independent and fully participate in society . the act seeks to empower individuals with disabilities by maximizing "employment , economic self - sufficiency , independence , and inclusion and integration into society , through ... the guarantee of equal opportunity. however , tension may arise between giving full effect to these statutory objectives and ensuring that section 504 compliance remains practicable for federal agencies and grantees . to prove a violation of section 504 of the rehabilitation act , a plaintiff must show that ( 1 ) the program or activity is carried out by a federal executive agency or with federal funds ; ( 2 ) the plaintiff is disabled within the meaning of the rehabilitation act ; ( 3 ) he is otherwise qualified ; and ( 4 ) he was excluded from , denied the benefit of , or subject to discrimination under the program or activity . a defendant in a section 504 suit may assert as an affirmative defense to liability that accommodating the plaintiff's disability would constitute an "undue burden. in 1985 , the u.s. supreme court held in alexander v. choate that a federal agency or grantee who denies an otherwise qualified plaintiff "meaningful access" to the program or benefit it provides has excluded the plaintiff from the program , denied the plaintiff its benefits , and / or discriminated against the plaintiff within the meaning of section 504 . moreover , the court stated that to afford meaningful access to people with disabilities , a federal agency or grantee might be required to make "reasonable accommodations. although choate was the first case to construe the nondiscrimination prong of section 504 as requiring meaningful access , the court ruled against the plaintiffs in choate . the plaintiffs argued that tennessee's decision to reduce the number of days of inpatient care paid for by medicaid denied medicaid recipients with disabilities meaningful access to medicaid and hospital services because they spent , on average , more days receiving inpatient care than their nondisabled peers . the court found that despite tennessee's change in policy , tennessee continued to provide people with and without disabilities "identical" access to medicaid covered inpatient care . accordingly , while choate remains the source of the meaningful access standard , the case illustrates that practices or policies with a disparate impact on people with disabilities do not , ipso facto , violate section 504 . the court in choate also noted that section 504 does not require federal agencies and grantees to provide people with disabilities meaningful access to their programs and activities at the expense of their programs' integrity .