when the economy recovers , the deficit can be reduced . the supply side approach is to cut the federal budget deficit now because deficits may discourage investment by causing uncertainty about future policy changes that will be needed to restore fiscal balance . the supply side approach also attempts to keep taxes on entrepreneurs low in order to induce them to invest more in productive capacity and create more jobs . there are two major schools of thought on this matter . the keynesian approach to growth is to continue government deficit spending through the recession and initial recovery phase in order to offset lower consumption by households and reduced levels of investment by businesses . each approach recognizes that the long - term security of the nation depends greatly on having a vibrant and growing economy . others may say , "what good is a high salary , if i am dead in a terrorist attack ? this debate over national security reaches deep into the fiber of american society . it is not merely political theater , and it is receiving a fillip by the weakened u.s. economy . congress allocates the resources to respond to national security threats , and in so doing it plays a part in determining the relative strength of hard and soft power options and the roles individual agencies will play . for several decades following world war ii , providing national security was conceptually simple . the united states maintained the world's preeminent military backed by the world's largest economy and led the western world by providing power - based leadership , serving as a beacon for democratic values , and maintaining a system of military alliances . the conventional wisdom was that washington could provide security for the nation primarily by keeping soviet bombs at bay and communist ideology from creeping across the planet . the economy always was there , both to fund the military and underpin the provision of economic security for households . policies for economic growth and issues such as unemployment were viewed as domestic problems largely separate from considerations of national security . as the world begins the second decade of the twenty - first century , the united states still has a preeminent military , large economy , strong alliances , and democratic values . however , the economy has come more into play because the country has long been accustomed to pursuing a "rich man's" approach to national security strategy . the united states could field an overwhelming fighting force and combine it with economic power and leadership in global affairs to bring to bear far greater resources than any other country against any threat to the nation's security . the world , however , has changed , and with it so have the challenges of providing u.s. national security . setting aside questions concerning the size , composition , and capability of the u.s. military , the economy enters into the debate on national security through three overlapping roles . the first is the economy as the source of funds , materiel , and personnel for the military . the second is the economy as a provider of economic security and well - being for americans .