there is no federal mandate that states provide workers' compensation . however , every state and the district of columbia has a workers' compensation system . there are no federal standards for state workers' compensation systems . however , all u.s. workers' compensation systems provide for limited wage replacement and full medical benefits for workers who are injured or become ill as a result of their work and survivors benefits to the families of workers who die on the job . if the employer or insurance carrier does not controvert the claim , then arrangements are made by the dol for the claim to be paid . if , however , the employer controverts any part of the claim , then the dol sets up an informal conference , either in person or by phone , between the employer or insurance carrier and worker with the goal of resolving any disputes over the claim . if this informal conference fails to resolve all outstanding disputes , then a formal hearing before a dol administrative law judge ( alj ) is scheduled . if the employer or insurance carrier or the worker is dissatisfied with the decision of the alj , then this decision may be appealed to the benefits review board ( brb ) . workers' compensation in the united states is a no - fault system that pays workers for employment - related injuries or illnesses without considering the culpability of any one party . in exchange for this no - fault protection and the guarantee of benefits in the event of an employment - related injury , illness , or death , workers give up their rights to bring actions against employers in the civil court system and give up their rights to seek damages for injuries and illnesses , including pain and suffering , outside of those provided by the workers' compensation laws . prior to the enactment of the lhwca in 1927 , longshore and harbor workers were not covered by any workers' compensation system . although persons who worked entirely on land were covered by workers' compensation laws in those states that enacted such laws , pursuant to the supreme court's 1917 decision in southern pacific co. v. jensen , state workers' compensation systems did not have jurisdiction over persons working on the "navigable waters" of the united states because the constitution granted the authority over "matters of admiralty and maritime jurisdiction" to the federal government . the lhwca created a federal workers' compensation program to cover these workers . in 1972 , the lhwca zone of coverage was extended to include areas adjacent to navigable waters that are used for loading , unloading , repairing , or building vessels . employers required by the lhwca to provide workers' compensation coverage to their employees may either purchase private insurance or self - insure . the dol is responsible for authorizing insurance carriers to provide coverage under the lhwca program and for authorizing companies to self - insure . however , the dol does not set or regulate insurance premiums . these insurance arrangements are the primary means of providing lhwca benefits to injured , sick , and deceased workers and their families . general revenue is not used to pay any lhwca benefits .