but will the exit strategy work ? the most straightforward exit strategy would be for the fed to sell its assets , thereby automatically reversing the growth in its balance sheet and the money supply . the fed seems somewhat reluctant to pursue this strategy as long as the housing market remains fragile because it would likely involve the sale of its mortgage - related assets . its other main proposal is to give banks an incentive to keep those reserves sitting at the fed by raising the interest it pays on reserves , a power that congress granted the fed in 2008 . this approach is largely untested in the united states or abroad , so its potential effectiveness is unproven . at current reserve levels , it would involve considerable expenditure if interest rates returned to levels closer to their long - term averages , and that expense would ultimately be borne by the taxpayer , since it would reduce the fed's profits , which are mostly remitted to the treasury . qe2 can be thought of as qe1 on a smaller scale . thus , assuming the economic context has not changed fundamentally , arguably the best way to predict the effects of qe2 is to look at the effects of qe1 , and adjust them proportionately downward . the direct effect of qe1 was to increase excess bank reserves from almost zero to over $1 trillion , which , in essence , is how the fed's loans and asset purchases were financed . in normal conditions , banks would be expected to lend out these reserves relatively quickly , which would boost economic growth and result in a rapid increase in the money supply through a money multiplier effect , that would increase inflation . instead , bank lending fell 0.3% over the past year , and the doubling in the portion of the money supply controlled by the fed ( roughly equivalent to the growth in the fed's balance sheet ) , did not translate into large increases in overall measures of the money supply . some would point to the $1 trillion in bank reserves as evidence that quantitative easing is "pushing on a string. even if this bank lending channel does not work , the fed has stressed that quantitative easing can still stimulate the economy through an interest rate channel . purchasing treasury securities of longer maturities should reduce long - term treasury yields . but to stimulate the broader economy , two additional steps are necessary . first , it is necessary for the decline in interest rates to spread to private assets that were not purchased . second , businesses and consumers must be willing and able to respond to lower interest rates by increase their interest - sensitive investment and consumption spending , respectively . although interest rates did not fall after qe1 in absolute terms , most research indicates it resulted in a modest decrease in interest rates , relative to if the fed had not purchased these assets , that modestly increased economic growth relative to what would have occurred in the absence of qe1 . some critics have complained that qe2 will lead to a weaker dollar .