target collection amounts are set out through fy2020 . subtitle j establishes a reserve fund in the sec which may hold up to $100 million in excess fee collections . the fund may be used to achieve flexibility and continuity in spending , in order that delays in enacting appropriations bills do not impede multi - year spending projects . in addition , the law provides for the sec to submit its budget request directly to congress , rather than through the office of management and budget . the fourth approach in a sense bridges the gaps between the others . in dodd - frank , congress adopted all these approaches . the asset securitization process , where home mortgages or other loans are sold by the original lenders , pooled , and resold to bond investors , produced the assets that came to be called "toxic" during the crisis . losses in value accruing to mortgage - backed securities , together with uncertainty as to the true value of such securities , were a key factor in the freezing of interbank credit flows , as market participants came to doubt the credit - worthiness of banks and the reliability of balance sheets . subtitle d addresses the asset - backed securities ( abs ) market by imposing new obligations on "securitizers" — issuers of an abs , or persons who organize and initiate abs transactions by selling or transferring assets to an issuer — and ( in some cases ) on "originators," those who , through an extension of credit or otherwise , create a financial asset that collateralizes an asset - backed security and sell that asset directly or indirectly to a securitizer . many analyses of the causes of the financial crisis assign a role to flawed compensation structures: when executives and traders receive much of their pay in the form of a bonus that reflects a single year's results , they may have an incentive to take long - term risks that boost short - term earnings . in most years , they profit , and when the rare loss comes , they keep their past bonuses . subtitle e contains a number of provisions intended to align the incentives and interests of long - term shareholders and employees . subtitle f is in significant part a response to perceived failures at the sec . the bernard madoff ponzi scheme , which was investigated several times by the sec but not detected , raised questions about the competence of some sec employees and about managerial and organizational weaknesses . specifically , some of the sec staff assigned to inspect madoff's firm were inexperienced and took madoff's false assertions at face value . others failed to take simple steps , such as making a phone call or sending a letter to verify accounts where madoff claimed to hold customer securities , that would have brought the fraud to light much earlier . there was little or no communication between divisions of the sec: in one case , a team of investigators did not realize that another sec investigation of madoff had recently concluded .