job losses have subsequently decreased . employment at private - and public - sector employers rose by more than 3 million between june 2009 and october 2012 , the latest month for which data were available at the time this report was prepared . within the june 2009-october 2012 period , total employment increased substantially from march to may 2010 because the federal government hired temporary workers to assist it in conducting the decennial census . after may 2010 , employment fell as the temporary workers were let go upon completion of the 2010 census . private - sector employment began increasing in march 2010 , according to data from the u.s. bureau of labor statistics' monthly survey of employers in the nonfarm sector of the economy . from october 2010 through july 2012 , job gains in the private sector more than offset losses in the public sector — chiefly at state and local governments . the public sector did not begin contributing to the net increase in nonfarm payroll employment until the second half of 2012 . in the last year , from november 2012 to november 2013 , employment growth has been in the private sector , while employment in the public sector fell . a "hands off" policy approach would counsel for patience . in this view , a decrease in unemployment is inevitable . every recession since world war ii except the 1980 recession was followed by a period of sustained job creation . historical experience confirms that strong economic growth is the most important factor for reducing unemployment after a recession . nevertheless , because the unemployment rate is so high , even if the economy grew at a healthy pace , it would take several years for the unemployment rate to reach its pre - recession level . for example , after the unemployment rate peaked at 10.8% in november and december 1982 , it had fallen less than three percentage points one year later ; it took about six years for the rate to fall by half . this gradual decline from a recession - elevated level happened when economic growth averaged an unusually high rate of 4.5% annually . during the current recovery , the rate of economic growth has been much slower . in addition , the recession came at a time when concerns were already growing about a long - term debt that was unsustainable in the future . concerns about this debt had led to spending caps that produced part of the fiscal cliff . further stimulus might help the economy to return more quickly to full employment but would exacerbate the debt problem . another argument in favor of patience is that the government has already taken extraordinary steps to stabilize the economy through the creation of the tarp , the fed's unconventional policy actions , and fiscal stimulus in 2008 and 2009 , the latter of which contained significant outlays through 2011 . no action has been taken on the other temporary provisions in h.r . 8 expiring at the end of 2013 , including the extension of unemployment benefits , the expiration of a number of temporary tax benefits , or a longer - term doc fix .