the standard of h.r . 1 judicial review that concerns congressional delegations of legislative authority to administrative agencies addresses whether an agency action is "in excess of statutory jurisdiction , authority , or limitations , or short of statutory right. the supreme court has stated that "an administrative agency's power to regulate in the public interest must always be grounded in a valid grant of authority from congress. courts grant varying levels of deference to agency interpretations of statutes when examining questions such as whether an agency's action exceeds its congressionally delegated st atutory authority . a detailed discussion of the types of deference that a court may accord to an agency's interpretation of a statutory provision is available in crs report r43203 , chevron deference: court treatment of agency interpretations of ambiguous statutes , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] . the various exceptions are discussed below . agencies are generally empowered to amend or repeal existing rules that were issued pursuant to discretionary authority . in order to do so , however , the agency must comply with the default requirements of the apa , which defines "rulemaking" to be the "process for formulating , amending , or repealing a rule. therefore , in order to amend or repeal an existing legislative rule , an agency generally must comply with the same notice - and - comment rulemaking procedures , outlined in ยง 553 of the apa , that governed the original promulgation of the rule . in cases where a statute specifically requires alternative procedures for the initial promulgation of a specific legislative rule , the agency may be required to engage in those same procedures to amend or repeal that rule . rule repeals , which are often deregulatory in nature , may be excused from the apa's delayed effective date requirement if they are deemed to "relieve a restriction. as previously noted , the apa requires that a rule may not take effect until 30 days after the date of publication of the final rule . that requirement , however , is subject to various exceptions , including when an agency finds that there is "good cause" for the rule to take immediate effect , or where the rule "grants or recognizes an exemption or relieves a restriction. it would therefore appear that although an agency is generally required to comply with the notice - and - comment requirements of ยง 553 in repealing a rule , to the extent the repeal removes a previously existing requirement on regulated entities , the rule could be given immediate effect upon publication of the final repeal . policy statements , interpretive rules , agency rules of procedure , and other informal agency pronouncements that were not subject to notice - and - comment during their initial promulgation and that lack the force and effect of law may be altered immediately and without public participation . even long - standing agency positions that have been implemented through non - legislative rules may generally be reversed without compliance with notice - and - comment procedures . recent presidents , through executive order , have also imposed a number of non - statutory requirements on the executive branch rulemaking process .