a few agencies have both law enforcement and intelligence responsibilities . in the justice department , the fbi and the dea , elements of both of which are part of the intelligence community , have major law enforcement responsibilities . the contribution of intelligence agencies must be carefully integrated with the work of law enforcement agencies at the federal , state , local , and tribal levels and with the contributions of mexican , canadian , and other foreign agencies . there are , however , significant issues that congress may examine in order to ensure that u.s. borders are as secure as possible , that the global missions of the intelligence community are not downgraded , that waste and duplication of effort are avoided , that the civil liberties of u.s. persons are respected , and that canada and mexico remain close partners in preventing narcotics smuggling and terrorist activities . thus , any shifting of funds within this account to intelligence activities might arguably lack "specific authorization. accordingly , the dod's fiscal year fy2011 budget estimates states that dod "considers this request as notice to congress pursuant to 50 u.s.c . ยง 414 ( a ) ( 3 ) ( c ) that the department of defense intends to make funds appropriated for drug intervention and counterdrug activities of the department of defense available for the all source collection of counterdrug intelligence . further , the department considers congressional action on this budget request as satisfying the requirement of 50 u.s.c . although a unilateral declaration by an executive branch agency may not in the view of some observers definitively resolve an issue of specific authorization , the dod statement at least ensures that the concern is noted . the intelligence authorization act for fy2010 ( p.l . 111-259 ) includes a provision ( sec . 101 ) that authorizes "appropriated funds available to an intelligence agency may be obligated or expended for an intelligence or intelligence - related activity as appropriated for fiscal year 2010 , as modified by such reprogramming and transfers of funds authorized by and reported to the appropriate congressional committees. a role for intelligence agencies in the broader border security effort exists even if it cannot be publicly discussed in significant detail . these efforts come under the jurisdiction of several committees , including the intelligence , judiciary , homeland security , armed services , foreign relations , and appropriations committees . border security is inherently an interagency effort . congress does not oversee a self - contained entity known as "border security ; " rather , components and aspects of the effort are considered by a number of different committees . there are a number of areas relating to the role of the intelligence community that observers argue may warrant careful oversight .