this figure peaked at 13.1 years during the 111 th congress ( 2009-2010 ) . for both the house and senate , the congress with the fewest average years of prior experience was the 1 st , as all senators and representatives necessarily had zero years of experience upon arrival . in the last 50 years , the congress with the lowest average years of service among representatives and senators was the 97 th congress ( 1981-1982 ) , in which incoming representatives had an average of 7.4 years of prior service in the house ( slightly more than 3.5 terms ) and senators had an average of 7.5 years of prior service in the senate ( 1.25 terms ) . aggregate statistics on member service tenures tend to disguise the variety of congressional service records found among individual members . some members have very short tenures of service and choose not to seek reelection ; other members have long tenures that end after reelection defeat . at the aggregate level , average careers have become longer , but a great deal of variation in the length of congressional careers still persists . additionally , the institutional and policy contexts that have shaped member decisions to seek or not seek reelection , and succeed or fail when seeking reelection , are not static factors . just as the institutional contexts of elections and congressional operations have developed since the 19 th century , they continue to change in the contemporary congress . to the degree that patterns of congressional service in part reflect the incentives provided to members by these institutional factors , it is likely that the patterns of member service tenure will also continue to change . similarly , the continued development of the institutional environment suggests that there is no way to predict how the patterns of service tenure will change ; just as seemingly stable 19 th century patterns rapidly changed toward the end of the century , so could the service tenure patterns we observe today . during the 20 th century , congressional careers lengthened as turnover decreased and congress became more professionalized . the report also examines two further issues related to member tenure , including the distribution of member service over time , as well as members' cross - chamber experience . although the average tenure of members has increased since the late 19 th century , a substantial portion of representatives and senators in recent congresses have served for six years or less in their respective chambers . with respect to cross - chamber experience , while a small proportion of representatives have historically had previous senate experience , a sizable percentage of senators throughout congressional history have had previous house experience . as shown in figure 1 below , the average years of service of members in both chambers has generally increased over time . the prior house service of incoming representatives increased from an average of 2.5 years in the 19 th century to 9.5 in the 21 st to date ; the average peaked at 10.3 years — just over five terms — during the 102 nd ( 1991-1992 ) , 110 th ( 2007-2008 ) , and 111 th congresses ( 2009-2010 ) .