the bill , which was the same as h.r . 113-6 did not mention the acs , the senate explanatory statement noted that language in the two house amendments to h.r . 5326 , from the 112 th congress , "prohibiting funding for the acs or prohibiting penalties for non - compliance with the acs" was not adopted . the census bureau , however , was "directed to provide a report to the committees on appropriations no later than 120 days after enactment of this act on ... the steps being taken to ensure that the acs is conducted as efficiently and unobtrusively as possible. the department of commerce was "directed to acquire an independent analysis of the costs and benefits of making compliance with the acs voluntary . the results of this analysis shall be provided ... to the committees on appropriations no later than 180 days after enactment of this act. three bills that would have affected the acs were introduced in the 113 th congress , but saw no action beyond committee referrals and one subcommittee referral . two companion proposals that resembled h.r . 5046 from the 111 th congress and h.r . 931 , s. 3079 , and the poe amendment to h.r . 5326 in the 112 th congress would have made all but a few acs responses optional . a third bill would have prohibited the commerce secretary and the census bureau from conducting any surveys , including the acs , and almost all censuses . the house passed a fourth , appropriations , bill with an amendment that would have prohibited using funds to enforce any penalties under title 13 , united states code , section 221 , concerning the acs . 1078 , to make participation in the american community survey voluntary , except with respect to certain basic questions , and for other purposes , was introduced on march 12 , 2013 , by representative poe , and referred to the house committee on oversight and government reform . the legislation would have made optional most responses to "any survey authorized under" title 13 , u nited s tates code , section 193 . the acs , as previously mentioned , is conducted under this section and section 141 . 1078 would have required responses only to inquiries about the respondent's name and contact information , the date of the response , and the "number of people living or staying at the same address. the bill further specified that except for having to provide this information , "no person may be fined or otherwise compelled to answer questions in connection with the survey ... which is commonly referred to as the 'american community survey.' 1078 , was introduced on the same day by senator paul and referred to the senate committee on homeland security and governmental affairs . 1638 , the census reform act of 2013 , was introduced on april 18 , 2013 , by representative jeff duncan . it was referred on that date to the house committees on oversight and government reform , agriculture , and appropriations . on may 3 , 2013 , the bill was referred to the agriculture committee's subcommittee on department operations , oversight , and nutrition .