a number of states have an rps in place . as noted in this report , financing many existing tax - favored or otherwise federally favored financing programs does not currently exist . for example , creb financing is not currently an option for tax - exempt entities considering undertaking a renewable energy investment . babs were no longer available as of december 31 , 2010 . policymakers looking to encourage investment in renewables and efficiency may begin to start by looking at existing programs and deciding which , if any , programs should be extended and funded in the future . tax favored financing is one of many policy options for encouraging investment in renewables and energy - efficiency technologies . in markets that may fail to consider the full costs associated with fossil energy sources , renewables may be disadvantaged . one option to promote renewables that has been considered by congress is a renewable portfolio standard ( rps ) . requiring that some level of electricity be produced using renewable resources would drive markets to invest more in renewables and may lead to energy efficiency investments . in the absence of such market drivers , tax - subsidized financing is another option for promoting investment in the renewable sector . further , the use of tax - credit bonds addresses some of the economic efficiency and equity concerns that have been raised with respect to the use of tax - exempt bonds in the past . the goal of tax favored financing is to reduce the cost of borrowing for those investing in renewables and efficiency , making it easier for such projects to attract investors . while federally subsidized financing may attract investment , there is also the possibility that investment would have taken place without subsidization . in this case , tax favored bonds may reduce a project's borrowing costs , rewarding bond issuers at taxpayer expense without creating additional renewable energy capacity . energy tax subsidies reduce federal revenues , an issue that is of growing concern in an era of high budget deficits . well designed tax favored financing options should strive to achieve technology neutrality . oftentimes , in practice , tax favored investment opportunities are given to specific types of technologies . when policymakers select the types of technologies eligible for various forms of subsidized financing , there is a danger of "picking winners. subsidizing one technology may lead to additional investments in the subsidized technology , at the expense of non - subsidized , but potentially promising alternatives . figure a - 1 illustrates the distribution of the 2007 and 2009 creb allocations by state . california received the largest allocation , receiving $822 million . a number of states did not receive any creb allocations . while congress continues to explore the possibility of a federal rps through various hearings , it does not appear that adoption of such a standard is imminent . while adoption of a federal rps does not appear likely in the near future , strong interest remains in increasing the use of renewables and in increasing investments in energy efficiency .