this situation could raise a number of issues for congress . one issue is whether dod and the army have a common understanding of the gcv's program status and way ahead or whether disagreement exists regarding the precise status of the gcv program . another question that might merit examination is , where in the fy2015 budget request is the $150 million for fy2015 gcv - related activities ? additionally , congress might wish to examine how the army will manage gcv efforts and what activities will continue to be funded and which entities will be involved in post - termination activities . finally , congress might seek greater clarity on how post gcv - termination science and technology efforts will provide "value added" for the next attempt to develop a bradley replacement vehicle . in the wake of this cancellation , there appears to be no clear way ahead for the development of a next generation infantry fighting vehicle . while the secretary of defense has called for the army ( and marines ) to "deliver new , realistic visions for vehicle modernization by the end of this year" congress might decide to engage with army leadership as they formulate their strategy to develop a replacement for the bradley infantry fighting vehicle . such a dialogue could facilitate greater understanding of the army's future intentions and perhaps eventually facilitate a gcv follow - on program . as the army will essentially be "going back to the drawing board" to develop a new fighting vehicle , it might also be a potential consideration to reexamine foreign - developed infantry fighting vehicles that were evaluated during the gcv's analysis of alternative phase . some of the vehicles received highly favorable ratings during evaluations and could prove to be viable alternatives to initiating a third developmental effort to replace the army's bradleys . despite secretary of defense hagel's statement that the gcv program is to be "terminated," reports suggest that the gcv program will continue on as part of still to be defined science and technology effort . army officials reportedly stated $50 million in fy2015 funding would be set aside from an unidentified account ( there was no fy2015 gcv rdt&e budget request ) to preserve the engineering base associated with gcv , and that another $100 million in research and development funding would be used in the army's labs and research and development centers that had been involved in gcv efforts . the report suggests plans for how the army will continue to manage the terminated gcv program remain unclear , but there would likely be a scaled - down program office and an overall program manager to manage contractor efforts and coordinate science and technology activities . there appears to be a degree of disparity between dod and the army in terms of the true program status of the gcv . while dod has terminated the gcv program , the army appears to be continuing program activities and funding various unspecified aspects of the program .