appendix a . agricultural sector emissions of methane and nitrous oxides as shown in table a - 1 , agricultural activities contributed an estimated 34.2% of all ch 4 emissions and 73.3% of all n 2 o emissions in the united states in 2008 . like h.r . 2454 , s. 1733 would have allowed for agriculture and forestry offsets as part of a cap - and - trade scheme . also in the senate , the clean energy partnerships act of 2009 ( s. 2729 ) was introduced by senator stabenow shortly after the senate environment and public works committee completed work on s. 1733 . this bill ( often referred to as the "stabenow amendment" ) would have expanded the agricultural and forestry carbon offset provisions in the comprehensive climate bills ( eg , s. 1733 ) and also would have allowed for certain other provisions benefitting u.s. farmers and landowners . some degree of ghg emissions reduction from agricultural activities can be achieved with existing conservation and land management practices , which also conserve and improve the quality of soil , water , air , energy , and plant and animal life . thus , in addition to or in place of regulating agricultural emissions , another policy option could be to promote various voluntary on - farm practices — ranging from reduced tillage to prescribed grazing — that could mitigate emissions . the effectiveness , complexity , cost , and break - even point of the conservation practice varies based on the farm type , farm size , land management , and agricultural commodity , among other factors . a list of selected conservation practices that can reduce agricultural ghg emissions is displayed in table 2 . typically , conservation practices have been used for soil conservation and water quality improvement , not climate change abatement or mitigation . however , recent investigations have shown certain conservation practices can significantly reduce agriculturally based ghg emissions . ideal conservation practices that also could reduce ghg emissions are associated with the primary agricultural sources of these emissions ( described previously ) — enteric fermentation , manure management , and agricultural soil management — or more simply , croplands and livestock . conservation practices that fall under the domains of nutrient management , tillage operations , field management , precision agriculture , manure management , and dietary management will likely have the most influence on decreasing agricultural ghg emissions . a combination of practices may be necessary in some cases to significantly reduce ghg emissions . however , certain conservation practices may decrease a single ghg while simultaneously increasing others . depending on the agricultural source of ghg emissions , different conservation practices would likely need to be used to obtain desired reductions . for instance , ghg control strategies for cropland differ from those used for livestock . cropland ghg emissions generally are distributed over a vast area of land . land management practices , sometimes referred to as "non - structural practices," work well to reduce ghg emissions from cropland .