reliability . reliability refers to the consistency of measurement of an assessment . who pays for this ? how often should changes be made to the standards , as changes to the standards would require concomitant changes to assessments , teacher training , and curricula ? if the common core standards are included in the esea , would there be a federal role in maintaining or updating the standards ? similar questions may apply to any common assessments that are developed , particularly with respect to the responsibility for maintaining and updating the assessments if the standards to which they are aligned change . if esea reauthorization includes common standards or common assessments as part of a revised accountability system , this may increase the number of states that actually implement the standards and ultimately use the assessments . this may be particularly appealing if the adoption of common standards and assessments involves some sort of tradeoff , such as increasing state and local flexibility with respect to the consequences applied to schools and leas that fail to meet ayp ( or some other required performance target ) . alternatively , congress could choose not to incorporate common standards or common assessments into a revised esea , leaving the common standards and assessments movements at the grassroots level . under this scenario , congress could allow the common standards and assessments to be used to meet whatever accountability requirements continue to apply without actually addressing the issues of the common standards or assessments in statutory language . under the nclb , leas and states simply do or do not meet ayp standards . there is generally no distinction between those that fail to meet only one or two required performance or participation thresholds to a marginal degree versus those that fail to meet numerous thresholds to a substantial extent . several analysts have suggested that a more nuanced grading scale be allowed ( eg , a division of schools or leas failing to make ayp into higher versus lower priority categories , or grades ranging from a to f ) , as is used in several state accountability systems . a major complication associated with such an approach is determining at what point on such a scale the current automatic consequences ( eg , school choice or ses ) are invoked . an additional consideration under the nclb's current performance - based accountability system is that the same set of consequences applies to all schools regardless of whether they failed to make ayp for one subgroup or all students . that is , there is generally no distinction between those that fail to meet only one or two required performance thresholds to a marginal degree versus those that fail to meet numerous thresholds to a substantial extent . further , studies have determined that when otherwise - similar public schools are compared , those with a wider variety of demographic groups are substantially less likely to meet ayp standards . however , without specific requirements for achievement gains by each of the major student groups , it is possible that insufficient attention would be paid to the performance of the disadvantaged student groups among whom improvements are most needed , and for whose benefit the title i - a program was established .