is it unjustified ? are the data and documentation provided by an issuer incomplete , insufficient , or otherwise lacking in relevant information that reasonableness of the proposed rate increase may not be determined ? is it unfairly discriminatory ? will the proposed rate increase lead to premium differences among insureds that share similar risk profiles that either are not allowed under state law , or do not comport with differences in expected costs ? after completion of each rate review , cms will post its final determination on its website and provide explanation to the relevant issuer . as discussed above , a state will conduct the rate review if it has an effective rate review program . cms will evaluate ( and may re - evaluate ) whether a state has such a program in place , according to the following criteria: the state collects data and documentation from issuers that are sufficient enough to examine ( 1 ) the validity of assumptions used to develop the proposed rate increase , and ( 2 ) past projections and actual experience . the state conducts effective , timely reviews of such data and documentation . the state's review process includes the examinations described above , which takes into account factors specified in the rule that may impact rates ( factors such as medical trend , benefit and cost - sharing changes , and others ) . the state's review of rates is based on statutory or regulatory standards . a state with an effective rate review program will be required to publish on its website parts i and ii of the preliminary justification for proposed rate increases . moreover , the state must establish a mechanism to receive comments from the public regarding those proposed increases . cms reviewed all available state regulatory documentation and met with state insurance regulators to determine if a state had an effective rate review program . as of july 1 , 2011 , 40 states , the district of columbia , and the u.s. virgin islands have effective review for all insurance markets and issuers ( see table 6 ) . upon receipt of a determination that a proposed rate increase is unreasonable , the health insurance issuer may: decline to implement the proposed increase or choose to implement a smaller increase . the issuer must notify cms of either action . however , if the smaller rate increase still meets or exceeds the applicable threshold , the issuer must submit a new preliminary justification for that smaller proposed increase . or implement the rate increase that was determined to be unreasonable , if allowed under law . in this case , the issuer must ( 1 ) submit final justification to cms ( which will be posted on the cms website for three years ) , ( 2 ) post on the issuer's website: parts i and ii of the preliminary justification , the determination and explanation from the rate review conducted by the state or cms , and the issuer's final justification ; and ( 3 ) make this information available on the issuer's website for at least three years . the final justification must be consistent with the preliminary justification in terms of the information submitted to justify the rate increase .