data on the native - born population are often shown for comparison . the report relies heavily on the 2010 american community survey ( acs ) public use micro sample ( pums ) , the largest most representative and recent dataset available on the u.s. population . in some instances , other data sources , such as decennial census and current population survey data are introduced . at times , the report discusses possible reasons for patterns observed in the data . finally , the report presents several measures of economic well - being , including median income and poverty . the immigration and nationality act ( ina ) of 1952 collected and codified existing immigration law provisions into one organized structure . key definitions nativity , which refers to whether someone is native born or foreign born , generally refers to place of birth , but not exclusively . the census bureau defines native - born persons as those who were u.s. citizens or u.s. nationals at birth . hence , in addition to persons born in the united states , the term native - born also includes persons born in a u.s. commonwealth or other territories ( puerto rico , u.s. virgin islands , guam , american samoa , or the northern mariana islands ) , or born abroad to a u.s. citizen parent or parents . anyone not born a u.s. citizen or u.s. national is defined as foreign born , including those who have become u.s. citizens through naturalization . naturalized citizens are defined by the immigration and naturalization act ( ina ) as persons admitted as legal residents who have lived in the united states continuously for at least five years ; demonstrated good moral character as well as english reading , writing , and speaking ability ; and passed an examination on u.s. history and government . according to the most recent estimates of foreign - born legal status ( figure 5 ) , unauthorized aliens , legal residents ( permanent and temporary ) and naturalized citizens made up , respectively , 28% , 35% and 37% of the foreign - born population . applied to the total estimated foreign - born population of 39.9 million persons in 2010 ( computed from the acs data ) , these percentages yield absolute population sizes of 11.2 million for unauthorized aliens , 14.0 million for legal residents , and 14.8 million for naturalized citizens . the 39.9 million foreign born ( in 2010 ) make up roughly one - eighth of the u.s. population , but between 2000 and 2010 , they accounted for nearly one - third of all u.s. population growth . they include not only an estimated 14.8 million naturalized citizens ( 37% of all foreign born ) but also 11.2 million unauthorized aliens . of the 16.9 million children with at least one foreign - born parent in 2010 , 14.5 million , or 86% , were born in the united states . recent estimates indicate that unauthorized aliens , legal residents ( permanent and temporary ) and naturalized citizens made up 28% , 35% and 37% , respectively , of the foreign - born population . years of u.s. experience and educational attainment are positively associated with citizenship status .