they did wrong . they misbehaved but fortunately , our experts discovered it. moreover , an unnamed "senior diplomat" suggested that stuxnet may have caused iran to shut down its commercial centrifuge facility for a few days in november 2010 , reuters reported november 23 . iranian officials have attributed the stuxnet infections to a cyber attack , with some suggesting that western countries are responsible . for example , mahmoud liaii characterized the worm as part of an "electronic war [that] has been launched against iran. additionally , mehmanparast suggested october 5 that the "west" is taking "steps and efforts to use every possible means to prevent the peaceful nuclear activities of our country. an october 20 open source center analysis , however , observed that iranian officials have "largely remained vague" about stuxnet's "target , intent , and origin. there have been previous allegations of efforts by the united states and other governments , including israel , to sabotage iran's centrifuge program . the new york times reported in january 2009 that such efforts have included "undermin[ing] electrical systems , computer systems and other networks on which iran relies," according to unnamed senior u.s. and foreign government officials . one effort involved foreign intelligence services sabotaging "individual power units that iran bought in turkey" for tehran's centrifuge program . "a number of centrifuges blew up," according to the times . western governments have reportedly made other efforts to sabotage centrifuge components destined for iran , according to some non - governmental experts . additionally , new york times reporter james risen wrote in 2006 that , according to unnamed u.s. officials , the united states engaged in a covert operation to provide iran with flawed blueprints for a device designed to trigger a nuclear explosion . vulnerabilities in industrial control systems have long been an issue of concern to both the security and technology communities . modern critical infrastructure facilities rely on computer hardware and software continuously to monitor and control equipment that supports numerous industrial processes , including nuclear plant management , electrical power generation , water distribution and waste control , oil and gas refinement , chemical production , and transportation management . the department of homeland security ( dhs ) categorizes 18 critical infrastructure sectors as "essential to the nation's security , public health and safety , economic vitality , and way of life. the advent of the stuxnet virus has raised questions on the vulnerabilities of national critical infrastructure . in the absence of specific information on the full impact of stuxnet , one can speculate that all of these sectors may be at risk . many observers fear that a successful infiltration and attack could degrade or stop the operation of a critical infrastructure facility that delivers water , gas , or other essential utility , or affect multiple facilities due to the interdependent nature of the nation's infrastructure sectors responsible for providing essential services . sean mcgurk , the department of homeland security's acting director of the national cybersecurity and communications integration center , stated during a november 2010 hearing , "we have not seen this coordinated effort of information technology vulnerabilities and industrial control exploitation completely wrapped up in one unique package .