the problem is the problem. gramm - rudman - hollings included general deficit targets that applied to the budget as a whole and were enforced by sequestration , applying formulaic cuts to discretionary and direct spending programs . controversy arose as many felt that the inability to achieve the deficit targets was caused by changing projections of the impact of revenues or direct spending on the deficit even when action had already been taken to reduce discretionary spending . these criticisms led to the budget enforcement act of 1990 ( bea ) , which created a "firewall" between discretionary spending and direct spending . caps were set for discretionary spending and were enforced by sequestration solely to discretionary spending programs . paygo was established to enforce deficit reductions achieved by changes to revenues and direct spending enacted through reconciliation by limiting the ability of congress to enact new direct spending and revenue legislation and was enforced by sequestration . budget enforcement mechanisms , such as sequestration , frequently focus only on spending and not on revenue . this characteristic of budgetary enforcement has also been criticized as being unattractive . for example , if revenue decreases occur over the course of a year , either due to changes in law or economic factors , some believe it is not fair that spending should absorb the resultant impact on the deficit . therefore , proposals have been made that a sequester should be accompanied by an automatic revenue surcharge . a mechanism that would apply to all components of the budget , and do so proportionately , would need to be very sophisticated and would likely require alterations over the long term . although across - the - board enforcement mechanisms have been criticized for their formulaic and indiscriminate manner of making cuts , they can be tailored to exempt or shield certain programs , making the process more discriminate but greatly reducing the effectiveness as a tool for deficit reduction . for example , under statutory paygo , certain programs and activities are exempt from the paygo scorecards , including provisions deemed an emergency by congress and provisions dealing with four specific "current policy" areas . the four specified areas are medicare physicians' payments , the estate and gift tax , the alternative minimum tax ( amt ) , and extension of certain income tax cuts for the middle class enacted in 2001 and 2003 . without these exemptions , offsets of over $200 billion could be required in 2011 to finance them . additionally , certain programs have been exempt from sequestration itself . under statutory paygo some direct spending programs and activities are exempt from sequestration , such as social security and tier i railroad retirement benefits , federal employee retirement and disability programs , supplemental security income ( ssi ) , supplemental nutrition assistance program ( snap ) , children's health insurance program ( chip ) , temporary assistance for needy families ( tanf ) , veterans' programs , net interest , refundable income tax credits , medicaid , and unemployment compensation . in 2010 , these exemptions amounted to roughly half of total federal spending .