congress can also use regular ( i.e. , non - cra ) legislative procedures to disapprove agencies' rules , but such legislation may prove even more difficult to enact than a cra resolution of disapproval ( primarily because of the lack of expedited procedures in the senate ) , and if enacted may also be vetoed by the president . cra resolutions of disapproval must be presented to the president for signature or veto . for a variety of reasons , however , the cra has been used to disapprove only one rule in the 14 years since it was enacted . perhaps most notably , it is likely that a president would veto a resolution of disapproval to protect rules developed under his own administration , and it may be difficult for congress to muster the two - thirds vote in both houses needed to overturn the veto . although the cra has been used only once to overturn an agency rule , congress has regularly included provisions in the text of agencies' appropriations bills directing or preventing the development of particular regulations . such provisions include prohibitions on the finalization of particular proposed rules , restrictions on certain types of regulatory activity , and restrictions on implementation or enforcement of certain provisions . appropriations provisions can also be used to prompt agencies to issue certain regulations , or to require that certain procedures be followed before or after their issuance . winning that war will require administrative determination and imagination and as much political resolve as was needed to pass the legislation . the december 20 , 2010 , edition of the unified agenda listed 29 ppaca - related actions in the "proposed rule stage" ( indicating that the agencies expected to issue proposed rules on the topics within the next 12 months , or for which the closing dates of the comment periods are the next step ) . all but 2 of the 29 upcoming proposed rules were expected to be issued by components of the department of health and human services ( hhs ) : the centers for medicare and medicaid policy ( cms , 15 actions ) ; the office of consumer information and insurance oversight ( ociio , 4 actions ) ; the office of the secretary ( 4 actions ) ; the food and drug administration ( fda , 2 actions ) ; the administration on aging ( aoa , 1 action ) ; and the health resources and services administration ( hrsa , 1 action ) . one other proposed rule was expected to be issued by the department of labor's employee benefits security administration ( ebsa ) , and one was expected to be issued by the department of the treasury's departmental offices ( do ) . the december 20 , 2010 , edition of the unified agenda listed 18 ppaca - related actions in the "final rule stage" ( indicating that the agency expected to issue final rules on the subjects within the next 12 months ) .