the dtos have been in constant flux in recent years . by some accounts , when president calderón came to office in december 2006 , there were four dominant dtos: the tijuana / arellano felix organization ( afo ) , the sinaloa cartel , the juárez / vicente carillo fuentes organization ( cfo ) , and the gulf cartel . since then , the large , more stable organizations that existed in the earlier years of the calderón administration have fractured into many more groups . for several years , the u.s. drug enforcement administration ( dea ) identified the following organizations as dominant: sinaloa , los zetas , tijuana / afo , juárez / cfo , beltrán leyva , gulf , and la familia michoacana . in some sense these might be viewed as the "traditional" dtos . however , many analysts suggest that those 7 groups now seem to have fragmented to between 9 and as many as 20 major organizations . today , fragmentation , or "balkanization," of the major crime groups has been accompanied by many groups' diversification into other types of criminal activity . the following section focuses on nine dtos whose current status illuminates the fluidity of all the crime groups in mexico as they face new challenges from competition and changing market dynamics . the goal of the mexican government's counter - dto strategy has been to diminish the extent and character of the dtos' activity from a national - security threat to a law - and - order problem and , once this is achieved , to transfer responsibility for addressing this challenge from military forces back to the police . president peña nieto did not succeed in reducing the scope of the military in its domestic policing function . instead , the mexican military has been challenged by accusations of extrajudicial executions by members of its forces and also for the use of torture and other severe human rights violations . the government remains challenged by the corruption of politicians by dtos , such as the former governor of veracruz alleged to have fostered a "state of terror" during his administration , and he is among 14 sitting and former governors accused of deep corruption in office . in the wake of the six years under the pri , some towns have experienced serious displacement ; they are often described as ghost towns . they include towns close to the border in texas in the states of coahuila and tamaulipas ; and in the heart of mexico's golden triangle of drug cultivation , especially the state of sinaloa . the splintering of the large criminal organizations has driven violence , according to several analysts . a key cause of the violence has been the transition to a post - sinaloa cartel dominated - era , with the rise of a lucrative heroin trade and synthetic opioids , such as fentanyl , causing renewed conflict . nevertheless , some observers remain convinced of the capacity of the sinaloa dto , and the newly predominant cjng , to use their well - established bribery and corruption to operate with impunity in mexico .