94-171 data . such data , however , are available from the results of the american community survey for geographic areas with populations as small as 20,000 persons . census data are usually reported by political jurisdictions ( states , cities , counties , and towns ) , and within political jurisdictions by special census geography ( such as census designated places , tracts , block numbering areas , and blocks ) . 94-171 program allows states , which chose to participate in it ( 49 in 2010 ) , to request census data by certain nontraditional census geography such as voting districts ( precincts ) and state legislative districts . these special political jurisdiction counts enable the persons drawing the district lines to assess past voting behavior when redrawing congressional and state legislative districts . in most states , redrawing congressional districts is the responsibility of the state legislature with the concurrence of the governor . in seven states , arizona , california , hawaii , idaho , montana , new jersey , and washington , a non - partisan or bi - partisan commission is responsible for drawing and approving the plans . some states have explicit deadlines in law to complete their congressional districting . most do not , so the effective deadline for the legislatures or commissions to complete their work would have been whatever deadlines were established in the states for filing for primaries for the 2012 elections . although many states have standards mandating equal populations , compactness , contiguousness , and other goals to not split counties , towns , and cities , federal law controls the redistricting process . other than a requirement that multi - member states cannot elect representatives at - large ( 2 u.s.c . 2c ) however , no federal statutory law establishes explicit standards for redistricting . the principal laws that apply are the supreme court decisions mandating one person , one vote and the voting rights act . the fundamental federal rule governing redistricting congressional districts , one person , one vote , was promulgated by the supreme court in wesberry v. sanders ( 376 u.s. 7 , 1964 ) . the court has refined that ruling in a series of cases culminating in karcher v. daggett ( 462 u.s. 725 , 1983 ) that one person , one vote means that any population deviation among districts in a state must be justified , but the deviations from absolute equality may be permitted if the states strive to make districts more compact , respect municipal boundaries , preserve the cores of prior districts , or avoid contests between incumbents . section 2 of the voting rights act ( vra ) applies nationwide . it prohibits states or localities from imposing a "voting qualification or prerequisite to voting or standard , practice or procedure ... in a manner which results in the denial or abridgement of the right to vote on account of race or color. the supreme court interpreted the vra's application to redistricting in a series of cases responding , in part , to the extraordinarily complicated districts created by many states in the 1990s to maximize minority representation ( beginning with shaw v. reno , 509 u.s. 630 , 1993 ) .