domestic shippers are charged only once for each shipment , not at both ports . however , if imported goods are offloaded from a vessel at one port and then shipped to another u.s. port on a different vessel , such as a feeder ship or barge , the tax would be assessed at both ports . however , the fuel costs of these vessels could be prohibitive . funding technological development could be an option for promoting marine highways . technological developments have been instrumental in helping railroads compete to carry truck trailers and containers . proponents of marine highways have suggested that similar developments might occur in the maritime sector , with changes in port or vessel technologies potentially driving down the cost of short - sea shipping . one such technology is "fast ferries," ships with speeds of 40 knots or greater , which have been proposed as a way to make coastal shipping more attractive . there are questions , therefore , whether marine highways will divert enough trucks to provide public benefits commensurate with their costs . for instance , at the height of its service , the albany express barge was diverting 10 trucks a day . to put this number in perspective , the port of new york and new jersey handles , on average , about 10,000 containers per day . most of the marine highway services that have received federal grants are carrying , or seem likely to carry , no more than a few thousand containers annually . on a per truck basis , therefore , the federal cost of diversion is likely to be in the neighborhood of several hundred dollars . using the example of albany express barge again , the $5.3 million of federal funding provided for this service enabled the transportation of 8,486 containers over the service's three - year life . this equates to a federal outlay of $625 per container , which is in the neighborhood of what a shipper would pay for trucking a container between new york and albany . this is particularly severe in urban areas where there are additional concerns about emissions from transportation sources . marad uses the term "marine highways" instead of "short sea" shipping to convey the purpose of the program , which is to mitigate landside freight bottlenecks . for this reason , projects relating to waterborne shipment of dry and liquid bulk products and oversize cargo too large to fit into a container are not eligible , as these products already move on waterways . also , freight ferry service to an island without a bridge is ineligible , because no roadway congestion would be relieved . as specified by congress , shipments to or from mexico do not qualify , nor do shipments to or from canada , except those across the great lakes . the harbor maintenance tax is assessed at 0.125% of shipment value ( $1.25 per $1,000 of shipment value ) on imported waterborne and domestic cargo . it is not assessed on waterborne exports , as a 1998 supreme court decision found this tax on exports to be unconstitutional .