was the inmate unemployed before being incarcerated ? each program is discussed in more detail below . these variables were chosen because they provide an indication of what type of rehabilitative programming an inmate might need . data from the 1997 and 2004 surveys show that it was likely that there was increased need for drug abuse treatment programs , but the need for literacy / ged and occupational education programs along with fpi work assignments remained flat . as shown in table 1 , in both 1997 and 2004 approximately one - quarter of federal inmates reported not having a ged or a high school diploma and approximately 30% of inmates in both years reported that they were unemployed before being arrested . hence , unless inmates with rehabilitative needs accounted for a greater share of the inmates who participated in rehabilitative programming after fy2004 , the data from bop suggest that the trends observed in the 1997 and 2004 survey data could be applicable to current federal inmates . the analysis above suggests either that bop is not offering rehabilitative programming to all inmates with a need for it , or that inmates are choosing not to participate in rehabilitative programming even though they indicate a need for it . there may be multiple explanations for both findings . moreover , as discussed earlier , there is not necessarily conclusive evidence that rehabilitative programs for inmates are effective . this section of the report discusses two potential issues congress might choose to consider . a potential issue for congress is whether bop has the resources it needs to carry out its mission to provide rehabilitative programming to federal inmates . according to bop , its biggest challenge is "managing the ever increasing federal inmate population , and providing for their care and safety , as well as the safety of bop staff and surrounding communities , within budgeted levels. in its fy2011 congressional budget submission , bop notes that it has "stretched resources , streamlined operations , improved program efficiencies , and reduced costs to operate as efficiently and effectively as possible. even though total appropriations for bop increased every fiscal year since fy2000 , bop has dedicated a growing percentage of its base budget to cover mandatory requirements , including inmate medical care , food , utilities , fuel , and correctional staffing . bop also reports that the inmate - to - staff ratio , which includes staff to provide rehabilitative programming , has increased over the past several fiscal years . data provided by bop indicate that the total number of bop staff per 1,000 inmates decreased from 242.0 in fy2000 to 202.2 in fy2011 . as congress continues its oversight of bop , it might consider whether staffing levels at bop are adequate to allow bop to carry out its mission to rehabilitate inmates . a related issue is whether bop has enough facilities to manage the federal prison population . bop opened 50 new prisons between fy1991 and fy2012 and additional prisons mean more classrooms and factories in which bop can offer rehabilitative programs . in addition to providing more classrooms and factories , additional prisons decrease crowding .