the compensation program has two parts . part a creates a mandatory forum for the administration of claims by requiring individuals who seek compensation , including the injured party's legal representative , to file a petition in the united states court of federal claims ( vaccine court ) . a petitioner is entitled to recover if the affected person ( 1 ) received a vaccine covered by the vaccine act ; ( 2 ) suffered a "covered" injury ; and ( 3 ) it cannot be shown by a preponderance of the evidence that the injuries or death were not caused by the vaccine . a petitioner who suffers an off - table , or non - covered , injury may still recover compensation by proving affirmatively that the vaccine caused the injury . part b permits a petitioner to decline the result of the vaccine court and pursue a civil suit in state or federal district court only after a final judgment is issued by the vaccine court . any subsequent civil action is governed by state law , including the applicable statute of limitations , which is stayed pending the outcome of the suit filed in the vaccine court . however , section 300aa - 22 places limitations on subsequent civil actions , and it is this section that is at issue in bruesewitz v. wyeth . the issue before the court was whether 42 u.s.c . section 300aa - 22 ( b ) ( 1 ) of the act precludes all vaccine design defect claims even if the vaccine's side effects were avoidable , in other words whether the section preempts vaccine design defect claims categorically , or whether the vaccine manufacturer has to show on a case - by - case basis that the side effects could not have been avoided by some alternatively designed vaccine . on february 22 , 2011 , the supreme court issued its decision in bruesewitz , affirming , by a vote of 6-2 , the decision of the u.s. court of appeals for the third circuit that the federal law preempts all design - defect claims against vaccine manufacturers brought by plaintiffs seeking compensation for injury or death caused by the vaccine's side effects . this report provides an overview of the structure of the vaccine act and the relevant facts of the bruesewitz case . tri - immunol contained whole , inactivated pertussis cells ( "whole - cell" ) that effectively reduced pertussis infections and associated deaths , but it was linked to a variety of adverse events . it then examines the lower court decisions before reviewing the supreme court decision . finally , it discusses the decision's potential effect on preemption jurisprudence as well as on the existing vaccine act litigation . the national childhood vaccine injury act ( vaccine act ) was enacted in 1986 and established a national vaccine program to "achieve optimal prevention of human infectious diseases through immunization and ... against adverse reaction to vaccines. under the vaccine act , the national vaccine injury compensation program ( compensation program ) was established to handle claims against drug manufacturers for vaccine - related injuries and deaths . in this case , the plaintiffs / petitioners were the parents of hannah bruesewitz .