during a joint presentation in washington with u.s . ambassador to vietnam ted osius , vietnam's ambassador to the united states pham quang vinh said the end of the arms embargo would show that relations were fully normalized . ambassador osius proceeded to state that human rights remain a difficult issue in bilateral relations , and that more progress on human rights is needed for the relationship to reach its fullest potential . speaking in hanoi in august 2015 , secretary of state kerry stated that additional relaxation of the arms sales restrictions would be "tied to further progress" on human rights . there are reports that the united states and vietnam are discussing whether to end the restrictions on bilateral arms sales before or during president obama's scheduled trip to vietnam in may 2016 . the sale of arms to vietnam may be a source of some controversy for congress . while some members support the provision of lethal assistance , others object in part because of vietnam's alleged human rights record . for now , the provision of maritime security - related defense articles appears acceptable because of the tensions in the south china sea . until vietnam indicates in more detail the types of military assistance it seeks , the issue is likely to remain on a back burner . some sources indicate that vietnam may request advanced radar equipment , which may test the limits of partial lifting of the restrictions on arms sales for both the obama administration and congress . vietnamese leaders would like the united states to change vietnam's official designation under u.s. law from "nonmarket economy" to "market economy. under u.s. trade law ( 19 u.s.c . 1677 ) , the term "nonmarket economy country" means "any foreign country that the administering authority determines does not operate on market principles of cost or pricing structures , so that sales of merchandise in such country do not reflect the fair value of the merchandise. "nonmarket economy" status is particularly significant for antidumping ( ad ) and countervailing duty ( cvd ) cases heard by the u.s. international trade administration . in making such a determination , the administrating authority of the executive branch is to consider such criteria as the extent of state ownership of the means of production , and government control of prices and wages . however , the general agreement on tariffs and trade ( gatt ) implicitly defines a "non - market economy" for purposes of trade as "a country which has a complete or substantially complete monopoly of its trade and where all domestic prices are fixed by the state. for over 20 years , vietnam has been transitioning from a centrally planned economy to a market economy . under its doi moi policy , vietnam has allowed the development and growth of private enterprise and competitive market allocation of most goods and services . although most prices have been deregulated , the vietnamese government still retains some formal and informal mechanisms to direct or manage the economy . in may 2008 , vietnam formally requested to be added to the u.s. generalized system of preferences ( gsp ) program as a "beneficiary developing country" ( bdc ) .