criminals have become more elusive . they see international borders as opportunities while law enforcement views them as obstacles . criminals have expanded their range of tools and targets as well . meanwhile , law enforcement "plays by yesterday's rules and increasingly risks dealing only with the weakest criminals and the easiest problems," according to the strategic alliance group , a partnership of seven law enforcement agencies from five nations . motivated by money , organized crime fills needs not met by licit market structures and / or exploits businesses , consumers , and nations for profit . organized criminals have capitalized on commercial and technological advances that have bolstered communication and international business . they use innovative methods of moving illegal proceeds around the world . some nations have also witnessed the creation of ties between powerful business figures , politicians , and criminals . modern organized criminals may prefer cellular or networked structural models for their flexibility and avoid the hierarchies governed by elaborate initiation rituals that were favored by their predecessors . fluid network structures make it harder for law enforcement to infiltrate , disrupt , and dismantle conspiracies . many 21 st century organized crime groups opportunistically form around specific , short - term schemes . further , these groups may outsource portions of their operations rather than keeping all of their expertise "in - house. in july 2011 , to address these and other issues , the obama administration issued its strategy to combat transnational organized crime ( 2011 strategy ) . it described transnational organized crime ( toc ) as a strategic threat to national security , laid out a definition of toc , and set forth five policy objectives and six categories of priority actions in an attempt to devise a cohesive federal response to transnational organized crime . complicating all of this , since the terrorist attacks of september 11 , 2001 ( 9 / 11 ) , there has been a shift in law enforcement attention and resources more toward counterterrorism - related activities and away from traditional crime fighting activities — including the investigation of organized crime . this report provides an analysis of how organized crime has capitalized on globalization by using borders as opportunities , relying on fast - paced technological change , and adapting its organizational structures . it illustrates how these transformations can impact u.s. persons , businesses , and interests . the report includes a discussion of how u.s. law enforcement conceptualizes organized crime in the 21 st century and concludes by examining potential issues for congress , including the extent to which organized crime is a national security threat ( partly to be tackled by u.s. law enforcement agencies ) , congressional oversight regarding the federal coordination of organized crime investigations , and the utility of current resources appropriated to combat organized crime . this report employs a broad conceptualization of organized crime in its narrative discussion of criminal activity . in other words , the analysis includes groups engaged in sustained criminal enterprises , such as — but not limited to — drug traffickers , mafia families , smugglers , violent gangs , and fraudsters . he is wanted for leading a financial scheme that defrauded investors of $150 million between 1993 and 1998 .