in general , s.amdt . 4634 would largely support current administration plans and objectives to evolve bmd coverage of nato europe and the united states over the course of this decade , as well as supporting associated u.s. arms control and foreign policy objectives . on december 22 , 2010 , the house and senate armed services committees approved a joint explanatory statement , the practical equivalent of a conference report . the explanatory statement includes: the senate provision that expresses the sense of congress on bmd issues , particularly related to the european paa ; an amendment to the house provision clarifying that limits on the availability of funds for construction and deployment apply to land - based interceptors of the european paa until any host nation approves the required basing and deployment agreements , and a provision granting a national security waiver authority to the secretary of defense regarding those limitations . the statement further notes this provision is not intended to impede or delay the successful implementation of the european paa , nor is it intended to limit the production of missile defense interceptors for ground - and flight - testing , or production validation ; the house provision that limits funds for construction and deployment of the land - based portion of the european paa until after congress receives an independent assessment of the operational and cost - effectiveness of the paa as required by p.l . 111-84 ; and a provision that authorizes a shared early warning program with the czech republic . senator kyl proposed an amendment ( s.amdt . 4634 ) that would set u.s. policy toward the phased adaptive approach ( paa ) . this amendment could be viewed as complementing existing u.s. law ( the national missile defense act of 1999 ; p.l . 106-38 ; 113 stat . 111-383 ) on january 7 , 2011 . 2431 ) , which guides development and deployment of an effective national missile defense ( nmd ) against limited ballistic missile attacks on the territory of the united states . the bill also declares that new start imposes no restrictions on developing or deploying effective u.s. bmd systems . the senate defense authorization bill was scheduled for floor debate in late november 2010 . president obama signed the fy2011 national defense authorization act ( h.r . 6523 ) into law ( p.l . the focus at the early stages of the reagan administration's program was to protect against nuclear - armed ballistic missiles from the soviet union . over the past decade , the aim has been to neutralize the emerging ballistic missile threat from rogue states such as north korea and iran . the united states has been developing missile defense systems for decades . in the case of the former , the pentagon deployed interceptors in alaska and california . in addition , the bush administration sought to have a limited missile defense system endorsed by nato and adopted as an alliance capability . the house bill would also express the sense of congress that the paa is not restricted by new start , the u.s. - russian treaty designed to reduce further the two sides' strategic offensive nuclear weapons .