gina , p.l . in burlington , the supreme court found that an anti - retaliation provision protects an individual if the action might have dissuaded a reasonable worker from making a discrimination claim . generally , title ii of gina requires that genetic information shall be maintained on separate forms and in separate medical files and be treated as a confidential medical record , and prohibits a covered entity from disclosing genetic information . these entities are considered to be in compliance with the maintenance of information requirements if the genetic information is treated as a confidential record under ยง102 ( d ) ( 3 ) ( b ) of the americans with disabilities act . however , the general prohibition on disclosure in gina is subject to six exceptions , including disclosure to the employee . gina also contains a provision concerning the relationship of the confidentiality provisions with the hipaa privacy rule . gina does not prohibit an entity covered under hipaa "from any use or disclosure of health information that is authorized for the covered entity under such regulations. the eeoc final regulations track the legislative language . the eeoc in its discussion of the final regulations addresses several concerns raised by commenters . for example , the eeoc states that genetic information that had been placed in a personnel file prior to the effective date of gina , need not be removed and its existence does not create a violation of gina . however , disclosing such information to a third party would violate the law . generally , gina uses the remedies and enforcement mechanisms available in title vii of the civil rights act of 1964 , although for employees covered by the government employee rights act of 1991 , the congressional accountability act of 1995 , chapter 5 of title 3 of the u.s. code , or section 717 of the civil rights act of 1964 , the remedies and procedures track those acts and statutory provisions . the final regulations mirror the statutory provisions , and add a specific subsection referencing the remedies applicable to gina . these include compensatory and punitive damages , reasonable attorneys' fees , and injunctive relief . section 209 of gina contains several rules of construction , including a provision concerning the relationship between title i and title ii of the act . gina provides that nothing in title ii is to be construed to limit the rights or protections of an individual under any federal or state statute that provides equal or greater protection . in addition , nothing in title ii is to limit the rights or protections of an individual to bring an action , or provide for enforcement of , or penalties for , any violation under title i of gina , certain sections of erisa , the public health service act , and the internal revenue code . this provision has been referred to as a "firewall" between titles i and ii , and has been described as clarifying "that employers are not liable for health insurance violations under civil rights laws unless the employer has separately violated a provision of title ii governing employers. the final regulations mirror the statutory language and elaborate on the firewall provision .