clawbacks . under bankruptcy law , court - appointed bankruptcy trustees are entitled to "clawbacks," or recover , payments that were made out of a corrupt fund before the scheme was discovered and then return them to the bankruptcy estate for distribution to the scheme's victims . there are statutory limits on how far back a trustee can go in seeking such clawbacks . the court - appointed trustee in the madoff case has been attempting to claw back funds from such investors , many of whom reportedly withdrew all of their funds from the operation years before mr. madoff's arrest . this policy has been criticized by investors and by some members of congress . 5032 ( ackerman ) , the trustee would have been prohibited from clawing back any money from victims unless the bilked investor was proven in bankruptcy court to be complicit or negligent in their participation in a ponzi scheme . it would have also applied retroactively to trustees appointed to liquidate assets in discovered ponzi schemes with total investments in excess of $1 billion , including the madoff case . in support of the status quo , john coffee , jr. , a columbia university law professor and a frequent panelist at congressional hearings , has spoken of the long - standing principle that investors who are aided or allowed by a fraudulent manager to redeem their investments should not be allowed to benefit from their association with such a fraudulent entity . professor coffee has also indicated that under the existing bankruptcy code , the trustee can recover the payments made from a corrupt fund ( which he calls "fictitious" profits ) , and place them in a fund whereby they will benefit all of a ponzi's scheme's victims in a prorated fashion . he has also noted that the interests of net winners ( investors who make profits from a ponzi scheme ) will conflict with net losers ( investors who lose money from a ponzi scheme ) . thus , he argues that reform efforts such as h.r . 5032 that attempt to benefit net winners would invariably do so at the expense of net losers . in february 2009 , the sec charged robert allen stanford and three of his companies with orchestrating a fraudulent , multi - billion dollar investment scheme centering on an $8 billion certificate of deposit ( cd ) program . among mr. stanford's companies were the antigua - based stanford international bank ( sib ) and the stanford group company ( sgc ) , an investment adviser . the cds were issued by sib and marketed by sgc to investors worldwide , including to many americans . sipc officials have indicated that under sipa , sipc is obligated to repay up to certain amounts of accepted customer claims from failed broker - dealers when their securities are missing from the firm's accounts . however , according to the officials , the protection does not extend to investors who physically received their cds , as was the case with the holders of the stanford cds . the officials also noted that if fraudulent securities are issued by an sipc non - member such as the antigua - based sib , no sipc protection exists .