this section discusses several of these options . actual implementation of any of the options presented here would require careful consideration about how specifically to modify the parameters of the tax benefit ( s ) of interest . four out of the five would allow a 15% credit rate . three of the five credit options would be nonrefundable . in particular , do these two tax provisions actually increase homeownership as some argue ? this section analyzes these questions in turn . if congress chooses to do so , there are a number of options at its disposal for changing the mortgage interest deduction and the state and local property tax deduction . it appears that the two options that have generally received the most attention so far are converting the mortgage interest deduction into a credit , and limiting the deductibility of state and local property taxes . the list of options presented here is by no means exhaustive . one possible option would be to eliminate the mortgage interest and property tax deductions . elimination of the deductions could be justified as a second - best policy alternative to taxing net imputed rental income . it was discussed earlier in this report that net imputed rental income is currently excluded from taxation . this is due in part to limited acceptance by non - economists of the idea that owning a home provides owners with implicit income that should be taxed , and in part to the practical difficulty of taxing such income . little is known , for example , about the probable rental value of individual owner - occupied homes and available data on rental rates is of limited use because of the differences in size and quality of rental units as compared to owner - occupied properties . the impact on the economy and housing market would depend on how quickly the elimination of the deductions were phased in . sudden elimination of the deductions could cause home purchases to decrease , leading to a decrease in home prices . the decrease in home prices would be more severe if the deductions are capitalized to some degree into current home prices . the decrease in home prices would impose capital losses on current owners and perhaps produce a lock - in effect — current homeowners could be reluctant to sell at a loss . in addition , the decrease in home prices could lead to a reduction in new home construction , a reduction in homeowner wealth , and the possibility of higher defaults since some homeowners could find themselves underwater on their mortgages . these three events could lead to the broader economy being negatively impacted in the short term . if elimination of the deductions were gradually phased in over time it could help mitigate the negative consequences for the economy and housing market . researchers steven bourassa and william grigsby propose eliminating the deductions over a 15- to 20-year period with a fixed date after which the deductions would no longer be available .