if not , the option is eliminated from the list . these categories of options are not mutually exclusive . as stated by epa in its guidance: "combinations of inherently lower - polluting processes / practices ( or a process made to be inherently less polluting ) and add - on controls are likely to yield more effective means of emission control than either approach alone. data for control options include epa's bact / laer clearinghouse , existing epa or state permits , equipment vendors , trade associations , permitting engineers , and technical papers and journals . eliminate technically infeasible control options — control options need to be either demonstrated on a like facility or determined to be both available and applicable in the particular case . rank remaining options based on pollutant reduction — a variety of performance metrics may be necessary to determine comparative control efficiencies among different options . eliminate options that f ail energy , environmental , or economic criteria — the permitting agency has discretion in weighting the three statutory criteria for exclusion . determine bact — the most effective option remaining after the steps above have been taken is determined to be bact and the permitting agency establishes a corresponding emissions limit . a substantial record is built during the nsr process . a completed permit application is reviewed not only by the permitting agency , but also by the regional epa office , federal land managers ( if a psd class i area is involved ) , and by the public . conflicts among these parties and the applicant can send the permit application through a series of state and federal administrative appeals processes , along with state and federal litigation . the specifics on this process vary from state to state . it is possible in some cases that the carbon dioxide could be piped to a facility needing carbon dioxide ( such as an oil field using enhanced oil recovery ( eor ) ) , but those opportunities would be very site - specific . innovative control technology : a technology that has never been commercialized on any source category ; it is in the pilot - plant or demonstration stage of development or deployment ( for example , oxygen combustion [also called oxy - fuel] ) . deployment of an innovative technology on a coal - fired power plant would likely involve substantial costs and risks — costs and risks that could jeopardize the facility's viability . inherently lower polluting production processes , fuels , and coatings : an individual adjustment or combination of adjustments in a facility's production process , its source of fuel , and its use of coatings . inherently lower emitting fuels are available that could either partially ( co - fired ) or completely replace coal . two such alternatives would be natural gas and biomass . however , these alternatives could arguably change ( or "redefine" ) the fundamental purpose of the source ( a change epa does not require under its bact guidance ) , and eliminate some of the advantages of building a coal - fired facility . specific design or operational parameters : adjustments in a facility's design and / or inclusion of inherently less polluting work practices in the facility's operation .