congress overrode the veto . the number of highway earmarks grew in each of the next three surface transportation authorization acts to a high of 5,671 in safetea , enacted in 2005 . the moving ahead for progress in the 21 st century act ( map - 21 ; p.l . 112-141 ) , enacted in 2012 , and the fast act , enacted in 2015 , contain no earmarks . there were typically fewer than 50 highway earmarks in annual appropriations bills through fy1990 , and there were none in the fy1996-fy1998 period . the 1913 house ban on highway earmarks was repealed in 1999 . the number of highway earmarks in appropriations bills grew quickly from 96 in fy2000 to 614 in fy2010 . dot is responsible for the administration of most transportation programs of the federal government . most of that funding is distributed under formula programs , with projects selected by states , local governments , or transportation authorities pursuant to a federally mandated planning process at the state and local levels . dot's direct involvement in project selection is mostly limited to the funding in the department's discretionary programs . highways , transit , and intercity passenger rail are included in a single multi - year surface transportation authorization bill , which establishes programs and sets authorized spending levels . in the house , highways , transit , and rail are under the jurisdiction of the transportation and infrastructure committee ( t&i ) . in the senate , the environment and public works committee has jurisdiction over the highway provisions , the banking , housing , and urban affairs committee handles transit , and the commerce , science , and transportation committee handles rail . provisions involving highway trust fund and revenue issues are under the jurisdiction of the ways and means committee in the house and the committee on finance in the senate . aviation reauthorization bills are primarily under the jurisdiction of the t&i committee in the house and the commerce , science , and transportation committee in the senate . for appropriations legislation , highways , transit , and aviation are under the jurisdiction of the appropriations committees in each house . members of the appropriations committees also oversee the implementation of federal transportation spending through hearings that provide the opportunity to publicly call the attention of dot officials to issues that are important to the member's state or district . the process of developing a transportation authorization bill typically begins with a schedule of hearings in which members can participate , and at which local officials promoting the need for particular projects can testify . once the bill is introduced , members may discuss their concerns with the committee ( both at the member and staff levels ) . such discussions may continue through the bill markup and even during the eventual floor debate . an earmark ban does not affect the ability of members and their staffs to engage in such discussions . nor does it limit their ability to correspond and meet with dot officials in support of projects . a ban on transportation earmarks principally affects discretionary programs overseen by dot . it has little direct impact on the formula programs that make up most federal transportation funding .