, debarred or suspended ) . because of the amendments made to subpart 9.1 of the far in 1995 , past performance has traditionally played a unique role in the responsibility determination process . until recently , "relevant past performance" information was the only information that contracting officers were required by law to consider when making responsibility determinations . it made further updates to the far in 2014 to implement p.l . these regulations were codified in far subpart 15.3 and fully took effect in 1999 . subpart 15.3 , as amended , currently governs use of past performance as an evaluation factor in negotiated procurements . congress and the executive branch required agencies to consider past performance in source selection decisions in the hope that the government would obtain better performance under its contracts — and better value for its procurement dollars — by shifting the basis of its source selection decisions . previously , agencies conducting negotiated procurements had relied heavily on what some commentators described as "complex technical and cost proposals," which these commentators asserted had "no correlation to the contractor's ability to perform the job. consideration of past performance in source selection decisions was seen as an alternative to reliance on such proposals , especially by those who characterized past performance information as the best indicator of a contractor's ability to provide quality goods and services at a reasonable cost . such consideration was not intended to exclude contractors with poor performance histories from future contracts . rather , it was anticipated that certain contractors with poor performance histories would be able to compensate for this in other aspects of their proposals ( eg , offering lower prices , partnering with companies with better records ) , while others would be found nonresponsible for purposes of particular contracts or excluded from government contracting generally through the operation of other legal authorities . ever since the far was promulgated in 1984 , agencies have considered whether contractors have a "satisfactory performance record," among other things , in determining whether they are sufficiently "responsible" to be awarded a government contract . agencies are prohibited from awarding a contract to a contractor who has not been determined to be affirmatively responsible . then , in 1995 , after the issuance of ofpp policy letter 92-5 and the enactment of fasa , ofpp amended subpart 9.1 of the far to further require that agencies consider "relevant past performance information," as defined in subpart 42.15 , when making responsibility determinations . guidance issued by ofpp shortly thereafter clarified that agencies are to use consideration of past performance in the responsibility determination process — not the source selection process — as a means of avoiding contractors with poor performance histories: a contractor with a record of unsatisfactory past performance should be screened out of the selection process as part of the responsibility determination . if a contractor's past performance record passes the responsibility determination , then the record should be compared to the other responsible offerors to determine the offeror that provides the best value to the government .