the small business act of 1953 ( p.l . 83-163 , as amended ) authorized the sba and justified the agency's existence on the grounds that small businesses were essential to the maintenance of the free enterprise system: the essence of the american economic system of private enterprise is free competition . only through full and free competition can free markets , free entry into business , and opportunities for the expression and growth of personal initiative and individual judgment be assured . an enterprise may report under one or a number of eins. in this case , the firm may act more like a set of individual establishments rather than a unified set of establishments . generally speaking , "the net employment change remains the same for all levels of aggregation , but the magnitude of gross job flows varies with the unit of analysis chosen. there is "a higher level of churning when job flows are estimated at a lower level of aggregation ( the establishment ) " and a lower level of churning "at a higher level of aggregation ( the enterprise or firm ) [because] expansions in some units offset contractions in other units , leaving job flows at a lesser magnitude. the preservation and expansion of such competition is basic not only to the economic well - being but to the security of this nation . such security and well - being cannot be realized unless the actual and potential capacity of small business is encouraged and developed . it is the declared policy of the congress that the government should aid , counsel , assist , and protect insofar as is possible the interests of small - business concerns in order to preserve free competitive enterprise , to insure that a fair proportion of the total purchases and contracts for supplies and services for the government be placed with small - business enterprises , and to maintain and strengthen the overall economy of the nation . in economic terms , the congressional intent was to use the sba to deter the formation of monopolies and the market failures they cause by eliminating competition in the marketplace . the congressional emphasis on deterring monopoly formation could help to explain the sba's historical reliance on factors related to promoting business competition within the various industrial classifications , as opposed to using other factors , such as job creation , when formulating its industry size standards . the small business act did not mention the sba's role in job creation . however , in 1954 , wendell barnes , the sba's second administrator , was asked at a congressional hearing to discuss the sba's role in supporting small businesses . he testified that part of the sba's mission was to provide credit to small businesses to enable them to "provide additional employment. for many years , economists and others have argued that providing federal assistance to small businesses is justified because small businesses are perceived to be at a disadvantage , compared with other businesses , in accessing capital and credit . in their view , lenders are less likely to lend to small businesses than to larger businesses because small businesses tend to be younger and have less credit history than larger businesses .