( see table a - 3 . ) the koreu fta would be the eu's first completed fta in asia . similar to the korus fta , the koreu fta is a comprehensive pact that covers the broad range of economic activities in the eu - south korean bilateral economic relationship . the koreu fta is organized into 15 chapters plus special sector specific annexes , which cover automotive products , pharmaceuticals , chemicals , and consumer electronics . the koreu fta eliminates tariffs on virtually all manufactured goods in south korea - eu bilateral trade within seven years and reduces or eliminates many nontariff barriers ( ntbs ) . this report is designed to shed some light on the koreu fta for congress . similar to the objectives of the korus fta , the provisions in the pending koreu fta are intended to boost goods and services exports from the eu to south korea by eliminating south korean import duties and other barriers to trade in industries from autos and pharmaceuticals to consumer electronics and textiles and apparel . exports from south korea to the eu might increase in various manufacturing sectors but are not expected to surge since many eu tariffs are already relatively low and the eu's ntbs are for the most part not as significant as in south korea . differences also exist in how sensitive sectors such as automobiles are treated . for example , the koreu fta includes a duty drawback mechanism , while the korus fta has added a special safeguard for motor vehicles in the event of a surge in south korean automobile exports to the united states . the koreu fta has drawn the attention and interest of u.s. policymakers , including members of congress and the u.s. business community . the koreu fta could have an impact on u.s. - south korean trade by possibly diverting some south korean trade away from the united states to the eu and could provide the eu with a "first mover" advantage since it entered into force on july 1 , 2011 , and the korus fta is expected to enter into force no earlier than early 2012 . it briefly reviews eu - south korean economic ties and the respective eu and south korean objectives regarding the koreu fta . this conclusion logically follows from the fact that the south korean economy is much smaller than the eu , more dependent on the eu market than is the opposite case , and has higher trade barriers than the eu ; therefore , the effects of trade liberalization under the koreu fta would be greater in relative terms for south korea . however , in both cases , the impact of the agreement on the overall economy on both sides will be small , reflecting the larger role played by other countries in their trade and also the larger impact that other economic activities — domestic consumption , government spending , and business investment — have in their economies . most studies indicate that south korea's gdp will increase 1% - 2% after the koreu fta is implemented , while the eu gdp will increase less than 0.05% .