again , ppaca can serve as an illustrative example . the fact that there is arguably a basis for constitutional authority to act under the commerce clause in no way impacts an analysis of whether the specific provisions within ppaca are legitimate exercises of congress's power under the commerce clause . as a result , there has been litigation regarding ppaca's individual mandate , which , to date , has resulted in conflicting judicial decisions with respect to the mandate's constitutionality . the rule does not appear to be asking whether the specifics of what the member is proposing in the bill are consistent with the constitution . that is a separate , often times much more complex inquiry . for example , legislation intending to prohibit the interstate sale and distribution of material related to animal cruelty or depictions of child pornography is arguably within congress's authority to act under article i , ยง8 , clause 3 , commonly referred to as the commerce clause . thus , to comply with the house rule , a statement accompanying the bill identifying the commerce clause as the basis for congress's authority to act appears to fully satisfy the member's obligation . nothing in the statement required by the rule , however , speaks to whether the particular components of the legislation are in fact constitutionally permissible in light of provisions in the constitution that may place limitations or disabilities on congress's authority to act . although congress may have the requisite constitutional authority to regulate the interstate sale of material related to animal cruelty or child pornography , reaching that conclusion in no way requires the consideration of whether the first amendment constrains or disables congress's authority with respect to these materials . legislation governing the internal rules and procedures utilized by congress is authorized by article i , ยง5 , clause 2 , not the commerce clause . given the analytical and conceptual distinction between congress's constitutional authority to act and an act's constitutionality , the possibility of conflicting results is clear . although there are thousands of bills introduced in the house of representatives each congress , they can be broadly categorized into selected groupings for purposes of discussing possible bases of constitutional authority . this section of the report will discuss four such broad categories of legislation: authorization legislation ; appropriations legislation ; legislation that places conditions on the availability of federal funds ; and , finally , legislation that repeals existing laws and / or programs . this is not intended to be an exhaustive discussion of types of legislation , but is provided to illustrate the analytical framework for determining proposed legislation's constitutional authority . as discussed above , nothing in this discussion considers or discusses the constitutionality of specific proposed legislation . article i , section 9 , clause 7 no money shall be drawn from the treasury but in consequence of appropriations made by law ; and a regular statement and account of the receipts and expenditures of all public money shall be published from time to time . article i , section 8 , clause 12 to raise and support armies , but no appropriation of money to that use shall be for a longer term than two years .