, earmarks ) . other water quality - specific reductions in the bill included 14% less than fy2011 levels for the section 319 grant program ( for managing nonpoint source pollution ) and the section 106 grant program that assists state implementation of cwa programs . further , the bill provided $250 million for the great lakes initiative ( 16.5% below the fy2011 level and 29% below the fy2012 request ) . this measure funds the government generally at fy2012 levels plus a 0.6% increase . final action on fy2013 appropriations is expected in early 2013 . other factors also have been at work . these include a general reluctance by many members of congress to address controversial environmental issues in view of the relatively slim majorities held by political parties in the house and the senate ; and an absence of presidential initiatives on clean water issues ( neither the clinton nor the bush administration proposed cwa legislation , nor has the obama administration ) . in addition , for some time after the terrorist attacks of september 11 , 2001 , congress was more focused on security , terrorism , and iraq war issues than on many other topics , including environmental protection . the 2008 election encouraged many policymakers and stakeholders to anticipate much greater attention to many environmental issues , including clean water , by the 111 th congress and the obama administration . during the 2008 presidential campaign , candidate obama supported several water quality issues , including preservation of wetlands , great lakes restoration legislation , water conservation , regulation of large animal feeding operations , and full funding of clean water infrastructure assistance programs . funding for water infrastructure projects , discussed next in this report , received early attention in the 111 th congress in light of interest in using increased investment in public works projects — including wastewater — to stimulate the faltering u.s. economy , but the obama administration has not presented other legislative proposals concerning water quality . also on the congressional agenda was consideration of the geographic reach of the cwa over the nation's waters and wetlands , in light of court rulings — including two supreme court decisions — that have narrowed the law's regulatory jurisdiction , but in ways that are somewhat unclear . the 111 th congress enacted two bills that amend the cwa . one dealt with extending a moratorium for cwa permitting of certain vessels ( p.l . 111-215 ) , and the other dealt with ensuring that federal agencies and departments pay localities for reasonable costs associated with managing stormwater pollution from federal properties ( p.l . the 112 th congress also enacted two bills that amend the cwa . one extended the moratorium for cwa permitting of certain vessels for an additional year , until december 18 , 2014 ( p.l . 112-213 ) , and the other extends authorization of funds for the lake pontchartrain basin program in section 121 of the act through fy2017 ( p.l .