the bwaa also states that no u.s . governor or alternate governor at the bank may vote for an increase in the capital stock of the bank , if this would require additional subscriptions by the united states , unless congress authorizes such action by law . this requirement is not included in the legislation enabling u.s. participation in the other mdbs and the administration has not complied with this requirement for some time . over the years , congress has enacted into law directives ( many of them overlapping ) requiring the secretary of the treasury to instruct u.s. executive directors to take specific actions within the mdbs . it has required the secretary to consult with other countries about possible coordinated action within the mdbs on specific policy proposals or issues . it has also directed the secretary to consult with the relevant committees before u.s. executive directors may vote to support certain kinds of initiatives . many of these directives require that the u.s. representatives at the mdbs oppose many kinds of loans . these include , for example , loans to countries whose governments violate internationally recognized human rights , expropriate property owned by american investors without adequate compensation , support international terrorism , or fail to cooperate in the suppression of illegal drug trafficking or trafficking in persons . they also include directives that the u.s. representatives oppose loans for the production of certain agricultural or mineral products that are in oversupply in world markets and compete with u.s. output , and loans for education or healthcare projects where poor people would be charged a user fee for basic services . directives have also been enacted requiring the u.s. representatives at the mdbs to oppose , subject to various requirements , mdb loans to serbia , burma , zimbabwe , sudan , belarus , and sri lanka , and to oppose participation by cuba or the palestinian liberation organization in the mdbs . generally , the united states abstains in order to show opposition , though it may cast a negative vote for emphasis in particular situations . others also require the administration to pursue certain goals or to advocate particular policies in the mdbs . these can include efforts to include measures relating to workers rights , greater emphasis on the needs of the poor in various situations , more efforts to restructure debts of impoverished countries , increased emphasis on integration of women in the development process , or more attention or increased mdb assistance to countries such as haiti , east timor , tibet , cambodia , mongolia and ukraine . the authorization and appropriations committees generally hold hearings on the administration's funding requests for the mdbs . this enables administration witnesses to explain why they believe congress should provide the resources necessary to fund u.s. participation in mdb funding plans . hearings also provide committee members with opportunities to raise issues of concern where legislation or changes in u.s. policy might be needed . public witnesses are frequently invited , particularly for authorization hearings , to present additional views .