that rulemaking has since been largely finalized . for instance , the sec announced final rules on june 28 , 2012 specifying registering and review procedures for cas . the cftc announced a final rule on april 9 , 2012 , adopting new dodd - frank statutory provisions . the scope of title viii encompasses the infrastructure for the clearing of otc derivatives , which is governed by the regulatory framework established in title vii of the dodd - frank act . title vii requires firms to clear certain otc derivatives , including credit default swaps , through central counterparties . both the cftc and the sec must write various rules to implement title vii , which will apply to derivatives clearing organizations and clearing agencies supervised by those agencies . the clearing requirements in title vii could increase the likelihood of a systemic importance designation under title viii for financial market utilities that engage in clearing otc derivatives . those financial market utilities and pcs activities conducted by financial institutions that are designated as systemically important will be affected by additional supervision and requirements to comply with newly adopted risk management and conduct standards . further , those designated firms could potentially be subject to increased oversight through the federal reserve's enhanced examination authority and role in enforcing compliance with applicable rules . certain payment system infrastructures were previously subject to federal reserve or other agency oversight . newer systems and technologies may be developed in the future to process financial transactions via the internet and by other means . the impact on evolving technologies would depend upon the extent to which their activities fall within the scope of the supervisory framework established under the dodd - frank act and whether newer systems become systemically important . the impact of title viii on a particular entity is likely to vary depending upon whether a financial market utility or financial institution is currently subject to federal reserve supervision , whether a system or institution has operated previously outside the scope of bank regulatory or other federal agency oversight , and whether the utility or institution will also be subject to requirements and potentially increased clearing transaction volume under title vii requirements . the impact of title viii will also depend upon the actions of various regulators such as how broadly the financial stability oversight council applies the designation of systemic importance to financial market utilities and pcs activities of financial institutions and how stringently the fed , cftc and sec decide to set risk management rules and standards . the appendix to this report provides additional information regarding these systems . the existing infrastructure in the united states for those activities consists of systems operated by the federal reserve through the federal reserve banks , and by the private sector . in some cases , pcs activities are conducted primarily through one central party , such as the fed or a clearinghouse . listed below are some of the major systems currently operating in the united states . some privately - operated systems have been designated by fsoc as systemically important under title viii . additional information regarding selected systems , including recent transaction volume levels , is set forth in an appendix to this report .