, the labor force ) . since as they age , many older workers retire and exit the labor force , the labor force participation rate ( which determines the size of the labor force ) becomes an important indicator of unemployment among older workers . as shown below , during the recent economic recession , the reason unemployment rates have reached historical highs for older workers is not only a weak demand for labor but also increased labor force participation among older workers . unemployment is defined as not having a job but actively looking for work . the share of those aged 16 and older in the labor force , without a job and actively looking for work equaled the reported unemployment rate of 9.8% in november 2010 , a nearly doubling of the 5.0% rate experienced when the recession began in december 2007 . compared with previous years , the unemployment rate for older workers has reached historical highs ( see figure 1 ) . at the same time , unemployment rates for younger workers aged 25 to 54 are similar to levels experienced in 1982 and have not yet reached historical highs . younger workers , those aged 25 to 34 years old , generally experience the highest unemployment rates ( in absolute terms ) during both good and bad economic times . for all age groups under age 65 , unemployment rates have more than doubled since the recession began in december of 2007 ( see figure 2 ) . when looking at the unemployment rate , two key numbers are used . the numerator is the number of workers unemployed and actively looking for work and the denominator is the population considered part of the workforce ( i.e. workers who become unemployed at older ages may experience a less secure retirement . first , job loss at older ages results in less time to replenish lost income before retirement . second , those older workers looking for employment are experiencing longer durations as compared with their younger counterparts . both of these reasons can adversely affect long - run retirement security . older unemployed workers face a unique set of challenges , distinct from their younger counterparts . these include age discrimination and difficulty accessing affordable health insurance coverage outside of the employer market . the magnitude of these challenges will vary depending on their individual circumstances . for example , although age discrimination laws may benefit those older workers in retaining a job , these laws are less effective for those older workers who have become unemployed and are searching for a new job . furthermore , most public programs providing income support and health insurance for the unemployed are targeted toward those who have recently lost their jobs ( regardless of age ) . these programs generally do not provide assistance to the older unemployed who may be returning to the workforce after an extended absence ( eg , retirement ) . the following discusses these challenges in greater detail . finally , although the older unemployed over 65 years old most likely have access to medicare , premiums and cost - sharing can consume a growing share of income over time .