this funding increase has not been enacted . with regard to all - cargo operations , there is no statutory or regulatory requirement for screening , and according to industry estimates , the overall percentage of international shipments screened prior to transit to the united states may be as low as 50% . tsa concedes that screening international cargo poses unique challenges and constraints due to shippers' limited control over their foreign supply chains , the scale and diversity of worldwide supply chains , and diplomatic considerations . to address theses challenges , tsa's international air cargo workgroup has developed a risk - based rating system and scheduling tool to prioritize air cargo facility inspections overseas . in 2008 , the tsa entered into a bilateral agreement with the european union as well as a quadrilateral agreement on air cargo security with the european union , canada , and australia . more broadly , it is working closely with the international civil aviation organization ( icao ) to draft worldwide standards for all - cargo security , which will probably entail a lengthy period of implementation . tsa has 10 international cargo transportation security inspectors deployed to field offices in los angeles , dallas - fort worth , miami , and frankfurt , germany . the role of these inspectors is to examine cargo operations at the last points of departure to the united states and assess compliance with screening and security requirements . additionally , tsa has eight international industrial representatives who work with about 240 foreign passenger and all - cargo air carriers that operate flights to the united states . these individuals have responsibility for ensuring foreign air carrier compliance with tsa regulations , including those pertaining to the screening and security of air cargo . given the volume of international air cargo , the potential threat posed by international shipments , and the extensive reliance on passenger aircraft to haul cargo from overseas , the size of the tsa's international inspector and industrial representative workforce may be an area of particular interest to congress . under the current air cargo security system , a number of risk - based strategies are being employed to evaluate the security risk of air cargo shipments . whereas the air cargo industry has favored risk - based approaches for both cargo planes and cargo aboard passenger aircraft , some policymakers have argued that more comprehensive screening of cargo is needed to make cargo security comparable to that of passengers and baggage . congress responded to these arguments in a series of enactments since the 9 / 11 terrorist attacks . the first of these laws , atsa , established a requirement for screening and inspection of all individuals , goods , property , vehicles , and other equipment entering a secured area of a passenger airport . the law mandated that other areas of airports have the same level of protection as passenger terminals , but did not require the use of any specific screening technologies or techniques . atsa required tsa to provide for the screening of cargo placed on passenger aircraft , but did not specify how such screening was to be carried out .