as described above , e.o . 13526 assigns significant classified information policy responsibilities to the isoo , ndc , and nara . an executive order cannot be used to appropriate funds from the u.s. treasury ; hence , congress may assess whether these agencies have sufficient resources to carry out their work . 13526 , section 1.9 requires classifying agencies to review their classification guides to ensure they comport with current classified information policy . according to an ndc estimate , each year 15 million new pages of classified material are accessioned to the nara , and only 11 million pages complete the declassification process and are made available to the public . the president's memorandum would require more than 400 million pages of information to move through this process in four years , a rate of approximately 100 million pages per year . congress may choose to monitor the ndc's progress toward achieving the reduction of the backlog . congress enacted the reducing over - classification act in october 2010 , four months after the isoo released its regulations ( 32 c.f.r . 2001 ) for implementing e.o . the senate committee on homeland security and governmental affairs wrote: the committee wishes to emphasize that none of the provisions in this act is intended to supplant the executive branch's longstanding authority to determine what information should be appropriately classified within the framework established in executive order 13526 and its predecessors . indeed , the committee believes that the provisions of the act complement and do not conflict with executive order 13526 , and that both the order and the act will promote the goals of increased transparency , information sharing , and security . section 4 of this new statute requires the secretary of dhs to appoint a classified information advisory officer , who has the authority to "develop and disseminate educational materials and to develop and administer training programs" to assist sub - federal actors ( i.e. , state , local , and tribal governments and private - sector firms ) that utilize classified information . it is unclear whether this new official must have these materials and programs approved by the isoo , which is authorized to set the standards for agencies' security education and training programs ( e.o . 13526 , part 5 ) . congress may consider examining whether agencies have faced any challenges in implementing the new law and the executive order consonantly . the reducing over - classification act aims to increase information - sharing among agencies . the illicit release of over 250,000 state department cables , possibly by a department of defense employee , may indicate the inherent difficulty of balancing information sharing and information protection . already , some agencies have announced new security controls . no other values or criterion are to be taken into account . the terms damage and national security are inherently broad concepts . neither damage nor the state of relations among nations are easily quantified or determinable with precision . 13526 carries these two terms under a unified definition that defines national security to include the united states' international relations .