pursuant to h.r . 1133 , the archivist would then have been required within 30 days to publish certain information from these quarterly reports on a publicly accessible website . 1133 was reported by the house committee on oversight and government reform and placed on the union calendar on june 20 , 2013 . no further action was taken on the bill . nara , in its report on presidential libraries , suggested a possible alternative to the current libraries system that would require foundations to provide the government with a library - only building and "no museum component. any museum associated with the corresponding president could be placed "in the same general vicinity," but the facility would be separate and distinct from the library . removing the foundation from the library facility could clarify to visitors what is privately owned space and what is publicly owned . finally , the presidential libraries and museums often charge visitors an admission fee . in some cases , this fee is then divided between the federal government and the foundation . this fee division , however , is not always made clear to visitors . in some libraries , the foundations pay the federal government for access to federal government - owned portions of the library facility . at the reagan and clinton libraries , for example , each foundation pays the federal government a per - person fee after it holds events at which attendees are given free access to the library's museum . in addition to collecting fees from foundations in certain circumstances , congress has the authority to require nara to clearly identify to visitors what portion of their fees go to the federal government and what portion does not . congress also has the authority to enact legislation that would allow visitors to pay only for access to the areas of the library or museum that interest them . regardless of ownership of that portion of the facility , the visitor would pay only for those parts of the facility visited . congress could , therefore , require visitors to pay separate fees for access to federal property and non - federal property . the barack obama foundation was established in january 2014 to both begin raising funds for the library endowment and to lay the groundwork for an institute that would operate beyond 2017 . in addition , the foundation outlined values and priorities for their work , including economic development and community engagement . the foundation is currently led by a board of directors , which is chaired by martin nesbitt . the foundation began in march 2014 the process of selecting a site for the facility with the release of the request for qualifications ( rfq ) document . this was followed by the request for proposal ( rfp ) in september 2014 . while the rfq invited responses from "institutions of higher learning , not - for - profit organizations , private developers , or municipalities" the rfp specifically referenced universities in outlining the submission requirements .