this report will be updated occasionally as events warrant . federal law has regulated money in elections for more than a century . enactment of bcra in 2002 marked the culmination of efforts to limit soft money in federal elections and place additional regulations on political advertising airing before elections . concerns about limiting the potential for corruption and informing voters have been at the heart of that law and related regulations and judicial decisions . restrictions on private money in campaigns , particularly large contributions , have been a common theme throughout the history of federal campaign finance law . the roles of corporations , unions , interest groups , and private funding from individuals have attracted consistent regulatory attention . congress has also required that certain information about campaigns' financial transactions be made public . collectively , three principles embodied in this regulatory tradition — limits on sources of funds , limits on contributions , and disclosure of information about these funds — constitute ongoing themes in federal campaign finance policy . throughout most of the 20 th century , campaign finance policy was marked by broad legislation enacted sporadically . major legislative action on campaign finance issues remains rare . since the 1990s , however , momentum on federal campaign finance policy , including regulatory and judicial action , has arguably increased . fundraising , spending , and reporting questions have been at the forefront of recent debates in campaign finance policy , but they are not the only issues that may warrant attention . even if no legislative changes are made , additional regulation and litigation are likely , as is the constant debate over the role of money in politics . although some of the specifics are new , these themes discussed throughout this report have been present in campaign finance policy for decades . bcra was an extension of efforts begun in the 1970s , with enactment of feca , to regulate and document the flow of money in federal elections . bcra's soft - money ban and some other provisions remain in effect ; but citizens united , speechnow , and other litigation since bcra have reversed major elements of modern campaign finance law . the changes discussed in this report suggest that the nation's campaign finance policy may be a continuing issue for congress . the bipartisan campaign reform act ( bcra ) largely banned unregulated soft money in federal elections and restricted funding sources for pre - election broadcast advertising known as electioneering communications . as bcra was implemented , regulatory developments at the federal election commission ( fec ) , and some court cases , stirred controversy and renewed popular and congressional attention to campaign finance issues . since bcra , congress has also continued to explore legislative options and has made comparatively minor amendments to the nation's campaign finance law . the most notable recent statutory changes occurred in 2014 , when congress eliminated public financing for presidential nominating conventions and increased limits for some contributions to political parties . some of the most recent notable campaign finance developments beyond congress have occurred at the supreme court . the 2010 citizens united ruling spurred substantial legislative action during the 111 th congress and continued interest during subsequent congresses .