111-139 , 124 stat . 8-29 ) , enacted on february 12 , 2010 , is intended to discourage or prevent congress from taking certain legislative action that would increase the on - budget deficit . in addition , under the house paygo rule , each measure affecting direct spending and revenues must comply with the requirement , with the one exception of two measures combined upon engrossment , as explained above . the statutory paygo act , in contrast , applies the requirement to legislation after it has been enacted . direct spending is within the jurisdiction of the respective authorizing committees . revenues are the funds collected from the public primarily as a result of the federal government's exercise of its sovereign taxing power . they consist of receipts from individual income taxes , payroll taxes , corporate income taxes , excise taxes , duties , gifts , and miscellaneous receipts . ( 2 ) in the case of an amendment ( other than one specified in subparagraph ( 1 ) ) to a bill or joint resolution , the evaluation under paragraph ( a ) shall give no cognizance to any designation of emergency . revenues are within the jurisdiction of the committee on ways and means in the house . discretionary spending is not counted for purposes of determining whether legislation increases the deficit under the house paygo rule . the rule generally requires that each measure affecting direct spending and revenues not increase the deficit over either of the two time periods specified . that is , to comply with the rule , each measure that includes provisions projected to increase direct spending or reduce revenues must also include offsetting provisions projected to reduce direct spending , increase revenues , or both , by equivalent amounts . a projected deficit reduction resulting from a measure previously passed by the house , or one to be considered subsequently by the house , cannot be used to offset a deficit increase due to provisions in a measure currently under consideration . the rule provides one exception to this measure - by - measure application . under clause 10 ( b ) of house rule xxi , savings from a previously passed measure may be included in determining a separate measure's paygo compliance if a special rule provides that the two measures are to be combined upon engrossment . the rule specifies that a determination of the effect of direct spending and revenue legislation on the deficit or surplus is to be based on estimates made by the committee on the budget relative to the congressional budget office ( cbo ) baseline estimates . in producing its baseline estimates , cbo projects revenues , spending , and deficit or surplus levels under existing law ( i.e. , assuming no legislative changes ) . under the rule , such baseline estimates are to be consistent with section 257 of the balanced budget and emergency deficit control act of 1985 , as amended . the house paygo rule does not apply to direct spending increases or revenue reductions that occur under existing law .