appendix a . historical background and u.s. policy pre - 1987: hamas's emergence hamas's politicization and militarization can be traced to the first palestinian intifada ( "uprising" ) that began in the gaza strip in 1987 in resistance to the israeli occupation . its precursor , al mujamma al islami ( known simply as mujamma , or "the islamic center" ) , was established in israeli - occupied gaza in the 1970s under the auspices of the palestinian muslim brotherhood , which had links to muslim brotherhood chapters in egypt and jordan and later developed links to branches elsewhere — most notably among palestinian refugees and expatriates living in kuwait . 15 years ago ? have its rivals become stronger or weaker over that same period of time ? ( strength could be measured by one of more of the following factors: popularity , military force , leverage with israel , regional and global influence. ) what are the united states' ultimate goals for israel , the palestinians , and the broader region ? how do particular options regarding hamas fit into these goals ? what are hamas's ultimate goals and how might hamas act proactively to achieve these goals ? how might it react to particular u.s. options that it perceives could serve or frustrate these goals ? once implemented , when are various options likely to produce results ? what are u.s. capacities and political will for implementing and monitoring various options over time ? what are intervening variables ( i.e. , other relevant actors , other issues that might distract from those addressed by various options , political timelines ) and how might their potential negative impact on different options be minimized ? how would the success of various options be measured ? hamas's integral role in palestinian society and politics is seen by many as problematic because it is devoted to violent opposition to israel . u.s. efforts to deter , transform , marginalize , or neutralize hamas have at most achieved temporary or partial success . it is possible to conclude that u.s. and other international support for israel and the pa / plo / fatah has been counterproductive to some extent when comparing hamas's domestic , regional , and international strength in the early 1990s — measured by factors such as popularity , military force , and leverage with other actors ( including israel and fatah ) — to its current strength . hamas routinely portrays u.s. efforts to counter its influence as part of an agenda to weaken palestinians at the expense of israel , hoping to convince palestinians of israel's implacability and of the futility of peace negotiations aimed at palestinian statehood . factional and geographical divisions — reflected in hamas's control of gaza and the abbas - led pa's control of the west bank — present fundamental dilemmas both for prospects for a two - state solution and for the future of palestinian democracy . u.s. policy and law reject dealings with and aid to hamas or any pa government that includes hamas without the acceptance of conditions that appear antithetical to hamas's core principles .