there is not consensus that this should be a federal responsibility . nonetheless , if faced with a mass casualty incident , hospitals , physicians , and other providers could face considerable pressure to deliver care without a clear source of reimbursement . several federal programs provide limited assistance for this purpose . assistance may be available pursuant to a declaration under the stafford act , including cash assistance to individuals ; costs associated with the deployment of federal medical teams , equipment , and supplies ; assistance to government and non - profit entities for the costs of health care services of an emergency nature rendered as a direct result of a declared incident ; and mental health crisis counseling assistance to communities affected by a declared major disaster . assistance is more limited when the stafford act is not invoked . recent examples of this include the 2009 h1n1 influenza ( "flu" ) pandemic , the 2010 haiti earthquake ( in which many victims were airlifted to hospitals on the u.s. mainland ) , and the 2010 gulf oil spill . even when assistance is available under the stafford act , it is generally limited in scope , amount , and duration , and may fall short of actual uncompensated medical care costs . congress and / or the george w. bush administration provided special assistance to address the problem of uncompensated medical care costs in response to several recent incidents , as follows: following the september 11 , 2001 , terrorist attacks , hhs provided funding to hospitals and other health care facilities ( including privately owned facilities ) near the three affected sites ( in new york , pennsylvania , and virginia ) that either provided unreimbursed health care services to victims or suffered other economic hardship as a result of road closures or other infrastructure effects . since 2002 , congress has funded a program to provide health services to responders and others who were exposed to hazards at the world trade center ( wtc ) site in new york following the 2001 terrorist attacks , and who are now experiencing health problems believed to have resulted from those exposures . ( as discussed later , this program was recently explicitly authorized in modified form . see " care of long - term needs of 9 / 11 victims ." following hurricane katrina in 2005 , congress provided $2 billion to cover the state share of medicaid costs for evacuees from , and individuals living in , declared disaster areas , and to restore access to care in affected areas . in response to the 2009 h1n1 flu pandemic , congress provided supplemental appropriations to , among other things , finance the cost of vaccines , drugs , and medical supplies . finally , in response to the haiti earthquake of january 2010 , congress provided supplemental appropriations to reimburse u.s. hospitals for a portion of the costs of care for haitian evacuees , and to assist states in providing medicaid services to eligible evacuees . each action above was implemented after the incident occurred , and in some cases considerable time elapsed before funds were available .