in contrast to h.r . 480 would provide a formula for allocating funding among gulf states , and establish and fund four gulf of mexico programs , including an observation system , a grant program for sea grant colleges , a seafood marketing program , and a clean energy program . the scale and nature of the spill make it difficult for the public or government to quantify these effects . several mechanisms exist to provide short - and long - term assistance to the fishing industry . financial assistance to compensate for economic injuries to individuals and businesses affected by an oil spill are defined in statute by the oil pollution act . another source of assistance can be provided in cases where a fishery failure is declared by the secretary of commerce under the magnuson - stevens fishery conservation and management act ( msfcma , p.l . additional sources of assistance have been provided through bp grants , the vessels of opportunity program , and the small business administration . gulf fisheries production is dependent on healthy gulf ecosystems , including the quantity and quality of fisheries habitat . restoration of gulf ecosystems would likely maintain and enhance current fisheries production . the two main restoration efforts focusing on oil spill damages are the natural resource damage assessment ( nrda ) and the administration's gulf coast restoration plan . the 111 th congress held 62 hearings related to the gulf oil spill and at least 14 were directly related to natural resources and impacts on small businesses . the 112 th congress may continue to conduct oversight of efforts on fishing industry recovery , adequate compensation , and gulf restoration . ongoing efforts by federal agencies and states to ensure seafood safety and to regain and maintain the reputation of gulf seafood are the most immediate challenges . as the nrda process moves from the planning to restoration phase , questions may arise regarding the level of the potential settlement and the types of restoration activities identified by the trustees . in contrast to restoration efforts developed under nrda that are based on existing law , funding and governance of the administration's comprehensive and long - term gulf of mexico restoration plan would require congressional action . to fully implement and fund the administration's plan , congress may consider whether to commit clean water act civil penalties for this purpose as was recommended by the administration's gulf recovery plan and the national commission on the bp deepwater horizon oil spill and offshore drilling . congress also may consider how the fund should be allocated and whether to establish a gulf restoration council to coordinate restoration efforts . several bills were introduced during the 111 th congress that included these elements of the administration's plan , but no action was taken on any of them . survey teams also have documented 1,053 total linear miles of oiled shoreline . at issue for congress is whether current efforts will be sufficient to restore the fishery to pre - spill conditions . congress may continue to conduct oversight of efforts to promote fishing industry recovery and gulf restoration . immediate issues are likely to focus on providing financial compensation to fishermen , ensuring seafood safety , and maintaining gulf seafood markets .