israel pays below market prices for the natural gas it imports from egypt . continuing the imports and using additional production to begin exports , most likely to europe or jordan , could further improve israel's energy and economic security . eliminating the imports could improve israel's trade balance and provide greater supply security . for egypt , stopping the exports to israel would have political advantages as the natural gas sales to israel were unpopular with egyptians and were taken into court . the impact of the current unrest in egypt on its natural gas exports to israel is unclear . maintaining the exports to israel could help egypt's trade balance . the u.s. government is not directly involved in israel's oil and gas policies . however , in the near - term , consultations regarding the energy policy and regulations would be one area that government to government interaction might take place . natural gas from the new fields could displace the egyptian imports , which has benefits and disadvantages for both countries . israel has never been a major energy producer and must balance its normal economic and security concerns with development of this new resource . coal imports would likely be most affected as coal is currently the primary fuel for electric generation , and can be displaced by natural gas . israel's trade balance would likely improve and its carbon dioxide emissions would likely decline as a result . the discovery of natural gas resources has also led israel to reevaluate the nation's energy tax policy . israel's natural gas reserves — natural gas that has been discovered and can be expected to be economically produced — prior to the noble energy discoveries were estimated at 1.5 tcf or about 16 years worth at current production levels . if only half the natural gas from the new discoveries is produced at today's production levels , israel would have well over a 100-year supply of natural gas . it is too early to know the rate of natural gas recovery from the three new fields or if other discoveries will arise , but it is highly likely that israel's energy mix will move towards natural gas by the end of the decade . tamar's first production is expected at the end of 2012 , with dalit one or two years after that , and leviathan between 2016 and 2018 . regionally , israel's success thus far has sparked interest from its neighbors to explore their boundaries for energy resources and has raised concerns from lebanon about sovereignty over the discoveries . israel is poised to became an energy producer and perhaps even a natural gas exporter provided its recent discoveries come to fruition . at the end of last year , noble energy , a u.s. independent energy company , reconfirmed its estimates for its third and largest natural gas discovery off the northern coast of israel . the leviathan field has an estimated resource base of 16 trillion cubic feet ( tcf ) of natural gas , but will require at least two more appraisal wells to be drilled before the size of the resource base is better defined .