appendix a . summary of original commemorative works act provisions the commemorative works act ( cwa ) , as enacted , contained 10 sections covering the purposes of the bill , definitions , congressional authorization for memorials , creation of the national capital memorial commission , conditions for memorial placement in different parts of the district of columbia , site design and approval , issuance of construction permits , creation of a temporary memorial site , and other administrative provisions . table a - 1 provides a summary of the original provisions contained in the cwa for each section of the bill . appendix b . steps for establishing a memorial in the nation's capital in 1987 , the national park service created a 24-step outline of the commemorative works process . in 2001 , the national capital planning commission published the outline for establishing a monument or memorial in the district of columbia as part of the museums and memorials master plan . the 24-steps , reprinted verbatim below , are designed to guide interested groups and help ensure appropriate legislation , site selection , design approval , fundraising , and construction . memorial sponsor seeks national capital memorial advisory commission ( ncmac ) assistance to review the requirements and process established by the commemorative works act ( cwa ) and its applicability to the proposed memorial . memorial sponsor seeks a senator or representative who is willing to draft and introduce a bill to authorize establishment of the memorial . staffs of ncmac , member of congress who will introduce the bill , and authorizing committees draft a bill that conforms to the provisions of the cwa . congressman and / or senator introduce bill authorizing the memorial and designating the sponsor as the entity responsible for its erection at no cost to the federal government . ncmac considers proposed authorizing legislation to establish its view pursuant to cwa . chairmen of house and senate authorizing subcommittees on national parks solicit views of ncmac , may hold hearings on proposed authorizing legislation , and take action on a bill before sending it to the full house and senate for a vote on the bill . congress passes bill , president signs bill into law , providing memorial sponsor 7 years in which to begin construction of memorial in area ii . memorial sponsor organizes the structure of the entity that will establish the memorial and beings planning . the memorial sponsor may submit to the secretary a request to be authorized to consider sites in area i . the secretary seeks the advice of ncmac to determine whether the memorial warrants placement in area i . based on the advice of ncmac , the secretary notifies congress of a determination that the subject is of preeminent and lasting historical significance so that congress can consider passage of legislation authorizing an area i location for enactment by the president . memorial sponsor works with nps staff to identify potential area ii sites ( may include area i if authorized ) and prepare alternative site study and accompany preliminary environmental analysis .