two other workers drowned during the tsunami . recovery from the disaster has focused on restoring cooling systems at the three most severely damaged reactors at the six - unit plant and halting radioactive emissions into the air and water . that work has been hampered by continuing high levels of radiation in the plant and severe structural damage . the japanese government announced december 16 , 2011 , that the damaged fukushima reactors had achieved "cold shutdown," a milestone in which the reactor cooling water is below boiling temperature at atmospheric pressure . at cold shutdown , the diminished threat of further radioactive releases may allow some residents to begin returning to the least contaminated evacuation zones . japan's environment minister announced december 19 , 2011 , that about $15 billion had been allocated for decontaminating the area around the fukushima daiichi plant , an unprecedented undertaking . complete decommissioning and dismantlement of the plant is expected to take 40 years , and the total cost of the disaster was recently estimated by a japanese government committee to exceed $75 billion . the institute of nuclear power operations ( inpo ) , a safety organization established by the u.s. nuclear power industry after the three mile island accident , issued a detailed description of the fukushima accident in november 2011 . the inpo report provides timelines of the response actions taken at each unit of the fukushima daiichi plant and the sequences of events that led to major reactor core damage and radioactive releases . it is intended "to provide an accurate , consolidated source of information" about the event . however , the report notes , "because of the extensive damage at the site , some details of the event remain unknown or have not been confirmed. until the decay heat sufficiently diminishes , a source of electricity is needed to operate pumps and circulate water in the reactor . under normal conditions , it would take a few days for a reactor core to cool down to a "cold shutdown" state . reactors 1 , 2 , and 3 at fukushima daiichi were operating and automatically shut down when the quake struck , while reactors 4 , 5 , and 6 were already shut down for routine inspections . all four of the fukushima daini reactors were operating at the time of the earthquake and taken down after the quake . although horizontal ground acceleration from the magnitude 9.0 earthquake exceeded the maximum designed level at two of the operating fukushima daiichi units ( 2 and 3 ) , all the operating units maintained normal cooling immediately after the emergency shutdown . however , the earthquake triggered a tsunami that struck the fukushima daiichi station about 40 minutes later , devastating much of the area and overtopping the plant's six - meter - high seawall . tepco estimated the tsunami's height at fukushima daiichi to be 14 meters ( 46 feet ) . the station was cut off from japan's national electricity grid , leaving the plant dependent on backup diesel generators for alternating current ( ac ) power . the tsunami flooded most of the generators and electrical switchgear rooms , knocking out the backup ac power for cooling the nuclear reactors in units 1-5 .