appendix a . employment population and shares of the economy , by major industry and sector , 2010 appendix b . standard assumptions of economic models in order to assess the validity of the various estimates of the employment effects of the korus fta , it is first necessary to understand how the economic models work and the assumptions that are made . the standard approach to estimating the effects on u.s. employment associated with trade agreements follows a number of steps , although most of these steps are not included in the discussion of the estimates . in general , these steps include the following: 1 . estimating the impact a change in sales would have on a change in output or a change in employment . a change in employment associated with a change in sales would depend , at the very least , on the level of plant utilization , the level of productivity , and the availability of labor . in attempting to estimate these intermediary steps , most models incorporate a number of assumptions to reduce the high level of variability that is intrinsic in such estimates . often these additional assumptions are not well explained . in general , these basic assumptions are: 1 . changes in tariff rates will translate directly into price changes . most models assume that any change in the tariff rate will be passed along completely to the change in the prices of traded goods . in most cases , however , tariff rates are not adjusted completely at the time of implementation , but are adjusted over a set schedule that can encompass a decade or longer . also , there is no guarantee that the prices of traded goods would adjust at exactly the same rate as tariff rates are adjusted . they may be passed along at a differential rate or simply absorbed by the exporter . exchange rates will remain as they are . in most cases , the estimates do not make any assumptions concerning potential changes in the exchange rate of the dollar as a result of a trade agreement . in addition , the exchange value of currencies of competitors could affect the expected change in exports or imports associated with a trade agreement . consumer purchases will follow tariff reductions . most of the estimates on changes in employment are based on the assumption that reductions in the prices of goods associated with a drop in the rate of tariffs would result in a complete substitution of goods toward the fta countries and away from other foreign suppliers . in general , there may be some goods within the total basket of traded goods that consumers consider easily substitutable ( such as steel and fasteners ) , but consumer choices often are predicated on more than relative prices ( such as brand names and quality ) and , therefore , the rate of substitution overall may be quite low . to the extent that consumers do not shift their purchases based on changes in prices , the change in employment would be blunted .