intent - based . cyberterrorism exists when unlawful , politically motivated computer attacks are done to intimidate or coerce a government or people to further a political objective , or to cause grave harm or severe economic damage . a number of u.s. government organizations appear to monitor terrorist websites and conduct a variety of activities aimed at countering them . given the sensitivity of federal government programs responsible for monitoring and infiltrating websites suspected of supporting terrorism - related activities , much of the information regarding the organizations and their specific activities is deemed classified or law enforcement - sensitive and is not publicly available . the information listed below represents a sampling of what has been publicly discussed about some of the federal government organizations responsible for monitoring and infiltrating jihadist websites . it should be noted that the actions associated with the organizations listed below could be conducted by employees of the federal government or by civilian contract personnel . central intelligence agency ( cia ) : development , surveillance , and analysis of websites , commonly referred to as honey pots , for purposes of attracting existing and potential jihadists searching for forums to discuss terrorism - related activities . national security agency ( nsa ) : surveillance of websites and rendering them inaccessible . department of defense ( dod ) : surveillance of websites focused on discussions of perceived vulnerabilities of overseas u.s. military facilities or operational capabilities and disabling those that present a threat to operations . department of justice ( doj ) : development of polices and guidelines for creating , interacting within , surveilling , and rendering inaccessible websites created by individuals wishing to use the internet as a forum for inciting or planning terrorism - related activities . federal bureau of investigation ( fbi ) : monitoring of websites and analysis of information for purposes of determining possible terrorist plans and threats to u.s. security interests . department of homeland security ( dhs ) : monitoring of websites and analysis of information for purposes of determining possible threats to the homeland . numerous other federal government organizations have cybersecurity responsibilities focused on policy development , public awareness campaigns , and intergovernmental and private sector coordination efforts . information gleaned from the agencies noted above may at times be used to help inform and advise non - federal government entities responsible for safeguarding a geographic area or activity that has been discussed in an online jihadist forum . although organizations , policies , and plans exist to counter violent extremists' use of the internet , implementation may be hampered by several factors . laws may be interpreted by some agencies to prohibit certain activities , and in some cases agencies may have competing equities at stake . legislative and policy authority may be given to organizations that lack the technical capability to fulfill a mission , while entities with the capacity to address cyber attacks may be legally constrained from doing so due to privacy or civil liberties concerns . there may be tensions between the global internet freedom initiative as highlighted by secretary of state hillary clinton and overall counterterrorism objectives .