in addition , p.l . 111-275 increased the maximum financial assistance for automobiles and adaptive equipment from $11,000 to $18,900 effective october 1 , 2011 . the insurance ( mandatory ) category includes supplemental funding for national service life insurance ( nsli ) ; service - disabled veterans insurance ( s - dvi ) ; and veterans mortgage life insurance . this category shows a large increase ( 78.1% ) between fy2010 and fy2012 , primarily due to a projected increase in s - dvi due to death claims . the housing and other mandatory benefits category includes guaranteed and direct loan programs for veterans , native american housing loans ; and various proprietary receipts ( from the public ) . part of the decrease between fy2010 and fy2012 is attributed to a projected decline in proprietary receipts , including those associated with the gi bill , the national service life insurance fund ; and housing . the major construction category , which is for construction related projects for all va components where the total project cost is $10 million or more , reflects a 50.6% decline in the requested appropriation between fy2010 and fy2012 . however , the vba has noted in supporting documents that it has identified $381.6 million in prior appropriations for major construction that is unobligated , of which $135.7 million will be used for fy2012 major construction projects . the minor construction category , which is for construction related projects for all va components where the total project cost is less than $10 million , reflects a decline between fy2010 and fy2012 of 21.8% . the report begins with a brief introduction to the department's budget . next , it provides funding levels requested by the president for fy2012 for va health related programs . this is followed by a discussion of funding levels requested for mandatory programs and administration including programs such as construction of va facilities and information technology . it should be noted that this not an exhaustive discussion of va's budget request for fy2012 . to provide some context to the discussion that follows , this section provides a brief introduction to the various accounts that fund the department . the va's budget is comprised of both mandatory and discretionary spending accounts . mandatory funding supports disability compensation , pension benefits , education , vocational rehabilitation , life insurance , and burial benefits , among other benefits and services . discretionary funding supports a broad array of benefits and services with a majority of funding going towards providing medical care to veterans . according to the president's budget documents , in fy2010 the total va budget authority was approximately $127.2 billion . the fy2012 budget request for the va is for approximately $132.1 billion in budget authority . the va's health care program is funded through multiple appropriations accounts that are supplemented by other sources of revenue . the appropriation accounts used to support va health care programs include ( 1 ) medical services , ( 2 ) medical administration ( currently known as medical support and compliance ) , ( 3 ) medical facilities , and ( 4 ) medical and prosthetic research .