debate . all debate on amendments and the legislative vehicle is conducted under the five - minute rule . the chair normally entertains parliamentary inquiries and debate on points of order at his or her discretion . discussion under reservations of the right to object to a unanimous consent request is by practice normally brief , but is not limited by the five - minute rule . motion to limit or close debate . a committee member may move to limit or close debate on a pending section ( and all amendments thereto ) or on a pending amendment ( and all amendments thereto ) . reading amendments . each amendment must be read before debate on it begins . reading of an amendment may be waived only by unanimous consent . this motion may provide that debate end immediately , at a certain time , or after a specified number of minutes or hours . a motion is not in order to close debate on an entire measure if any portion of the measure has not yet been read . to end debate and preclude further amendments , a member may move the previous question on a pending amendment and all amendments thereto . a member may also move the previous question on an entire measure ( and all amendments thereto ) only after the measure has been read in full . vote to report . after a committee disposes of the last amendment to a measure , it votes on a motion to report the measure , together with any amendments the committee has agreed to . the committee does not vote on passing the measure , and amendments agreed to are not changes to the measure but recommendations to the house for change . a majority of a committee must be "actually present" to vote to report a measure . additional sections , above , of this report also explain the conduct of committee markups . regarding scheduling , see " notice and documents " and " scheduling subcommittee hearings and meetings . concerning markups being conducted as open meetings , see " open and closed meetings " and " media coverage . regarding quorums , see " meetings " under " quorum requirements . see also , below , " reports . three motions specific to committees are authorized in rule xi . rule xi , clause 1 ( a ) ( 2 ) provides a privileged motion to recess , either recessing subject to a call of the chair within a 24-hour period or recessing day to day . the motion to recess is not debatable . pursuant to rule xi , clause 1 ( a ) ( 2 ) , the first reading of a measure may be waived at a markup by a privileged , nondebatable motion , if printed copies of the measure are available . rule xi , clause 2 ( a ) ( 3 ) allows committees to adopt a rule to direct the committee's chair to offer a motion in the house under rule xxii , clause 1 whenever the chair considers it appropriate .