appendix a . acronyms appendix b. glossary anemia — abnormally low hemoglobin concentration in the blood . hookworm , for example , can cause iron deficiency anemia or loss of iron in the blood . chemotherapy — the use of chemicals or antibiotics to treat an infection , a malignancy , or other condition with the aim of curing it or preventing its further progress . coverage — the proportion of people in a target population or group who have taken a drug or drug combination . should countries receive assistance based on their ability to fund a national response or based on their portion of the global disease burden ? for ntds in particular , several other questions might arise . how might countries graduate from u.s. health assistance if ntds that cause more than 80% of the ntd disease burden cannot be eliminated by treatment alone and affected countries have several other health challenges to consider ? if the united states reduces support for a more expensive health issue , like hiv / aids , would countries maintain less expensive programs that carry a lower mortality rate like ntds ? while there appears to be consensus on the need to reevaluate u.s. foreign assistance programs , experts do not yet agree on the best approach to this challenging exercise . disability - adjusted life years — a measure of overall disease burden , expressed as the number of years lost due to ill - health , disability , or early death . disease burden — the amount of ill health from a given cause ( disease , injury , cause of disease , or risk factor ) in a population of interest . disease mapping — a method for displaying spatial distribution of cases of disease . elimination — the control of a previously prevalent communicable disease by reducing case transmission to a predetermined low level , although not necessarily to zero . the aim is to achieve a situation where the infecting agent cannot sustain itself in the population until the disease no longer presents a major public health problem . endemic — the constant presence in a population of a condition such as a communicable disease . eradication — ending all transmission of an infectious disease agent by bringing about the extermination of the disease agent . diseases such as guinea worm , measles , and polio have been eradicated regionally . smallpox , however , is the only disease to have been eradicated globally . incidence — the occurrence of new disease events or cases . incidence rate — the rate at which new events occur in a population . infectious disease — an illness due to a specific agent or its toxic products that arises through transmission of that agent or its products from an infected person , animal , or reservoir to a susceptible host , either directly or indirectly through an intermediate plant or animal host , vector , or the inanimate environment . integrated vector management — a decision - making process for the management of vector populations , so as to reduce or interrupt transmission of vector - borne diseases .