the problem is not will ; it is capacity . in many ways , the country's national security capabilities are still coping with the consequences of the 1990s , when , with the complicity of both ends of pennsylvania avenue , key instruments of u.s. power abroad were reduced or allowed to wither on the bureaucratic vine . the state department froze the hiring of new foreign service officers . the u.s. agency for international development dropped from a high of having 15,000 permanent staff members during the vietnam war to having less than 3,000 today . in testimony at a hearing on foreign assistance reform before the u.s. house committee on foreign affairs last year , peter mcpherson noted that "in 1980 usaid had 2,000 permanent foreign officers , which had declined to about 1,000 by 2008. . he also stated that "usaid currently [in 2008] has only two engineers , 16 agriculture experts and 17 education experts. some contend that the staff cuts have had detrimental impacts on usaid , including the loss of on - the - ground effectiveness ( eg , the reduced staff capacity has resulted in the closing of a number of overseas missions ) and the loss of technical expertise . staff cuts have changed usaid from an implementation agency to one that contracts out large portions of its foreign aid program to others . some believe that this has meant less coherence and effectiveness in the overall effort , less flexibility , and diminished leverage with other private and public funders . in addition , a recent report documented the country - level fragmentation in usaid - managed agricultural development assistance and the difficulty usaid has in managing the large number of relatively small projects that comprise its agricultural development portfolio due to shortages of staff , including expertise in agriculture and related technical areas . since the launch of the feed the future initiative , usaid has been actively working to address rebuilding its in - house technical capacity . as of december 2010 , usaid has hired nearly 40 additional agriculture foreign - service officers . beginning in the 1950s and 1960s , the u.s. government requested that some land - grant universities help create counterpart institutions in developing countries . in 1975 , with the passage of the title xii "famine prevention and freedom from hunger" amendment ( p.l . 94-161 ) to the foreign assistance act of 1961 ( p.l . 87-195 ) , the land - grant universities' participation in international development efforts was formalized . since the 1990s , the role of capacity building as a strategic direction at usaid both in developing countries and in the united states has been on the decline . in fact , some studies have stated that usaid - supported post - graduate training was down over 90% between 1989 to 2005 ( see figure 5 ) . over the last decade usaid has also reduced support for agricultural research with its longer - term outcomes and impacts , and reduced the duration and restricted the types of new projects . this has resulted in a weaker institutional capacity of partner institutions in developing countries .