during debate on h.r . 2112 , representative marcy kaptur opposed section 721 in floor comments but did not offer an amendment to remove it . instead , she argued that the proposed rule benefitted farmers and ranchers and that gipsa should be allowed to proceed with the rulemaking process . representative kaptur also entered statements from the american farm bureau and a group of 140 farm organizations that supported allowing usda to move the proposed rule forward . the house committee on appropriations' report on h.r . 2112 expressed concern that gipsa's proposed rule misinterpreted the intent of congress concerning the regulation of livestock marketing practices and underestimated the cost of the proposed rule . the report also expressed concern that usda might not have complied with the administrative procedures act that governs rulemaking by publishing its "farm bill regulations — misconceptions and explanations" document . §181 et seq . ; see box , "the packers and stockyards act of 1921" ) to oversee livestock and poultry markets . gipsa is responsible for monitoring , reviewing , and investigating livestock and poultry markets to promote fair competition ; providing payment protection through bonding and packer trusts , and guarding against deceptive and fraudulent trade practices . some farmers and ranchers and their advocate groups believe that as the meat and poultry industries have become increasingly concentrated over time , competition has eroded , and producers have little say in market transactions with large meat companies . in addition , some claim usda has not used the p&s act sufficiently to protect livestock and poultry producers , especially small producers , from perceived unfair trade practices of large meat companies . during 2010 , in order to address ongoing concerns about competition in the livestock and poultry industries , usda and the department of justice ( doj ) jointly held five workshops to discuss competition and regulatory issues in agriculture . the five workshops covered farming , poultry , dairy , livestock , and margins ( the difference between the price producers receive and the price consumers pay ) . these workshops provided an opportunity for stakeholders from various sectors of the meat and poultry industries to air their concerns . usda issued a proposed gipsa rule on livestock and poultry marketing practices in mid - 2010 . proponents and opponents espoused widely differing interpretations of it . according to usda and supporters of the proposed rule , the regulations allowed for more effective and efficient enforcement of the p&s act . according to usda , the interaction between meat companies would be more transparent , as the proposed rule required meat packers and poultry processors to justify pricing differences and provide sample contracts to gipsa . the proposed rule defined and gave examples of practices that gipsa considered unfair that would violate the p&s act . the proposed rule would bring fairness to marketing transactions , according to supporters . opponents of the proposed rule claimed that there would be unintended consequences that would adversely affect normal livestock and poultry marketing practices .