, not citizens ) . in fact , as the data in table 2 demonstrate , the total number of naturalized citizens and non - citizens ( 33.0 million ) is less than the number of uninsured citizens ( 37.4 million ) the difference between calculations in percentages and calculations in numbers raises difficult issues for policy makers considering policy options to reduce the number of uninsured . for example , proposals that may affect the greatest number of citizens ( who comprise almost three - quarters of the pool of uninsured ) may not affect the greatest number of noncitizens ( of whom almost half are uninsured ) . the section then , for each race , compares representative individuals who are largely identical but differ by age . figure 5 compares the likelihood across races that the representative individual is uninsured . all individuals compared were assumed to be 40-year - old , native - born citizens living with a spouse and children in the northeast . the individuals differed by race , and therefore had different probabilities of uninsurance ( even though they shared other characteristics ) . about 100,000 addresses comprise the sample households to be interviewed . statistical techniques adjust the data to represent all households in the nation . the key variable in this report is whether each person was uninsured in 2009 . more specifically , the uninsurance variable measures whether an individual lacked health insurance on any one representative day in 2009 . this report , therefore , uses the term "uninsured" to mean at a point in 2009 , and not necessarily over the entire year . the march supplement to the cps is one of several popular sources used to estimate the levels of uninsurance in the united states . additional prominent data sources include the american community survey ( acs ) , the medical expenditure panel survey ( meps ) , and the survey of income and program participation ( sipp ) . each dataset gives broadly similar results , and crs analyzes the data from the two largest data sets , the acs and the cps . this section covers the relationships between health insurance and an individual's demographic and employment characteristics . an individual's age and many other demographic characteristics cannot be changed by policy . public policies , however , can affect income and labor force attachments . this section demonstrates that , in evaluating groups of uninsured individuals , it is important to decide on an appropriate comparison group . although citizenship status is used as an example , the issues covered in this section are applicable to other traits as well . the conclusion is that different representations of the same data can lead to different conclusions if care is not taken when evaluating the data . figure 1 looks at the total number of uninsured individuals and displays the percentage of uninsured individuals by citizenship status . from this picture alone , it appears that the greatest number of individuals in need of policy support are those who are native - born citizens .