the constitutional justifications for fundamental rights analysis are varied . some commentators focus on the issue of consensus and of conventional morality theories . this line of adjudication most closely resembles common law statutory adjudication , where the underlying language of the constitution is considered in the context of principles derived from a common public morality . thus the protection of these rights must be justified on theories other than originalism . as there are many commentators who have proposed various refinements of theories of constitutional interpretation , this report will limit itself to selected originalist theories and some major theories that have arisen to address perceived problems with originalism . the report will first examine the historical bases for theories of constitutional interpretation , and will consider two schools of originalism — original intent and original meaning — and criticism of those schools . the report will then consider the role of judicial precedent and pragmatism in constitutional interpretation . finally , the report will consider theories relating to the identification and justification of heightened constitutional protections for fundamental rights . an initial concern with constitutional interpretation is discerning whether the drafters and ratifiers of the constitution intended a particular mode of interpretation . there is no express provision in the constitution mandating the principles on which it is to be interpreted , nor is there a strong indication that one method of constitutional interpretation was universally agreed on or favored by the founding fathers . the binding principle of these cases is that they involve rights so fundamental that the courts must subject any legislation infringing on them to close scrutiny . this analysis , criticized by some for being based on extra - constitutional precepts of natural law , serves as the basis for some of the most significant constitutional holdings of our time . fundamental rights theories often posit relatively specific sets of values that are of constitutional significance . under these theories , there are certain attributes of personhood that are so valued by individuals as to give them constitutional significance . for instance , the freedom of "intimate association," such as with a marriage or other family relationships , is deemed so fundamental that to discriminate against it raises questions of not just due process , but also equal protection . the framers were aware that unforeseen situations would arise , and they apparently accepted the need to allow for judicial construction of particular text . during the process of ratification , the issue of how the constitution would be interpreted became a topic of significant debate . these disputes arose most often in the debate between federalists and anti - federalists regarding the nature of the proposed relationship between the states and the federal government . perhaps one of the best examples of this is the fourteenth amendment , passed in the aftermath of the civil war , that was intended by its drafters to impose significant limitations on how states could treat their own citizens , especially newly freed slaves . there is significant scholarly agreement that the provision in this amendment which was intended to protect state citizens' rights was the privileges or immunities clause .