sentence under the guidelines . the guidelines are the work of the u.s . sentencing commission . application guidelines instructions relating to a . imprisonment ( sentencing table ) b . probation c. supervised release d. special assessments e. fines f. restitution g. forfeiture vii . consideration of departures ( more / less severe treatment ) which the guidelines permit viii . in imposing sentence , the court will include a detailed explanation of its determinations and may impose probation , a fine , a special assessment , a term of incarceration , a term of supervised release , an obligation to pay restitution , and / or order forfeiture . the obligation found in ยง3553 ( a ) ( 6 ) to avoid unwarranted disparity among the sentences for similar situated defendants speaks to federal sentencing disparity nation - wide . nevertheless , the defendants raise the section most often to question disparity between their sentences of their codefendants or coconspirators . some courts reject the argument out of hand ; some that disparity is one of the factors it may considered ; some that it must be addressed as circumstances dictate ; most , however , point out that it carries no sway when disparity is warranted . the courts are more clearly divided over whether the discretionary downward departure under u.s.s.g ยง5k3.1 for early disposition programs available in some districts and unavailable in others permits a departure under ยง3553 ( a ) in those districts in which no such program exists . finally , ยง3553 ( a ) ( 7 ) compels the sentencing court to consider the need to provide victim restitution . the factor seems most likely to come into play when a split or probationary sentence is possible under the guidelines . the trial court must present in open court and justify the sentence it imposes . the sentence and court's justifications may be appealed by either the defendant or the government or both . the court may adjust an earlier sentence to correct clear error or to reflect substantial assistance to the government . the parties may challenge on appeal the sentence or determinations upon which it is based . the court's sentence will be upheld on appeal , if it is found procedurally and substantively reasonable . having discerned the sentencing range recommended by the guidelines for either individual or organizational defendants , a court must consult the provisions of 18 u.s.c . 3553 ( a ) to determine the appropriate sentence . section 3553 ( a ) begins with the observation that the court should impose "a sentence sufficient , but not greater than necessary , to comply with purposes set forth" in the section . it then identifies factors other than the recommendations of the guidelines to be considered before imposing sentence . the court shall impose a sentence sufficient , but not greater than necessary , to comply with the purposes set forth in paragraph ( 2 ) of this subsection .