the law provided no additional funding for this initiative . the fy2013 appropriations law continued the authorization for the initiative , again , with no additional funding . in light of the decline in the number of public housing units over time and the lack of authority to construct new units , the future role of the public housing program in federal housing policy is uncertain . the public housing program began as a construction program designed to help stimulate the economy coming out of the great depression . its role evolved over time: first , to meet housing shortages during and after world war ii ; later , to address shortages of decent housing in conjunction with urban renewal efforts ; and finally , to address shortages of decent housing that was affordable to the poorest families . in this last role , as a provider of affordable housing to poor families , the program has declined in prominence as other models of providing direct housing assistance to the poor have been developed . first , there were programs promoting the construction of properties owned by private market participants ( through fha insurance programs and later section 8 rental assistance contracts ) , and later there were programs subsidizing families' housing costs in the existing housing stock ( through the section 8 voucher program ) . in the fy2012 hud appropriations law ( p.l . 112-55 ) , congress authorized a version of rad , which makes up to 60,000 units of public housing eligible to convert to project - based section 8 contracts . this last model , the section 8 voucher program , is the only direct rental assistance program serving poor families that has grown to serve more families in the last several decades . at least part of that growth is attributable to declines in the number of public housing units , as families being displaced from public housing have received vouchers . these other models were developed in direct response to perceived shortcomings — lack of mobility , cost effectiveness , and efficiency — in the public housing program . with policies like mandatory and voluntary conversion of public housing to vouchers , the question may be raised as to whether the "vouchering - out" of public housing is an inevitability , or if public housing itself is valuable enough to warrant taking steps to preserve it . critics of public housing point to its often poor locations and conditions and argue that it traps the most vulnerable families in the worst housing conditions . they point to high rates of crime at some developments and low levels of social capital development and work effort , contending that public housing denies poor families choice and the option to live in communities of opportunity . moreover , it is argued that the rent structure does little to promote self - sufficiency and may even discourage it . advocates for public housing argue that the most vulnerable families are the least likely to have their needs met by the private market , even with a section 8 rental voucher . landlords are not required to accept vouchers and are permitted to screen families for suitability .