ann . §§ 2a:16-63 et seq . governs structured settlements . these types of general structured settlement statutes are not captured in this table . where "no statute found" is entered means that crs could not locate a statute specific to medical malpractice actions on periodic payment . proc . code § 340.4 ( 2010 ) . ) louisiana and new york have a special time limitation for an action based blood transfusions tainted with hiv or aids . ( see la . rev . stat . as these exceptions span a variety of areas across the 50 states , this table generally does not include these types of provisions , though the reader should be aware that many states have these special exceptions that may affect the general time limitations for certain actions . 260 § 2e ( 2010 ) ) and breast implants ( see md . code ann. , cts . & jud . proc § 50116 ( 2011 ) ) . many states , if not all , also have a statute of limitations on a specific product that is or was the subject of class action lawsuits . these include the dalkon shield intrauterine device ( see mass . ann . laws , ch . section 5 of the h.r . 5 would empower the court to supervise the arrangements for the payment of damages to protect against conflicts of interest ( eg , a claimant's attorney having a financial stake in the outcome by virtue of a contingency fee ) . the court would have the power to restrict the payment of a claimant's damage recovery to such attorney , and to redirect the damages to the claimant . the bill would impose a sliding scale for attorney fees . in any health care lawsuit , the total of all contingency fees for representing all claimants would not exceed ( 1 ) 40% of the first $50,000 recovered by the claimant ( s ) ; ( 2 ) 33⅓ % of the next $50,000 recovered by the claimant ( s ) ; ( 3 ) 25% of the next $500,000 recovered by the claimant ( s ) ; and ( 4 ) 15% of any amount where the recovery is in excess of $600,000 . the sliding scale would be applicable regardless of whether the recovery is by judgment , settlement , mediation , arbitration , or any other form of alternative dispute resolution . the statute of limitations — the period within which a lawsuit must be filed — for medical malpractice suits under state law is typically two or three years , starting on the date of injury . sometimes , however , the symptoms of an injury do not appear immediately , or even for years after , malpractice occurs . many states therefore have adopted a "discovery" rule , under which the statute of limitations starts to run only when the plaintiff discovers , or in the exercise of reasonable diligence , should have discovered , his injury — or , sometimes , his injury and its cause .