sentencing commission . the guidelines are the work of the u.s . congress created the commission and authorized the guidelines in the sentencing reform act of 1984 . four of those set minimum offense levels when the offense also involves a serious injury ; the fifth refers to the drug quantity table which contains an array of 17 escalating offense levels based on the amount and type of drug involved . in order to account for the cases which involve more than one type of controlled substance , the guideline contains a drug equivalence table under which marijuana is used as the standard and other drugs are assigned an equivalent weight . for instance , 1 gram of heroin is treated as the equivalent of 1 kilogram of marijuana . it also lists 14 circumstances under which offense levels must be added to or subtracted from the base offense level ( eg , a two - level increase for possession of a firearm during the course of the offense ) . adjustments : the guidelines make adjustments for victim - related factors , the extent of the offender's participation ( role in the offense ) , obstruction , conviction for multiple offenses , and the offender's acceptance of responsibility . a party who objects to a recommendation in the report bears the burden of proof by a preponderance of the evidence . the court must begin its sentencing determinations with a calculation of the sentencing range called for under the guidelines . the guidelines may adjust an offender's offense level based on his level of participation in the offense of conviction . there is no adjustment for the one - man crime or the defendant of average culpability in a crime with more than one offender . on the other hand , leaders or organizers of a large criminal endeavor , and their managerial subordinates warrant offense level increases . conversely , minimal participants in an offense merit . an enhancement awaits a defendant who "abuse[s] a position of public or private trust , or use[s] a special skill , in a manner than significantly facilitate[s] the commission or concealment of the offense. a similar enhancement accompanies using , directing , commanding , encouraging , intimidating , counseling , training , procuring , recruiting , or soliciting a child under the age of 18 to commit a federal offense or to avoid apprehension ; or attempting to do so . a defendant convicted of a crime of violence or a drug trafficking crime faces an enhancement , if body armor was involved in the offense . obstruction may result in a sentencing enhancement under any of four sections: ( 1 ) obstruction or impeding the administration of justice , ( 2 ) reckless endangerment during flight , ( 3 ) commission of an offense while on release and ( 4 ) false registration of a domain name . the guidelines use a procedure called grouping to account for a defendant's simultaneous convictions for several crimes within a single offense level .