the genesis of the h.r . 6899 proposal lay partly in an analysis by the government accountability office ( gao ) , which observed that the proportion of grades of oil in the spr was not as compatible as it could be with the trend of refineries toward being able to handle heavier grades of crudes . gao observed that 40% of the crude oil refined by u.s. refineries was heavier than that stored in the spr . refiners reported to gao that running lighter crude in units designed to handle heavy crudes could impose as much as an 11% penalty in gasoline production and 35% in diesel production . the agency reported that other refiners indicated that they might have to shut down some of their units . refineries that process heavy oil cannot operate at normal capacity if they run lighter oils . the types of oil currently stored in the spr would not be fully compatible with 36 of the 74 refineries considered vulnerable to supply disruptions . ( a majority of the refineries that have pipeline access to the spr are located in the gulf coast region and the midwest region. ) gao cited a doe estimate that u.s. refining throughput would decrease by 735,000 barrels per day ( or 5% ) if the 36 refineries had to use spr oil — a substantial reduction in the spr's effectiveness during an oil disruption , especially if the disruption involved heavy oil . it was unclear what sort of effect a roughly 70 million barrel draw on the spr would have on prices . in a market where there is no physical shortage , oil companies may have limited interest in spr oil unless they have spare refining capacity to turn the crude into useful products , or want to build crude oil stocks . spr oil is not sold at below - market prices . bids on spr oil are accepted only if the bids are deemed fair to the u.s. government . section 313 of the appropriations act prohibited expending spr appropriations to anyone engaged in selling refined products valued at more than $1 million to iran or contributing in any way to expansion of refining capacity in iran . firms providing , or insuring tankers carrying , refined product to iran were also included in the prohibition . a bill to establish a national strategic gasoline reserve ( h.r . 142 ) would authorize the secretary of energy to set aside 10 million barrels of refined gasoline products similar to the northeast home heating oil reserve . arguments in favor of establishing a refined product reserve are that u.s. oil imports include refined products and that it could be more efficient and calming to markets if it were not necessary to first draw down spr crude and then refine it into needed products . the effect that spr crude might have on moderating price increases could also be offset if refineries themselves or oil pipelines carrying crude to refineries were compromised . the availability of refined product reserves would address that scenario .