the rfs mandates the use of bbd substitutes . while this is often referred to as a "biodiesel mandate," the term biodiesel refers to a fuel produced through a specific process . once rins are detached , the owner of the rins may use them to meet the current - year obligation , save them for use in the coming year ( with certain limits ) , or trade them to another party . the tax credit for the production and use of bbd fuels has been a major factor in their growth over the past few years . while the rfs mandates could potentially provide a larger incentive — in the form of a guaranteed and growing market — biodiesel production has remained largely dependent on the $1.00-per - gallon tax credit . despite a growing rfs mandate , the expiration of the tax incentives at the end of 2009 led to a drop in production from 2009 to 2010 . the mandate was not sufficient to overcome the expiration of the tax credit , along with tight credit markets and an overall poor economy . the national biodiesel board maintains that the extension of the tax credit that was enacted in december 2010 will "help kick - start the domestic biofuel industry," and that the credits make biodiesel competitive with conventional diesel at the pump . while the tax incentives improve the competitiveness of bbd fuels , some stakeholders question whether they are warranted in the presence of a mandate to use the fuel . they argue that if the mandate is binding , the incentives will not promote the use of additional fuel beyond the mandate , and that overall fuel prices are lowered , creating an incentive to use more conventional fuel . a counterargument is that this perverse incentive is only likely if the mandate is binding and credible . as seen in figure 1 , after the expiration of the tax credit , production declined from 2009 to 2010 . if producers do not see the mandate as binding and certain , the presence of the tax credit may lower their perceived risk . alternately , producers could be gambling on the likelihood that epa will waive the bbd mandate in the face of limited production , or they could be hedging their bets into 2011 based on the deficit carryover contingency while they wait to see what the epa will do with the bbd mandate . bbd producers have already seen the epa waive the cellulosic rfs2 mandate in successive years due to lack of production . meanwhile , bbd rin prices have risen steadily to about $0.90 per gallon . if bbd rin prices remain high , producers may perceive less need for the tax credit , especially if rin prices ultimately exceed the per - gallon value of the tax credit . going forward , the settlement of the 2009 / 2010 combined bbd mandate , as well as the trajectory of domestic production / consumption and bbd rin prices in 2011 , could provide insights for the future of other biofuel / rin markets . for the bbd rin market to function effectively , epa most likely will need to hold firm to its 2011 rfs2 bbd mandate .