c onduct hearings . congress might choose to gather further information on u.s. engagement and cooperation efforts with the icc , including the specific activities undertaken by respective executive agencies to cooperate with the icc and the identified "in - kind" assistance to the icc , including assistance that flows through international organizations such as the united nations . congress may also ask for an explanation of administration policy and icc cooperation as it relates to the intended restrictions on the u.s. - icc relationship in aspa ; the possibility of the united states becoming party to the rome statute in the wake of the adoption of the crime of aggression and the restrictions on intrastate use of certain asphyxiating gases and special ammunition ; and the implications for u.s. interests , especially the security of members of the u.s. armed forces , of the adoption of provisions to activate the court's jurisdiction over the crime of aggression . r equir e executive branch report s . congress might consider requiring the executive branch to report on a periodic basis on u.s. cooperation with the icc , including resources and personnel involved in such cooperation . as explained above , aspa prohibits the use of appropriated funds to support the icc , but the obama administration has pledged only "in - kind" assistance to the court . reporting on u.s. support for the icc could shed light on whether u.s. - icc cooperation activities fall within existing legislative authorities and restrictions , especially those in aspa ; and developments in the practices , procedure , and precedents of the icc , as well as the statements of the icc prosecutor and other icc officials , in relation to preparing for prosecuting the crime of aggression , as well as any icc investigations into the actions of u.s. officials or officials of u.s. allies . a mend ing existing or enact new legislation . because official u.s. policy toward the court has shifted to one of engagement and support , congress might provide direction to u.s. officials concerning the u.s. - icc relationship going forward through new legislation , including provisions specifically dealing with the review conference's adoption of the crime of aggression and other changes to the rome statute . such legislation might provide new authorities for or limitations on u.s. involvement with the court , and might address the definition of "in - kind assistance" and u.s. provision of it to the icc . congress might decide to take up legislation that would provide policy direction on u.s. support or opposition to icc activities and to delineate authorization for u.s. participation in meetings of the asp and other u.s. - icc engagement . the states parties did not adopt a resolution or declaration on the topic of peace and justice . generally , observers of the stocktaking exercise at the review conference have asserted that it was a productive undertaking , even though it did not concern the central judicial and investigative operations of the court . instead , it focused on states parties' obligations under the rome statute and highlighted the need to consider the effects of the icc on issues outside mere prosecutions .