, "marketplaces" ) . group health plans can be insured ( i.e. under the irc , the group health plan requirements are enforced through the imposition of an excise tax . for single - employer plans , employers are generally responsible for paying this excise tax . under multiemployer plans , the tax is imposed on the plan . a group health plan that fails to comply with the pertinent requirements in the irc may be subject to a tax of $100 for each day in the noncompliance period with respect to each individual to whom such failure relates . however , if failures are not corrected before a notice of examination for tax liability is sent to the employer , and these failures occur or continue during the period under examination , the penalty will not be less than $2,500 . where violations are considered to be more than de minimis , the amount will not be less than $15,000 . limitations on a tax may be applicable under certain circumstances ( eg , if the person otherwise liable for such tax did not know or if exercising reasonable diligence would not have known that such violation existed ) . since the provisions of aca are incorporated by reference into chapter 100 of the irc , and section 4980d of the irc imposes a tax on any failure of a group health plan to meet the requirements of the chapter , group health plans subject to the internal revenue code could be subject to the excise tax for violations of the aca provisions . the following table summarizes applicability and enforcement mechanisms of the phsa , erisa , and the irc . traditionally , health insurance matters were primarily regulated at the state , rather than the federal , level . accordingly , states can and do regulate health insurance and insurers comprehensively . these requirements vary from state to state , but many states require insurers , for example , to be financially solvent and to pay claims promptly , and to mandate certain benefits ( i.e. , require health insurers to cover services provided by certain medical specialties or cover treatments for specific diseases ) . congress explicitly recognized the role of the states in the regulation of insurance with the passage of the mccarran - ferguson act of 1945 . this law was passed in response to the supreme court's ruling in united states v. south - eastern underwriters , in which the court affirmed the federal government's right to regulate the competitive practices of insurers under the commerce clause of the u.s. constitution . the intent of the mccarran - ferguson act was to grant states the explicit authority to regulate insurance in light of this decision . section 2 ( a ) of the act states , "the business of insurance , and every person engaged therein , shall be subject to the laws of the several states which relate to the regulation or taxation of such business. in addition , a penalty may not be imposed for a violation if it is established to the secretary's satisfaction that none of the entities knew ( or if exercising reasonable diligence would have known ) that the violation existed .