4310 as an amendment . increasing use of marine resources is driving proposals for congress and the administration to alter current relationships between environmental protection and sustainable resource management . in response to reports by the u.s. commission on ocean policy and the pew oceans commission noting declines in marine resources and shortcomings in what are perceived as fragmented and limited approaches to resource protection and management in federal and state waters , the obama administration released the final recommendations of its ocean policy task force on july 19 , 2010 . a further concern is the increasing pressures and conflicts that arise from economic activity associated with continued human population growth . a common concern is habitat loss or alteration , due both to natural processes , such as climate variation and ocean acidification , and to development , competition from invasive species , and other factors , primarily related to economic and social interests . congress faces the issues of how to balance these diverse interests ( which may fall on various sides of any given controversy ) , and whether to alter current laws that promote the sustainable management of fishery and other marine resources and protect the marine environment . the primary laws governing fisheries , aquaculture , and marine mammals are msfcma ( 16 u.s.c . §§1801 et seq .

 ) , the national aquaculture act of 1980 ( 16 u.s.c . §§2801 et seq .

 ) , and the marine mammal protection act ( mmpa ; 16 u.s.c . §§1361 et seq. ) congress last reauthorized and extensively amended msfcma in the 109 th congress ( p.l . 109-479 ) ; the current funding authorization expires on september 30 , 2013 . the marine mammal protection act was last reauthorized in 1994 by p.l . 103-238 , and funding authorization expired on september 30 , 1999 . appropriations also play an important role in federal fisheries management , providing funds for various programs and initiatives . in addition , appropriations bills have served as vehicles for some changes in msfcma provisions . for nmfs , funding for fisheries and marine mammal programs including management under msfcma is provided within noaa's operations , research , and facilities ( or&f ) account . ( see table 1 . ) nmfs employs more than 2,800 scientists , policy analysts , engineers , boat captains , computer modelers , statisticians , enforcement officers , secretaries , fisheries managers , economists , and various other skilled workers to implement its programs . appropriations issues in the 112 th congress included not only what level of funding might be adequate to implement the programs required by law , but also what levels of funding might be provided for alleviating the effects of disasters on fisheries and how much funding should be provided to restore salmon habitat and promote the recovery of endangered and threatened salmon stocks . the administration's fy2013 budget request was released on february 13 , 2012 . the administration is proposing that fy2013 funding for nmfs in noaa's or&f account increase about $13.6 million ( +1.7% ) above the fy2012 enacted funding . this is offset by a proposed reduction of $15 million for the pacific coastal salmon recovery fund .