for example , h.r . 3593 , the securing our borders and wilderness act , would amend the wilderness act to permit u.s. customs and border protection to perform border security measures as needed , including operating motor vehicles and aircraft and building infrastructure , including roads ( upon approval of the secretary of the interior ) , within designated wilderness areas . 3548 , the border security for america act of 2017 , and s. 1757 , the building america's trust act , would amend iiraira and explicitly waive any provisions in the wilderness act ( among others ) that would impede , prohibit , or restrict activities of u.s. customs and border protection on federal lands on both the southern and northern international borders . similar bills were introduced in previous congresses . congress directed fs and blm to initially evaluate the wilderness potential of their lands at different times , and these wilderness reviews have been controversial . congress directed fs to review the wilderness potential of the national forest system ( nfs ) in the 1964 wilderness act , and directed blm to do so for public lands in the federal land policy and management act of 1976 ( flpma ) . in contrast , blm is not required to conduct reviews of its lands and resources at regular intervals , and when blm does do a review , an assessment of the wilderness potential is not required . previous congresses have considered legislation to more broadly release wsas . for example , the wilderness and roadless area release act of 2011 ( h.r . 1581 / s. 1087 , 112 th congress ) would have released certain blm wsas — those not designated as wilderness by congress and those identified by the blm as not suitable for wilderness designation — from the nonimpairment requirement of section 603 ( c ) of flpma . the bill also would have terminated the william clinton and george w. bush forest service roadless area rules . the 114 th congress also considered similar legislation . for example , s. 193 , the inventoried roadless area management act , proposed to terminate the clinton roadless area rule on national forests in wyoming but did not broadly address wsas . congress also regularly considers legislation to release specific wsas . see table 2 for an alphabetical list of wsa release legislation in the 115 th congress ( see appendix for 114 th congress legislation ) . the 114 th congress added 275,665 acres to the wilderness system by either adding new wilderness areas or expanding existing areas . many other bills to designate additional wilderness areas were introduced and considered ( see table a - 1 ) . see table a - 2 for 114 th congress legislation that would have released blm wsas . state jurisdiction over and responsibilities for fish and wildlife and water rights are unaffected . the wilderness act provides that the area will be managed , in part , for recreational use , but it does not specifically address hunting , fishing , or recreational shooting ( although motorized vehicles , which may be helpful in removing big game from remote areas , are typically forbidden ) .