this legislation will be up for reauthorization in fy2013 . usaid began its tb program in 1998 . since then , congress has increased funding for global tb and the u.s. response has expanded to include more ambitious goals for usaid and involve several other u.s. agencies . the united states currently provides bilateral tb assistance to 40 countries ( figure 2 ) . president obama has indicated that tb is a key global health priority . on may 5 , 2009 , the president announced the global health initiative ( ghi ) , a new effort to develop a comprehensive u.s. global health strategy over the course of six years . tb is one of the ghi's six focus areas , reflecting the administration's goal of prioritizing those areas with the greatest disease burden , as well as the intention to maximize health impact per dollar spent . the ghi also calls for a more integrated u.s. response to global health issues and for a shift in u.s. global health strategy from one focused on specific diseases to a more comprehensive approach to health , including a focus on health system strengthening . in march 2010 , in response to congressional reporting requirements to develop a coordinated approach to global tb , usaid , the department of health and human services ( hhs ) ( including cdc and nih ) , the department of state , and the department of defense ( dod ) released a joint "lantos - hyde united states government tuberculosis strategy" ( the strategy ) . the strategy explains how u.s. tb programs will advance the goals of the ghi and outlines key targets for the u.s. tb response from 2009 to 2014 , including several of the goals set out in the lantos - hyde act . two of the targets in the strategy differ from those in the lantos - hyde act . while the lantos - hyde act aims to treat 4.5 million new infectious tb cases and diagnose and treat 90,000 new mdr - tb cases by 2013 , the strategy includes the following goals: treat 2.6 million new infectious tb cases using dots by 2014 , and diagnose and treat at least 57,200 new mdr - tb cases by 2014 . in order to reach the goals outlined in the strategy , u.s. tb programs focus on providing assistance for four key activities: accelerated detection and treatment of tb in up to 25 countries , selected on the basis of tb , mdr - tb , and hiv / tb co - infection prevalence and incidence rates ; case detection and treatment success rates ; and other factors , including political commitment , financial need , and managerial feasibility ; scaled - up prevention and treatment of mdr - tb ; expanded coverage of interventions for tb - hiv co - infection in coordination with usg hiv efforts under pepfar ; and improved health systems . a number of u.s. agencies and departments implement a range of programs aimed at treating and containing the global spread of tb . key agencies include the following: united states agency for international development: usaid is the lead agency in international tb control .