, payroll ) taxes . for example , each plan seeks to broaden the tax base by eliminating various exemptions , deductions , and credits , allowing for lower tax rates . the following sections highlight similarities , as well as differences , through providing an overview of the two proposals . as noted above , the budget control act of 2011 established a joint select committee for deficit reduction . as this bi - partisan committee evaluates various policy options , the findings of the fiscal commission and the debt reduction task force may serve as a useful starting point . the low levels of individual and corporate income tax collections can be partially explained by the recession . another factor contributing to reduced income tax collections is the increased availability of income tax credits , exemptions , and deductions . individual income tax collections have tended to be below historical averages , since the 2001 tax cuts . social insurance tax collections were slightly above the historical average . as a benchmark , it is helpful to consider the magnitude of the increase in revenues that would be needed , should deficits be eliminated through only tax increases . table 1 provides some guidance on the percentage increase in revenues that would be necessary to achieve a balanced budget under the cbo current policy baseline and the administration's fy2012 budget proposal ( omb ) , based on fy2011 and fy2015 projections . both cbo and omb projections suggest that the federal budget deficit will remain around $1.5 trillion in fy2011 . this report provided a broad overview of some of the potential revenue options available to congress . the majority of federal revenues are collected through the individual income tax system and through payroll taxes . revenues can be enhanced by eliminating various deductions , exemptions , and credits , generally broadening the tax base . a broader tax base could allow for lower tax rates , which may enhance economic efficiency . there are , however , additional revenue options outside of the existing tax code . both the president's fiscal commission and the debt reduction task force laid out plans for achieving fiscal sustainability . tax reform was a substantial component of both proposals . the following sections address these factors in turn . in fy2010 , federal revenues were $2.2 trillion . the sources for these revenues are illustrated in figure 4 . nearly 41.5% of total receipts ( $899 billion ) was collected through individual income taxes . another 40.0% ( $865 billion ) was collected through social insurance and retirement ( i.e. instead , the debt reduction task force proposed raising revenues through a consumption tax , in the form of a broad - based national sales tax . the president's september 19 , 2011 , deficit reduction proposal also provides a specific framework for achieving long - run deficit reduction and enhancing fiscal sustainability . both cbo and omb project increasing tax revenues and falling deficits over time as the economy continues to recover from the recent recession . note that cbo's baseline is current law , meaning that the 2001 and 2003 tax cuts , and the amt patch , among other policies , are allowed to expire as scheduled in 2012 .