this legislation will be up for reauthorization in fy2013 . in 1999 , the 106 th congress authorized resources to support a proposal by the clinton administration to broaden u.s. activities related to global hiv / aids through the leadership and investment in fighting an epidemic ( life ) initiative . life sought to address hiv / aids in 14 african countries and in india and represented the first time agencies other than the united states agency for international development ( usaid ) were included in the u.s. response to hiv / aids . president george w. bush launched two initiatives that built on the life initiative . in 2002 , president bush announced the international mother and child hiv prevention initiative , which focused on preventing mother - to - child transmission of hiv in 12 african countries and in 2 caribbean countries . in 2003 , president bush announced pepfar , proposing that the united states spend $15 billion over the course of five years to combat global hiv / aids . both the life initiative and the international mother and child hiv prevention initiative were replaced by pepfar . pepfar significantly increased attention to and funding for global hiv / aids . the president proposed that the majority of the funds ( $9 billion ) be concentrated in 15 focus countries , including 12 in sub - saharan africa . the proposal also allocated $5 billion to research and to other bilateral hiv / aids programs and $1 billion for contributions in fy2004 to the global fund . pepfar represents the largest commitment by any country toward an international health issue . at the time it was established , health experts were debating whether the international community had a responsibility to provide art to hiv - positive people in developing countries and whether they could be safely administered in such environments . pepfar responded to calls from those advocating treatment for the world's poor and demonstrated that art could be effectively provided in low - resource settings . through the leadership act , congress authorized the establishment of the office of the global aids coordinator ( ogac ) , at the department of state . ogac oversees and coordinates all u.s. spending on bilateral global hiv / aids activities implemented by various agencies ( see " pepfar implementing agencies " ) , as well as contributions to multilateral organizations . president barack obama has committed to continued support for pepfar , while working to transition pepfar from an emergency plan to a long - term and sustainable approach to global hiv / aids . on may 5 , 2009 , the president announced the global health initiative ( ghi ) , a new six - year effort to develop a comprehensive u.s. global health strategy . the ghi calls for a more integrated u.s. response to global health issues and for a shift in u.s. global health strategy from one focused on specific diseases to a more comprehensive approach to health . pepfar is the central component of the ghi and accounts for approximately 75% of the president's fy2013 budget proposal .