circuit resolve the license dispute . the letter made clear the members' position that doe had "overstepped its bounds" and "ignored congressional intent" in attempting to terminate the yucca mountain facility . finally , resolutions have been introduced in the house that would express support for yucca mountain as the "nation's primary permanent nuclear waste storage site ; " express disapproval of the doe motion to withdraw the yucca mountain license application ; and condemn the nrc's decision to halt its review of the yucca mountain license application . a resolution of inquiry has also been introduced that would ask the president and secretary of energy to provide the house of representatives with documents relating to the proposed termination of the yucca mountain program . other bills have also been introduced that would limit doe's ability to collect nwf fees . for a description of other legislative proposals pertaining to the yucca mountain project and the nwpa , see crs report rl33461 , civilian nuclear waste disposal , by [author name scrubbed] . while the result of the ongoing dispute over the attempted termination of the yucca mountain program remains uncertain , continued opposition to the proposed termination in the house of representatives will likely have a significant impact on the ultimate fate of the program . a number of leading house republicans have voiced strong opposition to abandoning the yucca mountain repository . for example , the chairmen of a number of influential committees — including the house budget committee , house committee on appropriations , house committee on appropriations subcommittee on energy and water , house natural resources committee , and house committee on science , space , and technology — have all opposed the administration's attempts to terminate the yucca mountain project . additionally , representative darrell issa , chairman of the house committee on oversight and government reform , opposes the administration's position on yucca mountain . speaker of the house john boehner has also indicated his interest in reviving the yucca mountain program , arguing that "[w]e've invested tens of billions of dollars in a storage facility that's as safe as anything we're going to find. consequently , the yucca mountain dispute will not only unfold legally before the nrc and in the d.c . defense - related high - level waste is to go into the same repository . in order to achieve this goal , and in an effort to mitigate the political difficulties of imposing a federal nuclear waste facility on a single community , congress attempted to establish an objective , scientifically based multi - stage statutory process for selecting the eventual site of the nation's new permanent geologic repository . although doe would be responsible for developing the eventual repository and carrying out the disposal program , individual nuclear power providers would fund a large portion of the program through significant annual contributions , or fees , to the newly established nuclear waste fund ( nwf ) . president obama subsequently nominated allison macfarlane , former member of the blue ribbon commission and an associate professor of environmental science and policy at george mason university , to succeed jaczko as chairman .