the text of h.r . 935 was introduced in the house - passed farm bill ( h.r . 2642 ) , but it was not included in the enacted 2014 farm bill ( p.l . general permits cover categories of point sources that have common elements and that discharge the same types of wastes . they allow the permitting authority to allocate resources efficiently , especially when there is a large number of potential permittees . permitting procedures are streamlined and simplified , compared with cwa individual permits . still , many agricultural industry groups are fearful that the court's ruling and epa's general permit will lead to more burdensome and potentially costly requirements that affect their operation and activities . [author name scrubbed] , specialist in resources and environmental policy , [phone number scrubbed] , [email address scrubbed] . pesticide spray drift describes the movement of pesticide during or soon after its application through the air . such drift can potentially move away from the intended target to unintended locations . various stakeholders , including many in the agricultural community , have expressed their concerns to states and epa regarding potential risk associated with exposure to spray drift . these include potential risks to the health of applicators and by - standers , and potential effects on non - target animals and plants . many of these stakeholders remain cautious about the level and extent of restrictions epa may require to prevent unreasonable adverse effects from spray drift . pesticide spray drift has also been the subject of several citizen petitions and lawsuits filed against epa by environmental advocacy groups . when considering whether to register a pesticide under fifra , epa currently incorporates an assessment of the potential risks from spray drift as part of an overall risk assessment of a pesticide . epa may require an applicant of a pesticide registration to conduct specific tests if the applicant proposes application methods that could potentially result in spray drift . results from these tests may be used by the agency in determining whether precautionary labeling or certain other restrictions are needed as a condition for registration . accordingly , epa's current regulation of pesticide spray drift primarily affects pesticide manufacturers . pesticide applicators may be subject to enforcement by states or epa if pesticides are not applied in accordance with label restrictions . epa has taken several actions to address risks from spray drift . in 2009 , epa proposed guidance for pesticide registration applicants and registrants to revise label statements intended to reduce spray drift . this guidance was not formally adopted . epa also initiated a voluntary drift reduction technology program to encourage development and verification of new pesticide application technologies that may reduce spray drift . epa is currently evaluating a drift reduction technology verification protocol , prior to its adoption for verifying the effectiveness of various spray drift reduction technology . additionally , epa has worked with pesticide applicators and the agricultural community to encourage the use of best management practices . in january 2014 , epa proposed guidance regarding the agency's process in evaluating risks from pesticide spray drift as part of its overall process for conducting pesticide risk assessments .