these elements are discussed in some detail below . the 2010 deepwater horizon oil spill generated considerable interest in the existing oil spill liability and compensation framework . the incident placed a spotlight on multiple elements of the framework , in particular the liability limits and the size and limitations of the osltf . the issues raised by the spill highlight a central policy debate: how should policymakers allocate the costs associated with a catastrophic oil spill ? what share of costs should be borne by the responsible party ( eg , oil vessel owner / operators ) compared to other groups , such as the oil industry ( eg , through the per - barrel tax ) , and / or the general treasury ( assuming congress would appropriate funds to compensate for unpaid costs / damages ) ? policymakers may want to consider the magnitude of the deepwater horizon incident and the liability and compensation issues raised under a scenario in which bp had refused to finance response activities or establish a claims process to comply with the relevant opa provisions . bp has either directly funded oil spill response operations or reimbursed the federal government for actions taken by various agencies . the current combination of liability limits and $1 billion per - incident cap is not sufficient to withstand a spill with damages / costs that exceed a responsible party's liability limit ( assuming it would apply ) by $1 billion . even if the per - incident cap were increased , the current ( and projected ) level of funds in the osltf may not be sufficient to address costs from a catastrophic spill . the options available to address these issues depend upon on the overall objective of congress . one objective — which has been expressed by many in and outside congress — is to provide full restoration and timely compensation for the impacts from a catastrophic spill , without directly burdening the general taxpayers . in the context of this objective , "timely" compensation means that an injured party would have access to compensation without going through a court system , which would likely require more of a claimant's time and resources . with that objective in mind , several options are discussed below . potential options for congress include ( but are not limited to ) the following , many of which were proposed in various legislation in the 111 th congress and some of which are included in proposals in the 112 th congress: increase the liability limits , so that the responsible party would be required to pay a greater portion of the total spill cost before accessing trust fund dollars . congress may consider different limits for different offshore activities . precedent exists in opa for setting different liability limits to account for different oil spill risks: the liability limit for single - hulled tank vessels is approximately 50% higher than for double - hulled vessels .