reg . 15123 et seq. ) without regard to any other provision of statute or regulation that applies to issuance of such rule . such reissuance ( including this section ) shall not be subject to judicial review and shall not abrogate or otherwise have any effect on the order and judgment issued by the united states district court for the district of wyoming in case numbers 09-cv - 118j and 09-cv - 138j on november 18 , 2010 . the effect was to return to the april 2009 rule , described above , establishing the dps in the northern rockies and delisting those wolves , except for those in wyoming . the gray wolf becomes the 49 th species to be delisted under esa , although it was delisted only in the states of montana and idaho plus eastern washington , eastern oregon , and north - central utah . ( it remains listed as either endangered or threatened in all of the other lower 48 states. ) of the 48 species delisted to date , none has been delisted due to specific legislative action . while there may be attempts to point to the language of p.l . 112-10 as a precedent for delisting other species , two facts are unlikely to find parallels in other species controversies: ( 1 ) fws had previously attempted to delist the species , meaning fws believed the science supported delisting ; and ( 2 ) the species had met and exceeded the numeric goals for delisting in the species' recovery plan , although the genetic connectivity was disputed . the language of section 1713 blocks judicial review of reissuance of the rule , and it appears to leave open the option for a subsequent proposal to re - list the species or to delist wyoming's wolves . also in april 2011 , fws took action addressing wolves in other parts of the united states . fws has proposed to delist the wolves in the western great lakes and to recognize wolves in the eastern states as a different species ( canis lycaon ) from the wolves found in most of the rest of the country: after reviewing the latest available scientific and taxonomic information , the service now recognizes the presence of two species of wolves in the western great lakes: the gray wolf ( canis lupus ) , the wolf species currently listed under the esa , and the eastern wolf ( canis lycaon ) , with a historical range that includes portions of eastern canada and the northeastern united states . recent wolf genetic studies indicate that what was formerly thought to be a subspecies of gray wolf ( canis lupus lycaon ) is actually a distinct species ( canis lycaon ) . to establish the status of this newly recognized species , the service is initiating a review of canis lycaon throughout its range in the united states and canada . as with the many controversies surrounding wolf conservation , these proposals may also be subject to litigation and come to congressional attention . other bills in the 112 th congress ( besides h.r . 1473 ) proposed revising gray wolf protection .