supplemental energy concerns: none . bahrain oil exports: bahrain shares the abu safah field with saudi arabia and is a minor exporter of oil . natural gas exports: bahrain is not an exporter of natural gas . in 2009 , iraq exported almost 1.8 mb / d , making it the 10 th - largest exporter . the basrah oil terminal has a 1.3 mb / d capacity and is iraq's main export terminal . congressional views on the use of the spr vary . some have supported the sale of 6 million barrels for operational reasons , citing fiscal and environmental concerns about losing the oil . others have asked the administration to stand ready to draw down the spr if the situation in mena deteriorates any further , posing greater risk to oil supply . and still others are calling for an immediate spr release to bring down prices . critics of tapping the reserve have questioned the administration's motive in selling crude for operational reasons , and suggested that the spr should be preserved for more severe disruptions , resisting calls that it be used to affect prices . industry analysts disagree whether selling crude from the spr will have a significant market impact . on march 8 , 2011 , officials stated that the administration is monitoring the situation and that drawing down the spr is an option under consideration . the spr was established at least in part because there are few other short - term options to mitigate the effect of severe oil market disruptions . price controls implemented in the 1970s , also responses to mena oil supply disruptions , were ultimately rejected as counterproductive to long - term energy goals . when prices were rising rapidly in 2008 , congress considered but did not pass a temporary "gas tax holiday. the proposal , s. 2890 in the 110 th congress , would have amended the internal revenue code of 1986 to reduce the 18.4¢ per gallon federal gas tax and 24.4¢ diesel tax to zero during the summer driving season . it met significant opposition on concerns it would contribute to higher oil import dependence by spurring increased consumption and jeopardize programs funded by the highway trust fund , the recipient of the fuel excise tax . apart from the spr , much of the policy debate stemming from the unrest in mena and its impacts on oil markets has focused on options that take a long time to implement . some members of congress and others cite the current unrest in mena and the resulting increase in oil costs in backing proposals ranging from increasing support for domestic oil and gas production , and renewable energy , or mandating greater efficiency . such proposals may contribute to lower import dependence but only over time , as they take months or years to make material impacts on liquid fuels supply and demand . further , while such moves would reduce the drag on economic growth when oil prices rise , american consumers could still face higher gasoline prices at the pump due to international disruptions of oil supply , since oil prices are set in a global marketplace . discussing these numerous options falls beyond the scope of this report .