a federal death sentence is subject to appellate review . if upheld , the defendant is committed to the custody of the attorney general for execution . they supply the evidentiary standards within which a trial must be conducted . yet application of the rules and control of a federal criminal trial rests primarily with the trial judge . "[t]he trial judge has the responsibility to maintain decorum in keeping with the nature of the proceeding ; 'the judge ... is the governor of the trial for the purpose of assuring its proper conduct.' special procedures apply after a defendant is found guilty of a federal capital offense . a sentencing hearing is held before a jury to determine whether the defendant should be sentenced to death . first , in a murder case , the jury must determine whether the defendant acted with the intent necessary to qualify for imposition of the death penalty . if it does so , the penalty may be imposed only if the jury also finds one or more of a series of aggravating factors and finds that the aggravating factor or factors outweigh any mitigating factors to an extent justifying a sentence of death . as noted earlier , the statutory list of aggravating factors includes instances , for example , when ( 1 ) the death occurred during the course of an assault on a member of congress of some other designated felony ; ( 2 ) the homicide was committed in a particular heinous , cruel , or depraved manner ; ( 3 ) a federal judge was a victim of the offense ; ( 4 ) the defendant killed or attempted to kill more than one person in a single criminal episode ; or ( 5 ) when "any other aggravating factor for which notice has been given exists. mitigating factors include , for example , ( 1 ) the defendant's impaired capacity ; ( 2 ) the absence of a significant prior criminal record ; ( 3 ) commission of the offense "under severe mental or emotional disturbance. mitigating factors may also be found "in the defendant's background , record , or character or any other circumstance of the offense. the sentence of death , however , may not be carried out if the defendant lacks the mental capacity , as a result of mental disability , "to understand the death penalty and why it was imposed. in a capital case when the jury finds the defendant eligible for the death penalty but fails to unanimously recommend the death penalty , the court sentences the defendant to "life imprisonment without possibility of release or some other lesser sentence. when the prosecution elects not to seek the death penalty and when the defendant is convicted of a noncapital offense , the court sentences the defendant , without benefit of a jury . although the federal sentencing guidelines are no longer binding , noncapital sentencing begins there . comparable attributes of state law are beyond the scope of this report . rules govern the general attributes and procedures of a federal criminal trial . for example , the federal rules ban cameras from the courtroom .