appendix a . methodology of report selection of programs programs were selected for inclusion in this report if they ( 1 ) have provisions that base an individual's eligibility or priority for service on a measure ( or proxy ) of low or limited income ; or ( 2 ) target resources in some way ( eg , through allocation formulas , variable matching rates ) using a measure ( or proxy ) of low or limited income . a few programs without an explicit low - income provision were included because either their target population is disproportionately poor or their purpose clearly indicates a presumption that participants will be low - income . such programs that serve disproportionately low - income people include the indian health service , homeless assistance grants , indian education , title i migrant education program , and indian human services . programs with purposes that presume a low - income target population include adult basic education and social services block grants . federal student loan programs were considered for inclusion because they determine benefit levels through the same need analysis system that is used for pell grants and several smaller postsecondary education programs . however , this system can result in students from relatively well - off families receiving assistance , as there is no absolute income ceiling on eligibility . pell grants are structured in such a way that the majority of recipients are low - income and the lowest - income students receive the largest benefits . student loan programs are not as strongly targeted and therefore , are not included in the report . on the other hand , deliberations about whether to include the additional child tax credit ( actc ) reached a different conclusion . the regular child tax credit ( ctc ) is a nonrefundable credit and phases out at relatively high income levels . the actc is a refundable credit that allows families with no or insufficient tax liability to get all or part of the benefit they would otherwise receive from the ctc . because of the refundable nature and other design features of the actc , including certain recently enacted changes , it serves predominantly low - income families . for example , for tax year 2008 , 87% of returns that claimed the actc were filed by families with adjusted gross incomes ( agi ) below $40,000 and 83% of the credit went to such families ; 94% of returns that claimed the actc were filed by families with agi below $50,000 and 93% of the credit went to such families . thus , actc is included in the report . categorization of programs most programs are easily assigned to broad categories , such as health , cash aid , food assistance , or education . a few , however , have multiple purposes or allowable activities . for some of those programs , spending can be disaggregated into the relevant categories . for example , using state reporting of actual expenditures , it is possible to estimate the amount of tanf obligations attributable to cash aid , social services , and employment and training . other programs cannot be disaggregated , however , and must be assigned to a single category .