each assertion raises issues . for instance , declaring that biomass energy is carbon neutral because biomass is naturally carbon neutral does not account for ghg emissions released due to management of crops grown for energy production ( eg , fertilizer ) . in addition , there may need to be additional plantings of certain biomass feedstocks to remove the co 2 emitted from biomass cultivated for energy production . the carbon cycles for a bioenergy system and a fossil fuel system differ in at least two ways: the carbon source ( finite versus renewable ) and the atmospheric carbon concentration ( potentially stable versus additional ; see figure 1 ) . three main factors contribute to the amount of carbon emitted from biopower generation: feedstock production ( cultivation and harvest ) , feedstock transport , and the biopower technology type . however , as noted by many sources , feedstock production also absorbs carbon during growth . whether and how to conduct ghg emission accounting for biopower are issues that have been under consideration for the last few years . ghg emission accounting can be used to compare the environmental footprint of a biopower operation with that of a conventional fossil fuel operation ( eg , electricity from coal or natural gas ) . a life - cycle assessment ( lca ) is one method to calculate the environmental footprint . the lca is an analytic method for identifying , evaluating , and comparing the environmental impacts of emissions and the resource depletion associated with a specific process . an lca generally uses observed data and assumptions to model what ghgs are being released at each phase of the process . ideally , an lca would encompass economic and social factors for a more comprehensive assessment ( eg , job growth , poverty ) . however , most lcas focus exclusively on emissions and fossil fuel consumption . an lca can be one element used in assessing a preferred energy approach , along with cost and performance data . in some cases , even if lca results favor a particular approach , an lca alone might not be the deciding factor when choosing an energy process ; financial objectives , policy goals , and other factors may influence which approach is selected . ghg accounting with an lca can be performed at each phase of the biopower pathway: biomass cultivation and harvest , biomass transport , electricity generation , electricity transmission and distribution , and electricity end use ( figure 2 ) . the first three phases of the biopower pathway ( cultivation and harvest , transport , and electricity generation ) are where the bulk of ghg emissions occur . ghg flux during the first three phases is site and operation specific and depends on many factors , including the biomass type , management strategies , and biopower generation technology . published lcas for biopower are limited and , as noted above , may not be applicable to specific cases . the lcas performed often are tailored to one feedstock and one biopower technology type , and lca results vary depending on assumptions such as the time frame of the assessment .