net worth ( i.e. , the difference between the value of assets and liabilities ) fell for seven consecutive quarters beginning in the third quarter of 2007 . this section explains these factors in more detail . "trigger events" are defined as sudden changes in circumstances that can lead to greater loan defaults . a steep rise in unemployment is an example of a trigger event . during the 2007-2009 recession , the unemployment rate soared to 10.0% , which was the highest it has climbed since 1982 . job losses can translate into income disruptions that make it difficult to repay existing credit obligations or seek new loans . a sharp , unanticipated decline in household net worth is another example of a trigger event . housing assets are also typically a much larger component of household balance sheets . hence , stock market declines tend to have a smaller impact on household consumption and borrowing decisions relative to declines in real estate prices . given that declining real estate asset values may lead to permanent wealth reductions that would prevent existing ( mortgage ) debt obligations from being repaid , two possible reasons for household deleveraging are worth considering . households may have a precautionary savings motive that influences them to reduce borrowing when household wealth drops . if households wish to maintain a certain level of wealth to protect against unexpected economic reversals , their consumption behavior is likely to change if those balances fall below desired thresholds . households may reduce spending ( and borrowing ) and increase saving until net wealth has been restored to more desirable levels . for example , figure 4 shows that "cash - in" mortgage refinancings became more common relative to "cash - out" refinancings by 2008 . during the mid - 2000s housing boom , many borrowers pulled equity out of their homes to finance expenditures . freddie mac refers to this type of transaction as a "cash - out" refinance when the outstanding mortgage balance increases by more than 5% . conversely , a "cash - in" refinance occurs when borrowers refinance and pay down some mortgage principal , which reduces outstanding balances . during the 2007-2009 recession , households saw a decline in household net worth that had not occurred in previous recessions over the past three decades ( figure 3 ) . the most recent decline in net worth was larger and persisted for more successive quarters than did the steep decline in the stock market of the late 1990s , which lasted until approximately 2002 . much of the decline in net worth is attributable to real estate assets that many households financed through borrowing . the federal housing finance agency and case - shiller house price indices show that u.s. house prices began declining in 2007 , and homeowners were increasingly likely to find themselves "underwater" or "upside - down" as the amount of their outstanding mortgage balances exceeded current home values . academic research suggests that changes in real estate values generate a greater response in consumer spending and borrowing decisions than do changes to stock values .