appendix a . beneficiary travel program history appendix b . beneficiary travel program funding according to the department of veterans affairs , the costs associated with the travel beneficiary program have risen in recent years due to the increased number of veterans claiming mileage reimbursement , a rise in the average number of claims per veteran , and higher costs per veteran claim . va showed a 30% increase in the number of veterans claiming reimbursement ( estimated at 450,000 in fy2008 and 586,000 in fy2009 ) , and showed the average number of claims per veteran increased from 5.5 to 7.1 during that same period . as shown in table b - 1 , spending for the beneficiary travel program increased by approximately 285% between fy2006 and fy2010 . it is estimated that va will spend approximately $798 million in fy2011 . it should be noted that the funding for this program comes directly from the va health care appropriation . deductibles apply in most cases . eligible veterans who drive in private cars to appointments are reimbursed at a per - mile rate for travel both to the appointment and back home . if two or more eligible beneficiaries are riding in the same car , only one mileage reimbursement will be made ( i.e. , the reimbursement is provided for costs actually incurred , not per person traveling ) . "special mode" transportation refers to travel in an ambulance , wheelchair van , or other vehicle specially designed for transporting people with disabilities . other types of transportation , such as subways , trains , airplanes , and privately owned vehicles , are not considered special mode even if they have been adapted or are capable of transporting people with disabilities . to receive benefits for special mode transportation , the veteran must be eligible for the benefit , as described above , and the special mode transportation must be medically required , as determined by a va clinician . reimbursement for special mode transportation must be requested prior to the trip , except in the case of medical emergencies . special mode transportation from a va facility to a community emergency facility and back is authorized for reimbursement if the transportation is required because the va facility could not provide the needed care . special mode transportation to an emergency facility for treatment can be retroactively authorized if the emergency episode of care is approved for va payment . the caregivers and veterans omnibus health services act of 2010 clarified that "actual necessary expense of travel includes the reasonable costs of airfare if travel by air is the only practical way to reach a department facility.' the veteran's medical condition and any other impediments to the use of ground transportation should be considered in the evaluation of whether travel by air is practical . va will reimburse for actual cost up to 50% of the government employee rate for meals and lodging when deemed appropriate by va based on medical condition , distance required to travel , weather conditions , time of appointment , and other factors . reimbursement for food and lodging should be requested in advance .