planning assistance . administrative costs ( limited to not more than 3% of a state's allotment ) . promotion of tourism in the gulf coast region , including recreational fishing . promotion of the consumption of seafood harvested from the gulf coast region . to receive its share of funds , a state must meet several conditions , including a certification ( as determined by the secretary of the treasury ) that , among other things , funds are applied to one of the above activities and activities are selected through public input . in addition , states must submit a multiyear implementation plan , documenting funded activities . the act distributes 30% of its trust fund monies to a newly created gulf coast ecosystem restoration council . the council is composed of high - level officials from six federal agencies and the governor ( or his / her designee ) from each of the five gulf states . based on its comprehensive plan , the council will finance ecosystem restoration activities in the gulf coast region . workforce development and job creation . improvements to or on state parks located in coastal areas affected by the deepwater horizon oil spill . infrastructure projects benefitting the economy or ecological resources , including port infrastructure . coastal flood protection and related infrastructure . the act directs the council to disburse 30% of the trust fund monies to the five gulf states . the council is to develop a distribution formula based on criteria listed in the act . in general , the criteria involve a measure of shoreline impact ; oiled shoreline distance from the deepwater horizon rig ; and coastal population . crs is not aware of an authoritative source that has estimated how much each state would receive under these criteria . to receive funding , each state must submit a plan for approval to the council . state plans must document how funding will support one or more of the 11 categories listed above . however , only 25% of a state's funding can be used to support infrastructure projects in categories 6 and 7 above . the act establishes the gulf coast ecosystem restoration science , observation , monitoring , and technology ( gcersomt ) program , funded by 2.5% of monies in the trust fund . the national oceanic and atmospheric administration ( noaa ) administrator will implement the program , which will support marine research projects that pertain to species in the gulf of mexico . the act disburses 2.5% of monies in the trust fund to the five gulf states to establish — through a competitive grant program — "centers of excellence. the centers would be nongovernmental entities ( including public or private institutions ) in the gulf coast region . finally , interest earned by the trust fund would be distributed as follows: 50% would fund the gulf coast ecosystem restoration council , so it can "carry out the comprehensive plan. 25% would provide additional funding for the gulf coast ecosystem restoration science , observation , monitoring , and technology program mentioned above . 25% would provide additional funding for the centers of excellence research grants mentioned above . no such negligence determination has been made in connection with the 2010 oil spill .