appendix a . domestic u.s. forests most domestic u.s. forests are temperate forests , with relatively few tree species ( compared to tropical forests ) , but various species mixes . the text box below describes the temperate forests that dominate most of the united states . alaska contains mostly boreal forests of hemlock - sitka spruce along the southern coast and panhandle , and of spruce - birch mixes in the interior . the united states also includes some tropical forests in southern florida and hawaii . within each of the many temperate forest types , a few to several tree species dominate the overstory , and several to many additional plant species occur in the understory . domestic forest ownership u.s. forests are owned and managed by many entities , including the federal government , states , local governments , corporations , and other private landowners . the relative importance of these landowner groups varies regionally , as shown in figure a - 1 . the largest federal forest management agency is the forest service , in the department of agriculture ( usda ) . these forests are primarily in the west , although the forest service is the largest landowner in the eastern regions . the department of the interior ( doi ) , particularly the bureau of land management ( blm ) , administers most of the other federal forestlands , although the departments of defense and energy also manage federal forests . several states and local governments also own significant amounts of forestland ; this is especially the case in the midwest ( minnesota , michigan , and wisconsin ) and mid - atlantic ( pennsylvania and new york ) regions . private forests are more common in the north and south regions . corporate forests are substantially concentrated in the most productive areas for timber growing — the pacific coast ( washington , oregon , and california ) and the south — and are generally managed for industrial wood products . other private forests — also called non - industrial private forests — dominate in the eastern regions . these landholdings vary widely in size and purpose , ranging from a few acres for a second home on a forested lakeshore or a woodlot on a farm , which occasionally provide timber revenues for the landowners , to tens of thousands of acres managed by hunt clubs , land trusts , and other organizations , where timber production is often a secondary or residual result of management . forest management programs the forest service and the department of the interior are addressing the effects of climate change on federal land and resource management . the forest service released its national roadmap for responding to climate change in july 2010 . this is a strategic plan that establishes general management guidance for national forest adaptation and for carbon mitigation from agency activities . it also acknowledges the need to build agency capacity and seeks to build cooperation among landowners recognizing that climate change affects all forests . the interior department established a climate change task force , which developed three reports analyzing the impacts of climate change and identifying relevant options for doi agencies .