some of the provisions require final rulemakings . the commission is in the process of considering the legislation and determining whether and how to consolidate some of the rulemakings . it will add specific rules under the act to the regulatory flexibility act agenda as it proceeds . although this unified agenda entry indicated that the upcoming action would be an interim final rule to be issued in september 2011 , the rule's legal authority was characterized as "not yet determined. the unified agenda is perhaps the best vehicle to provide that early information , describing not only what rules agencies are expected to issue , but also providing information regarding their significance and timing . although the cra has been used only once to overturn an agency rule , congress has regularly included provisions in the text of agencies' appropriations bills directing or preventing the development of particular regulations . therefore , it appears that the sec could ultimately issue multiple proposed rules related to the dodd - frank act pursuant to this unified agenda entry , or the sec could issue no proposed rules . the december 20 , 2010 , edition of the unified agenda listed 12 dodd - frank act - related actions in the "final rule stage" of rulemaking ( indicating that the agency expected to issue final rules or take other final actions on the subjects within the next 12 months ) . eight of the 12 agenda entries were from the sec ; two were from the federal trade commission ( ftc ) ; and two were from the occupational safety and health administration ( osha ) within the department of labor . however , it is possible that these entries will not result in 12 final rules . as was the case for upcoming proposed rules under the dodd - frank act , one of the sec final rule entries in the unified agenda ( "final rules under the dodd - frank wall street reform and consumer protection act" ) was very general: the dodd - frank wall street reform and consumer protection act was enacted on july 21 , 2010 . the act includes a significant number of rulemaking provisions applicable to the commission . the commission is in the process of considering the legislation and determining whether and how to consolidate some of the rulemakings . it will add specific rules under the act to the regulatory flexibility act agenda as it proceeds . therefore , it appears that the sec could ultimately issue multiple final rules related to the dodd - frank act pursuant to this unified agenda entry , or the sec could issue no final rules . three other sec "final rule" entries ( two of which were entitled "references to ratings of nationally recognized statistical rating organizations," and one on "security ratings" ) were scheduled for action in july 2011 . all three entries referenced prior notices of proposed rulemaking , with the agency indicating that it was considering how to proceed in light of the dodd - frank act . therefore , these entries may result in a final rule , or may result in the agency concluding action without issuing a final rule .