this was the first time that capital increases for so many mdbs were considered by congress at the same time . it also provided an opportunity for the administration and congress to evaluate u.s. participation in the institutions , debate whether the mdbs are using their existing capital effectively , and decide whether participation in any or all of the capital increases is in the interest of the united states and what additional policy reforms , if any , the united states should seek . on march 10 , 2010 , the senate foreign relations committee's minority staff prepared a report on reforming the mdbs , stating that "the administration and the other donor countries of the g - 20 should be firm in demanding that needed reforms are secured before committing additional funds. the report includes a number of recommendations , including strengthening anti - corruption efforts , improving evaluation frameworks , and improving oversight of budget support lending , among others . during its gci negotiations with other mdb shareholder governments , the obama administration gained support for many of these reforms , according to testimony delivered before the senate committee on foreign relations in september 2010 ( see text box below ) . secretary geithner reiterated these efforts , and stressed the importance of the mdbs to the administration at additional hearings before the senate committee on foreign relations in february 2011 . at the hearings , he stated that u.s. investments at the mdbs "are a critical and cost - effective component of the united states' global economic leadership. the obama administration requested that contributions to the asdb gci be included in the fy2011 budget , p.l . 112-10 , signed by the president on april 15 , 2011 , authorized to be appropriated $13.3 billion for u.s. participation in the asdb gci . the act also appropriated $106.59 million for the first payment toward the u.s. paid - in capital . authorization and appropriations for the remaining gci requests were included in the fy 2012 budget . 112-74 , which includes authorizations for u.s. participation in the ibrd , afdb , ebrd , and ibrd replenishments , as well as appropriations for the initial contribution . in the conference report accompanying the legislation authorizing u.s. participation if the gcis , congress required treasury to report to the committees on appropriation that substantial progress was being made on several reforms prior to any funds being disbursed . these include: reforms agreed to by the world bank and the afdb at the pittsburgh g20 summit concerning "sound finances , effective management and governance , transparency and accountability , focus or core mission , and results ; " annual transfers of at least $200,000,000 from the resources of the idb to a grant facility for haiti ; implementing best practices for the protection of whistleblowers from retaliation ; requiring that candidates for budget support from the mdbs provide an assessment of reforms needed to budgetary and procurement processes to encourage transparency ; increased disclosure of mdb performance and financial audits of its loan projects ; and adopting policies concerning the world bank's proposed program for results ( p4r ) .