postal service . those who did not respond were sent reminders or contacted by telephone , with the survey response period closing in march or april following the election . for each survey , the overall final response rate was about 40% of the sample , or about 17% of all jurisdictions in the united states . respondents answered 85% - 90% of questions , on average . the response was sufficiently high to permit statistical analysis and comparison of the results among the surveys . the distribution of responses among states was similar across the surveys ( see figure a - 2 ) . individual response rates per state were between 25% and 50% for about three - quarters of states . the remainder were evenly split between those for which under 25% of leos responded , and those for which the rate was greater than 50% . response rates did not vary significantly for any survey with the number of local election jurisdictions in a state or its voting age population . about 70% of respondents worked in county election jurisdictions , with most of the remainder working in townships ( figure a - 3 ) . the small difference among the surveys in those choosing "town / township" and in those choosing "other" was almost certainly a result of a small change in the structure of the question after the 2004 survey . however , as the figure implies , the proportion of respondents from county jurisdictions increased slightly over the course of the three surveys . all the results presented in this report are from analyses by crs of data provided from the surveys by researchers at texas a&m university ( 2004 and 2006 ) and the university of oklahoma ( 2008 ) . the raw data were first examined for errors , and corrections were made where necessary , in a few cases , such as if a leo claimed to work more hours per week than is physically possible . where the correct answer could be reasonably discerned , the response was corrected . otherwise it was discarded . once cleaned , the data were analyzed using standard parametric methods , mainly analysis of variance , linear regression , and student's t - tests as appropriate . three kinds of hypotheses were tested: differences between groups , such as whether results differed across the three surveys ; differences from a hypothetical value , such as whether leos were neutral about , agreed with , or disagreed with a particular statement ; and tests for associations , such as whether the number of pollworkers in a jurisdiction was correlated with the number of registered voters . statistical significance was determined using a significance level ( α ) of .01 . however , for display purposes , graphs with error bars were drawn showing 95% confidence intervals for the means . most tests for which results are presented in this report yielded highly statistically significant results — p - values much lower than the significance level ( p < < .01 ) .