title i of h.r . 1174 / s. 238 would strike the current mandate and replace it with a single mandate of long - term price stability . it would require the fed to establish metrics ( eg , an inflation target ) to evaluate whether the mandate was being achieved , and those metrics would have to take into account price indices of goods and services , asset prices , exchange rates , and the price of gold . the fed would be required to publicly disclose the metrics and report to congress when the metrics were altered . as practiced abroad , countries with a single mandate or inflation target have not ignored changes in unemployment when setting monetary policy , in part because they may help predict future changes in inflation . while this demonstrates that policymaking under one or both can be more flexible in practice than opponents sometimes portray , it also begs the question of whether dropping maximum employment from the mandate is necessary or desirable . arguments in favor of an inflation target and single mandate include improved accountability of monetary policymakers and increased transparency of monetary policy to financial markets . both are thought to result in better outcomes for the economy . to the extent that an inflation target were interpreted flexibly by the fed , these benefits would be diminished . on the other hand , flexibility could improve outcomes if policymakers cannot devise a regime that accounts for all unforeseen contingencies ahead of time . some of the desire for legislative change comes from discontent with the fed's recent performance . but would those shortcomings be affected by a mandate change ? many of the criticisms of the fed's performance — its "bailouts" of "too big to fail" firms , lax supervision of the financial system in the run up to the crisis , and passivity during the housing boom's run up of unsuitable mortgage debt — are unrelated to its monetary policy mandate , and involve authority derived from other parts of the federal reserve act . monetary policy's failure to prevent , and possibly exacerbate , the housing bubble , could argue in support of a mandate change . but because the housing bubble did not lead to high inflation , a single mandate would not obviously modify the fed's behavior in the face of future asset bubbles . a mandate change to require the fed to explicitly address bubbles or financial stability might be a more direct means to this end . criticism that the fed should have done more to prevent the depth and length of the recession implicitly speaks to the "maximum employment" part of the dual mandate , and so it does not follow that a single mandate of price stability would result in more aggressive countercyclical policy . a criticism could be made that the fed's focus on core inflation has not proven to be the optimal measure for obtaining price stability . but this criticism does not make the case that the fed has neglected price stability , or that the fed would be more focused on price stability under a single mandate .