103-382 ) , which amended the esea . distributed scoring involves scorers working from home , accessing the assessment items through an online platform . in this arrangement , the assessment vendor is not required to supply a facility or equipment for scorers . in reality , it is likely that assessment vendors would use a mixture of onsite and distributed scoring . when investigating cost strategies , researchers modeled the savings involved in using a 50-50 mix of onsite and distributed scoring . the 50-50 mix resulted in an 11% reduction in the costs of scoring constructed response items . another option that has been proposed to reduce scoring costs is using teachers to score assessments . teachers evaluate student performance on a daily basis , and it may be a natural extension of their job to score state assessments . given the flexibility that states have to design their own assessment systems , it may be difficult for federal funding to meet a constantly moving target . the federal government could , however , develop policies that promote quality and efficiency in state assessment systems . federal policies that aim to promote efficiencies , however , may risk reducing the quality of assessments if the efficiencies are supported without full consideration of the consequences . certain efficiencies may involve tradeoffs in terms of the type of assessments , number of assessments , and timeline imposed on states to report results . a number of issues may arise , however , if teachers score assessments . first , since teachers have a stake in the outcome of the nclb accountability system , the state would need procedures in place to ensure objective scoring . in the nclb accountability system , states must hold schools and leas accountable for student performance ; therefore , it may not make sense to have teachers score assessments within their school or lea , given that they have a vested interest in the outcome . it may be possible to require teachers to score assessments from other schools or other leas ; however , the potential travel involved may negate the cost saving potential of using teachers . another option to consider in reducing scoring costs is the advent of artificial intelligence ( ai ) . ai software has been developed to score some constructed response items . some research finds that ai produces results that are relatively comparable to human scoring ; however , the cost for ai scoring is currently too high to realize any savings in a state assessment system . there is speculation that the costs of ai scoring will come down considerably in the next several years , and it may serve as a cost reduction strategy in the future . a related issue to consider is the time required to score assessments . under the nclb , the state assessment is typically administered in the spring and results must be reported before the beginning of the next school year . the timeline is driven by regulations that require notifying parents of their public school choice options under the nclb , which is dependent upon the results of state assessments .