1 in the house . these epa regulatory actions cut across the various environmental pollution control statutes' programs and initiatives , such as those that address greenhouse gas emissions , hazardous air pollutants ( including mercury ) , mountaintop mining regulation , management of coal ash , particulate matter emissions , and water quality management including geographical ecosystems ( notably chesapeake bay and the great lakes ) . title vii of division b in the senate substitute amendment ( s.amdt . prior to the enactment of p.l . 112-10 on april 15 , 2011 , p.l . 112-8 , the further additional continuing appropriations amendments , 2011 , enacted april 9 , 2011 , continued funding through april 15 , 2011 , for federal departments and agencies typically covered under the 12 regular appropriations bills . 112-8 had extended funding for epa and other federal agencies included within the interior , environment , and related agencies appropriations bill generally below the fy2010 enacted levels , but under the terms and conditions contained in the fy2010 appropriations law , p.l . 111-88 , with some exceptions . since fy1996 , epa's appropriations have been requested by the administration and appropriated by congress within eight statutory appropriations accounts . brief descriptions of the accounts are provided in table 1 in the following section of this report . during the term of a cr , epa ( and other agencies ) generally must determine how to allocate a fractional portion of the fy2010 funding levels , and make other adjustments to program activities and priorities . this incremental funding can affect programs in different ways , depending on various factors such as size and duration of specific activities . in contrast to regular and supplemental appropriations acts , crs generally do not provide specific amounts for each account . most crs , instead , extend appropriations at the same levels as in prior year appropriations acts , unless otherwise specified , including funding adjustments for specific accounts or activities . as amended and passed by the house on february 19 , 2011 , title vii of division b in h.r . 1 specified funding levels of certain epa accounts for the full fiscal year instead of a temporary period as in earlier crs , as well as several provisions restricting or prohibiting the use of appropriated funds to implement certain regulatory activities under the agency's jurisdiction . additional provisions relevant to epa were included in division d of the house - passed h.r . a number of recent and pending regulatory actions were the focus of considerable debate during floor consideration of h.r . 149 ) would have provided funding levels different from those in the house - passed bill , and omitted the house provisions related to epa regulatory activities . the following section of this report provides an overview of funding levels as specified in house - passed h.r . 1 and the subsequent senate substitute amendment that was not agreed to , compared to enacted amounts for fy2011 in p.l . 111-88 , and as requested by the president for fy2011 .