appendix b . acronyms used in the repor . the act includes two titles . title i contains amendments to the eight ihcia titles . title ii amends and reauthorizes the native hawaiian health care act , which authorizes health education , health promotion , disease prevention services , and health professions scholarship programs for native hawaiians . this report focuses on title i , which contains eight sections , each of which amends a specific ihcia title . title i also , with some exceptions , consolidates ihcia appropriations into a single section , repealing authorizations that had previously been included at the end of each of ihcia's eight titles . this report is primarily for reference purposes . the material in it is intended to provide context to help the reader understand the intent of the aca's individual provisions at the time of enactment . the section numbers below refer to the section numbers in the ihcia reauthorization and extension act . where appropriate , sections amended by section 10221 ( b ) of the aca are noted . the subtitles below refer to those in the ihcia reauthorization and extension act , which correspond to the ihcia title they amend . each subtitle begins with some background on the ihcia title it amends to provide context for the descriptions of the law's provisions . this background reflects the policy issues at the time of enactment and does not reflect the effects of the aca . table 1 describes the major differences between the ihcia and the ihcia reauthorization extension act . appendix a includes a detailed timeline of effective dates for the ihcia reauthorization and extension act provisions . appendix b includes a list of acronyms used in this report . the term "secretary," as used in this report , means the secretary of hhs , unless otherwise indicated . the term "indian" in this report refers to "indian" as defined in ihcia . under this definition , an indian is a person who is a member of a federally recognized tribe , band , nation , or other organized group or community , including any alaska native village or group , or regional or village corporation , as defined in or established pursuant to the alaska native claims settlement act . the aca also defined a number of new indian - related terms . two of the new terms most frequently used in this report are indian health program and tribal health program . "indian health program" ( ihp ) is defined as ( 1 ) any health program administered by the ihs , ( 2 ) any tribal health program , or ( 3 ) any indian tribe or tribal organization to which the secretary provides funding under the buy indian act . "tribal health program" ( thp ) is defined as any it or to operating any health program , service , function , activity , or facility funded , in whole or part , by the ihs through , or provided for in , a contract or compact with the ihs under the indian self - determination and education assistance act ( isdeaa ) .