global malaria coordinator at usaid . the malaria coordinator is charged with overseeing all u.s. anti - malaria efforts , submitting an annual report to congress describing u.s. malaria programs , and developing a five - year strategic plan for u.s. efforts to combat malaria . this legislation will be up for reauthorization in fy2013 . pmi represented a growing acknowledgement of the efficacy of malaria prevention and treatment strategies and built on the success of the president's emergency plan for aids relief ( pepfar ) in harnessing resources to combat a disease . pmi was initially created as a five - year , $1.2 billion effort to increase u.s. engagement in global malaria control and reduce malaria - related deaths by 50% in 15 high - burden focus countries . focus countries were selected according to several criteria , including high malaria burden , capacity to implement anti - malaria programs , and willingness to partner with the united states . pmi has since expanded into four other malaria - endemic countries in africa ( table 1 ) . pmi is an interagency initiative run by usaid and jointly implemented by usaid and the centers for disease control and prevention ( cdc ) . global malaria coordinator at usaid coordinates malaria efforts across a number of agencies and departments , including cdc , the department of defense ( dod ) , and the national institutes of health ( nih ) . oversight duties are shared with an interagency steering group composed of representatives from usaid , cdc / the department of health and human services ( hhs ) , the department of state , dod , the national security council , and the office of management and budget . usaid and cdc also provide bilateral malaria assistance to a handful of countries not designated as pmi focus countries . president obama has indicated support for an expanded u.s. malaria program . on may 5 , 2009 , the president announced global health initiative ( ghi ) , a new effort to develop a comprehensive u.s. global health strategy over the course of six years . malaria is one of the ghi's six priority areas , and pmi is considered a key component of the ghi , reflecting the administration's belief that scaled - up malaria interventions can help maximize health impact per dollar spent . the ghi calls for a more integrated u.s. response to global health issues , including better coordination between malaria and maternal and child health programs . the ghi also calls for a shift in u.s. global health strategy from one focused on specific diseases to a more comprehensive approach to health , including a focus on health system strengthening . in april 2010 , in response to congressional reporting requirements to develop a coordinated approach to global malaria , usaid , hhs ( including cdc ) , and the department of state released a joint "lantos - hyde united states government malaria strategy. the strategy explains how u.s. malaria programs will advance the goals of the ghi and outlines key targets for the u.s. malaria program from 2009 to 2014 .