additionally , h.r . 3298 with an amendment by unanimous consent on july 27 , 2017 , which the house agreed to without objection on the same day . 3298 was enacted into law on august 4 , 2017 , as p.l . on july 20 , 2017 , senator jeff flake of arizona introduced s. 1608 , the wounded officers recovery act of 2017 . an apparent companion bill to h.r . 3298 , the measure would authorize the uscp board to make payments from the u.s. capitol police memorial fund to uscp employees who sustain serious injuries in the line - of - duty , including uscp officers injured in the alexandria shooting , subject to conditions established by the uscp board by regulation . s. 1608 was read twice and referred to the committee on rules and administration . no further action has been taken at the time of this writing . in addition to legislative proposals , various administrative efforts were undertaken in response to the alexandria shooting , including the following . this material should be interpreted with care . although they have high profiles , and any incident of violence against them is likely to engender considerable attention in contemporary times , it is possible that some incidents of violence involving members have not been captured . it is also possible that available sources , whether official or non - official , provide limited or conflicting accounts of a member's involvement in violent activities . in the aftermath of some violent incidents against members and staff , policy proposals and legislation have been considered . on a number of occasions , incidents of violence involving members of congress or congressional staff have led to congressional legislative or administrative responses changing policy and practice . these include the following: a prohibition of the giving or accepting , within the district of columbia , of challenges to a duel , following the death of representative jonathan cilley of maine . representative cilley was killed in a duel with representative william j. graves of kentucky on february 24 , 1838 , in prince george's county , maryland . enactment of law in the 91 st congress ( 1969-1970 ) making it a federal offense to assassinate , kidnap , or assault a member of congress or member - elect , or to endeavor or conspire to commit such offenses following the assassination of senator robert francis kennedy of new york on june 6 , 1968 . initiation of congressional mail screening following the delivery in the fall of 2001 of letters containing anthrax spores to the offices of senator patrick leahy of vermont and senator tom daschle of south dakota . some violent incidents in which members may not have been the direct target have also led in part to congressional action . the 1971 and 1983 capitol bombings were reportedly some of the reasons for the introduction of visitor screening around the chamber galleries , and capitol entrances , respectively . the attacks of september 11 , 2001 , were a contributing factor in increases to the number of uscp officers and staff , expedited deployment of a security perimeter planned prior to the attacks , and appropriations funding construction of the capitol visitor center .