this is only one example . it is possible that other methods of apportioning the total population could be developed that would mimic the results one would get using the equal proportion methods with the citizen population more closely . the point is that an alternative to pursuing a constitutional amendment to replace the total population with the citizen population for apportionment purposes could be to change the apportionment method . the 2013 acs total population , with respect to citizenship status is composed of five parts: ( a ) native born citizens ( nb ) , ( b ) native born citizens born in puerto rico , guam , the virgin islands , or the northern marianas ( pr ) , ( c ) citizens born abroad of american parents ( ba ) , ( d ) naturalized citizens ( nat ) , and ( e ) non - citizens ( non ) . the citizen population is made up of the first four parts of the total population ( parts a - d ) . these values are presented in table 3 , along with the associated measurement of error ( moe ) , as the values are estimates derived from a sample survey . as the acs is a sample survey , estimates derived from the survey results are subject to sampling error . when constructing tables from the acs , the american factfinder application produces the margin of error ( moe ) for all appropriate estimates at a 90 percent confidence level . for purposes of this paper , all moes for population estimates have been converted to moes at the 95 percent confidence level using the formula described in the u.s. census bureau's description of how to use acs data . to create moes at the 95 percent confidence level , one multiplies each of the moe values provided by the census bureau by the ratio ( 1.960 / 1.645 ) . these values ( moe95 ) , along with the values provided by the u.s. census bureau ( the estimates and the matching moe90 ) are displayed in table a - 1 . calculating the measurement errors for the citizen population estimate as noted above , the citizen population estimate is composed of the sum of the persons responding to the four categories in the citizenship status question ( native born ; native born in puerto rico , guam , the virgin islands , and the northern marianas ; born abroad to american parents ; and naturalized ) . consequently , the estimate of the citizen population merely consists of the sum of the values in these four categories . however , estimates of the sampling error for this sum are somewhat more complicated . the first step in calculating the moes for the aggregated counts for each state consists of using the following general formula , the moe cit for the citizen population is moe cit = ± √ ( moe nb 2 + moe pr 2 + moe ba 2 +moe nat 2 ) for each state . these calculations for the moe 90 and moe 95 for the sum are shown in the last two columns of table a - 2 , below .