both sides have been working to resolve some of the biggest disputes for years . these include a dispute between the aerospace manufacturers airbus and boeing , and conflicts over bio - engineered food products and protection of geographical indicators . the airbus - boeing dispute involves allegations of unfair subsidization for both companies and is being adjudicated by the world trade organization dispute resolution process . on the house side , these include the committees on agriculture , energy and commerce , financial services , foreign affairs , judiciary , transportation and infrastructure , and ways and means . on the senate side , these include the committees on agriculture , banking , commerce , science , and transportation , energy and natural resources , environment and public works , finance , foreign relations , and judiciary . proposals for deepening transatlantic economic ties include the reduction of regulatory barriers , the negotiation of a zero tariff agreement , and movement towards a barrier - free investment environment . each proposal holds the prospect of producing economic gains in terms of jobs and growth for both sides , but each also faces obstacles as freer trade creates winners and losers when it comes to jobs . a more comprehensive free trade agreement has also been proposed from time to time along with efforts to liberalize trade in selective services . for much of the post - world war ii era , the united states and europe provided key leadership to the global economy . given the heft of their combined economies , what was decided by the two powers was often adopted by the rest of the world . while the united states and the eu still today remain central to the global economy , other countries have grown in prominence . this redistribution of global economic power , in turn , arguably increases the need for the united states and eu to work together to promote their continued competitiveness , and to ensure that the rules of the global economy remain steeped in values and principles that both sides share . such cooperation is already taking place on a wide range of issues including access to raw materials , intellectual property protection , and changes in global and financial market governance . this section highlights mutual challenges on completing the doha round , influencing china to operate its economy more in accord with market principles , and reducing global imbalances . u.s. - eu trade and economic relations are healthy , complex , and mutually advantageous . joint concerns about slow growth , job creation , and increased competition , however , have prompted a number of proposals for deepening transatlantic economic ties . over the course of this year , a high level working group on jobs and growth will assess a wide range of proposals to deepen economic ties , reduce remaining barriers to trade and investment , and to enhance regulatory cooperation . whether any new , major policy initiative will be advanced by the working group to accelerate the integration of the two economies or to foster greater government - to - government cooperation in dealing with mutual global economic challenges remains to be seen .