mandate procedures . congress could specify procedures for carrying out adaptive management , including how the results from adaptive management research and monitoring are to be tied to operational or project - based changes in the ecosystem restoration initiative . for instance , congress could require that changes to operations be subject to a vote by a working group , or that changes would be implemented solely at the discretion of program or project managers . set goals and objectives . congress may set broad or specific goals associated with an initiative . recently , some initiatives ( such as the platte river and glen canyon initiatives ) have moved towards quantitative restoration goals . congress could establish formal goals as targets for restoration , or else require that goals be specified in a future strategy or plan . it could also require a formal reporting process ( including reports to congress ) on the progress of an initiative . provide assurances to stakeholders . congress may provide assurances to stakeholders in the form of requirements that an adaptive management effort will not significantly alter certain ongoing operations or specified resource allocations . congress might consider variations in these potential actions to better suit the needs of individual ecosystem restoration initiatives . a "one model fits all" approach to addressing adaptive management might not work for all restoration initiatives given their varying objectives , resources , and scope . for example , restoration initiatives that have the potential to alter water supplies for users might need broader assurances in legislation that restoration water requirements for restoration will not exceed a certain level , or that the actual procedures for carrying out an initiative will be decided by a joint federal / non - federal working group . conversely , adaptive management plans that address threatened or endangered species may need assurances that certain species will not be jeopardized by an adaptive management plan . while more prescriptive congressional guidance has the potential to clarify some issues associated with adaptive management , it could also subject congress to criticism by outside observers who disagree with part or all of the planning approach . additionally , future changes to prescriptive or detailed programs could entail amending the underlying authorization , which could be more difficult than simply adopting changes within the program administratively . thus , providing federal agencies with broad authority to construct individual adaptive management programs ( as has largely been the practice to date ) may in the long - run provide greater flexibility for changing the adaptive management process . congress could also address adaptive management by increasing its oversight of adaptive management in restoration initiatives . in the past , congress has had limited oversight of adaptive management programs . however , it could weigh in at various stages of this process . for instance , in the early stages of developing an adaptive management governance structure , congress could conduct oversight hearings that provide a forum to discuss issues such as stakeholder representation and management structures . it could also hold hearings outlining progress and problems implementing adaptive management . finally , it may require periodic reviews of these efforts by independent evaluators , such as the government accountability office or the national academy of sciences .