appendix a. u.s . there is still much to be accomplished . some parts of the government are not fully independent , the judicial system is weak , and corruption and political violence still threaten the nation's stability . haitian governance capacities , already limited , were considerably diminished by the earthquake . poverty is massive and deep , and there is extreme economic disparity between a small privileged class and the majority of the population . the united states and other members of the international community continue to support efforts to hold free and fair elections in haiti in the belief that in the long run they will contribute to improved governance and , eventually , improved services to haitian citizens and greater stability which will allow for increased development . congress has given bipartisan support to this policy approach . the road to democratic development has been bumpy , and the international community became increasingly involved in trying to keep haiti on that road . aristide was overthrown in a military coup eight months after he was inaugurated . for three years , the coup leaders resisted international demands that aristide be restored to office . only when faced with a u.s. military intervention did the regime relent . aristide returned in 1994 under the protection of some 20,000 u.s. troops , who transferred responsibility to a united nations mission in 1995 . with u.s. assistance , president aristide disbanded the army and began to train a professional civilian police force . in 1996 haitians saw their first transfer of power between two democratically elected presidents when aristide was succeeded by rene préval . subsequent elections held under presidents aristide and préval , both of whom served two non - consecutive terms , were marred by alleged irregularities , low voter turnout , and opposition boycotts . some election conflicts left haiti without a fully functioning government , as when most of the legislators' terms expired in 1999 without elections being held to replace them . president préval then ruled by decree for the remaining two years of his first term . the international community , including an oas mission , tried in vain for several years to mediate negotiations between the aristide government and the opposition over the elections in which aristide was reelected in 2000 . tension and political violence continued throughout aristide's second term , culminating in his flight into exile in 2004 , after the refusal of the opposition to negotiate , an armed rebellion , and loss of international support . there were numerous allegations that aristide was involved in drug trafficking and other corrupt activities . an interim civilian government was formed and oversaw elections in 2006 in which préval , after a dispute over the vote calculation , was elected to a new term . since the earthquake that ravaged the haitian capital of port - au - prince and surrounding areas on january 12 , 2010 , political stability has been especially uncertain , due to the loss of many political figures and government officials , massive damage to government infrastructure , and mounting frustrations at what is widely perceived as slow progress in reconstruction and distribution of over $9 billion in pledged international assistance .