all references to aca in this report refer to the law as amended . the report provides a brief summary of major aca provisions , implementation and oversight activities , and current legal challenges . for more detailed information on aca's provisions , crs has produced a series of more comprehensive reports , which are available at http: / / www.crs.gov . the information provided in these reports ranges from broad overviews of aca provisions , such as the law's medicare provisions , to more narrowly focused topics , such as dependent coverage for children under age 26 . the primary goal of aca is to increase access to affordable health insurance for the millions of americans without coverage and make health insurance more affordable for those already covered . in addition , aca makes numerous changes in the way health care is financed , organized , and delivered . among its many provisions , aca restructures the private health insurance market , sets minimum standards for health coverage , creates a mandate for most u.s. residents to obtain health insurance coverage , and provides for the establishment by 2014 of state - based insurance exchanges for the purchase of private health insurance . certain individuals and families will be able to receive federal subsidies to reduce the cost of purchasing coverage through the exchanges . the new law also expands eligibility for medicaid ; amends the medicare program in ways that are intended to reduce the growth in medicare spending ; imposes an excise tax on insurance plans found to have high premiums ; and makes numerous other changes to the tax code , medicare , medicaid , the state children's health insurance program ( chip ) , and many other federal programs . aca is projected to have a significant impact on federal spending and revenues . the law includes spending to subsidize the purchase of health insurance coverage through the exchanges , as well as increased outlays for the expansion of the medicaid program . aca also includes numerous mandatory appropriations to fund temporary programs to increase access and funding for targeted groups , provide funding to states to plan and establish exchanges , and support many other research and demonstration programs and activities . the costs of expanding public and private health insurance coverage and other spending are offset by revenues from new taxes and fees , and by savings from payment and health care delivery system reforms designed to reduce spending on medicare and other federal health care programs . while most of the major provisions of the law do not take effect until 2014 , some provisions are already in place , with others to be phased in over the next few years . implementation of aca , which began upon the law's enactment in 2010 and will continue to unfold over the next few years , involves all the major health care stakeholders , including the federal and state governments , as well as employers , insurers , and health care providers . the hhs secretary is tasked with implementation and oversight of many of aca's key provisions . however , the court held that it was not a valid exercise of congress's power under the commerce clause or the necessary and proper clause .