when the ada was enacted in 1990 , the technology for closed captioning was limited . the legislative history of the ada did not specifically discuss closed captions , but did discuss open captioning . open captioning was not seen as required by the ada , but open captioned versions of films were encouraged and theaters were encouraged to have some preannounced screenings of open captioned films . places of public accommodation are prohibited from providing individuals with disabilities a service that is not equal to that afforded individuals without disabilities . in addition , public accommodations are required to take action to ensure that an individual with a disability is not excluded , denied services , or otherwise treated differently because of the absence of auxiliary aids and services "unless the entity can demonstrate that taking such steps would fundamentally alter the nature of the good , service , facility , privilege , advantage , or accommodation being offered or would result in an undue burden. auxiliary aids and services are defined as including "qualified interpreters or other effective methods of making aurally delivered materials available to individuals with hearing impairments ; [and] qualified readers , taped tests , or other effective methods of making visually delivered materials available to individuals with visual impairments. the americans with disabilities act ( ada ) is a broad civil rights statute prohibiting discrimination against individuals with disabilities . as stated in the act , its purpose is "to provide a clear and comprehensive national mandate for the elimination of discrimination against individuals with disabilities. title iii of the ada prohibits discrimination by public accommodations , which are defined to include movie theaters , but the statute does not include specific language on closed captioning or video description . on july 26 , 2010 , the 20 th anniversary of the enactment of the ada , doj issued an advance notice of proposed rulemaking ( anpr ) regarding movie captioning and video description . doj examined the ada's statutory language and found that "given the present state of technology , we believe that requirements of captioning and video description fit comfortably within the statutory text. although doj had raised some questions regarding closed captioning and video description in its 2008 notice of proposed rulemaking , no regulations on the subject were proposed , and none were included in the final rule . in the anpr , doj sought further public comment on several new issues and technical questions as well as the implications of the conversion to digital cinema for potential regulations .