one option is to further extend the section 1603 grant program . prior to arra , investments in renewable energy technologies were generally eligible for the production tax credit ( ptc ( irc ยง45 ) ) or investment tax credit ( itc ( irc ยง48 ) ) , depending on technology type . arra modified the incentives available for renewable energy investments in two ways: ( 1 ) ptc - eligible property was given the option to claim the itc at the itc rate , and ( 2 ) all eligible energy properties were allowed to elect to receive a one - time cash grant in lieu of tax credits . the section 1603 grant program provides payments equal to 10% or 30% of the eligible cost basis for specified energy projects . under arra , projects placed in service during the 2009 or 2010 tax years , or those that met certain start - of - construction requirements before the end of 2010 , were eligible for the grant option . the tax relief , unemployment reauthorization , and job creation act of 2010 ( p.l . 111-312 ) extended the placed - in - service and construction start dates through the end of 2011 . as noted in the analysis , motivations and incentives to use the grant program differ among the technologies that qualify for section 1603 grants . the following analysis evaluates these parameters for the wind , solar , and other technologies that have elected a cash grant in lieu of tax credits . the section 1603 cash grant program was created as an alternative mechanism for renewable energy projects to realize federal tax incentives . if renewable energy expansion is a key policy objective , congress may want to consider policies that holistically address these other factors in addition to the availability of tax - based incentives . furthermore , the section 1603 grant program was motivated by difficult economic conditions that resulted in less tax equity investment capacity available for renewable energy projects to realize the value of itc and ptc incentives . as the economy recovers , congress might want to assess if section 1603 is needed to serve its original purpose or if the cash grant options provides the renewable energy sector with additional benefits that stimulate continued market growth . finally , this report analyzed the section 1603 grant program from an economic perspective . section 1603 grants may be a more economically efficient mechanism than tax credits for delivering benefits to the renewable energy sector . however , subsidies to the renewable energy sector , whether grants or tax credits , are less economically efficient than pricing polluting energy alternatives . like other tax incentives for renewable energy , there are inefficiencies associated with the section 1603 grant program to the extent there are inframarginal beneficiaries . again , a question before congress is whether the benefits associated with the section 1603 grant option are worth the budgetary and potential economic costs . specifically , the program was created to address the limited availability of tax equity investor funds resulting from challenging u.s. economic conditions .