regulation was weak and ineffective . before the fhfa , fannie and freddie's regulator did not have authority to constrain excessive risk taking . aggressive lobbying by both firms prevented efforts to impose stricter regulation . rather than address the identified problems through specific legislative or regulatory proposals , the administration proposes to wind down fannie and freddie's participation in the housing market . this would be done by removing their competitive advantages and further restricting the kinds of mortgages that they are allowed to purchase . to accomplish this , the administration sets out five specific mechanisms: 1 . require fannie and freddie to raise their guarantee fees to what those fees would be if they were held to the same capital standards as private banks or financial institutions . this would allow private firms to compete on more even terms , and should reduce fannie and freddie's market share over time . encourage fannie and freddie to obtain credit loss protection from private insurers . reduce the size of investment portfolios , which had the effect of allowing fannie and freddie to operate as hedge funds whose losses would fall upon taxpayers . under the terms of the treasury support agreement , fannie and freddie should reduce the size of their portfolios by 10% per year . allow the current conforming loan limits to expire . during the crisis , congress raised the ceiling on the size of mortgages fannie and freddie are allowed to purchase . if congress allows these emergency increases to expire as scheduled on october 1 , 2011 , the loan limit will fall from $729,750 to $625,500 in "high - cost" housing areas ( and lower elsewhere ) . gradually increase the size of the required down payment on mortgages purchased by the two firms . the administration proposes to increase the minimum down payment to 10% , which would reduce the number of mortgages that fannie and freddie are allowed to buy . none of the above proposals requires congressional action . the administration's report does not set out specific timetables , but notes that reducing fannie and freddie's role depends on the return of private capital to the housing market . in congressional testimony , treasury secretary timothy geithner has estimated that the process may take five to seven years . the administration's report does not discuss the ultimate disposition of fannie mae and freddie mac . the logic of the proposals suggests that the gses should eventually become equal competitors with wall street firms in the secondary mortgage market , without any significant advantages conferred by government charters . this presumes that market participants will no longer view the gse charters as conferring an implicit federal guarantee and that investors will evaluate the riskiness of fannie and freddie securities on the same basis as private securities . to revoke fannie and freddie's charters and fully privatize the two firms would require an act of congress . the administration's report sets out three long - range scenarios for the future government role in the housing market .