1746 was passed by both the house and the senate . the pdm program is a potential source of funding to address the levee issues presented in this report . appropriations for pdm have fluctuated significantly since initial program authorization , ranging from $150 million for fy2003 and fy2004 to $50 million in fy2006 . fema has had little involvement in levee planning and construction . the corps and fema have several programs that authorize the agencies to assist with flood fighting in response to an imminent or occurring flood event . these flood fighting actions can include assisting with existing levees that are locally operated ( eg , temporary reinforcement measures ) or the construction of temporary levees to manage floodwaters . fema , the corps , and nrcs have programs that can fund disaster related emergency levee repairs . while some of the flood fighting activities discussed above may overlap with disaster related repairs , such as the fema public assistance program , most activities covered by repair and rehabilitation assistance discussed below do not occur during a flood event . rather , repair and rehabilitation activities are undertaken after the peak of a flood event has occurred and the extent of damage from the flood event can be determined . the flood control act of 1936 ( 49 stat . 1570 ) declared some flood control a "proper" federal activity: it is hereby recognized that destructive floods upon the rivers of the united states , upsetting orderly processes and causing loss of life and property , including the erosion of lands and impairing and obstructing navigation , highways , railroads , and other channels of commerce between the states , constitute a menace to national welfare ; that it is the sense of congress that flood control on navigational waters or their tributaries is a proper activity of the federal government in cooperation with states , their political sub - divisions and localities thereof ; that investigations and improvements of rivers and other waterways , including watersheds thereof , for flood - control purposes are in the interest of the general welfare ; that the federal government should improve or participate in the improvement of navigable waters or their tributaries including watersheds thereof , for flood - control purposes if the benefits to whomsoever they may accrue are in excess of the estimated costs , and if the lives and social security of people are otherwise adversely affected . 3415 and s. 3051 , suspension of flood insurance rate maps in areas where certain levees are being repaired h.r . the corps is the primary federal agency involved in the study and construction of levees . legislative proposals in the 111 th congress are discussed in an appendix . in the united states , flood - related roles and responsibilities are distributed within a regulatory framework designed to permit the responsible development of the nation's floodplains . local governments generally are responsible for land use and zoning decisions that shape floodplain and coastal development , but the federal and state governments also influence decisions on managing flood risk . state and local governments make decisions that allow or prohibit development in flood - prone areas .