appendix a . summary of all nominations and appointments to independent and other agencies appendix b . nomination action by agency type , 110 th congress appendix c. agency abbreviations independent agencies arc — appalachian regional commission bbg — broadcasting board of governors cia — central intelligence agency cncs — corporation for national and community service csosa — court services and offender supervision agency for the district of columbia dra — delta regional authority epa — environmental protection agency fmcs — federal mediation and conciliation service gsa — general services administration mcc — millennium challenge corporation nara — national archives and records administration nasa — national aeronautics and space administration nfah — national foundation on the arts and humanities nsf — national science foundation odni — office of the director of national intelligence oge — office of government ethics onhir — office of navajo and hopi indian relocation opic — overseas private investment corporation opm — office of personnel management osc — office of special counsel pc — peace corps sba — small business administration ssa — social security administration sss — selective service system tda — trade development agency usaid — united states agency for international development executive office of the president ( eop ) cea — council of economic advisers ceq — council on environmental quality omb — office of management and budget ondcp — office of national drug control policy ostp — office of science and technology policy oustr — office of u.s. trade representative multilateral banking organizations afdb — african development bank asdb — asian development bank ebrd — european bank for reconstruction and development iadb — inter - american development bank ibrd — international bank for reconstruction and development ijc — international joint commission , u.s. and canada imf — international monetary fund legislative branch agencies ac — architect of the capitol gao — government accountability office gpo — government printing office lc — library of congress appendix d. senate intersession recesses and intrasession recesses of four or more days , 110 th congress appendix e. change in methodology from previous tracking reports the calculations of nomination - to - confirmation intervals provided in this report counted all the days within the interval , including those during summer recesses and between sessions of the senate . the inclusion of all days differs from the methodology used in similar crs reports for previous congresses . in these earlier reports , days during august and intersession recesses were not included in calculations of nomination - to - confirmation intervals . the rationale for the earlier methodology was that the senate was unlikely to continue consideration of nominations during these periods ; committee hearings and votes , among other activities , typically do not occur during these times . the exclusion of days during only certain periods of adjournment — intersession recesses and august recesses , which are usually longer than 30 days — is suggested by senate rules regarding when nominations are to be returned to the president .