subsequently , p.l . 111-226 , signed into law on august 10 , 2010 , rescinded $302 million of unobligated btop money from ntia . there were two rounds of arra broadband funding . thus , 90% of awarded btop infrastructure projects received one or more pnrs in round one . the high percentage is not surprising , given that most btop infrastructure projects are middle - mile projects ( 85% of total btop infrastructure projects ) , which cover a significantly larger project area than last - mile projects . in round two , ntia significantly changed the methodology for collecting pnrs . ntia posted a list of 69,880 census block groups or tracts that each round two comprehensive community infrastructure ( cci ) applicant proposed to serve through its project . the posting of this information initiated a window for existing broadband service providers to submit information about the broadband services they currently offer in their respective service territories by census block group or tract . census block group or tract numbers are not listed according to specific applications , and ntia stated that they would connect challenges from service providers to the proposed service areas of relevant round two cci applications . in total , 391 existing broadband providers filed pnrs in round two . the presence of an existing broadband provider in a project's proposed service area was one of many factors rus and ntia considered when deciding whether to fund an application . in the case of some "unserved" areas , it was possible that there could be at least one existing provider present , and in the case of "underserved areas" it was a certainty that one or more existing broadband providers would be present in the proposed service area . thus , pnrs were one , but by no means the only , tool used by rus and ntia to assess the level of existing broadband service in proposed project areas . agencies also used available broadband deployment data and analysis gathered by the fcc , the states , and others . where feasible , rus also relied on regional usda rural development staff to assess the adequacy of broadband service in proposed project areas . finally , other factors were considered when assessing the existing broadband service in a proposed project area — factors such as affordability , quality of service , available download and upload speeds , and adoption rates . the issue of providing federal funding to areas and communities with existing providers is controversial and has been previously raised with respect to the rus rural broadband access loan and loan guarantee program . broadband awards to areas with preexisting service — that is , areas where existing companies already provide some level of broadband — have sparked controversy because award recipients might compete to some extent with other companies already providing broadband service . on the one hand , one could argue that the federal government should not be subsidizing competitors for broadband service , particularly in sparsely populated rural markets which may be able only to support one provider . furthermore , providing grants and loans for projects serving communities with preexisting broadband service may divert assistance from unserved areas that are most in need .