category 2 . products from the fukushima , ibaraki , and tochigi prefectures that the government of japan has not currently banned for sale or export . these include dairy products and fresh produce . under import alert 99-33 , authorities may detain these products when they arrive in the united states . authorities will release these products from detention if the importer can show the products are compliant . category 3 . food and feed products not covered by fda's import alert 99-33 that come from these three japanese prefectures: fukushima , ibaraki , and tochigi . fda will examine these products , and conduct sampling and testing as needed , to determine if they are safe to enter the united states . category 4 . all other fda - regulated food products from japan that are not listed in import alert 99-33 and do not belong to one of the other categories . authorities will review these products using standard procedures , and as part of this may monitor and sample products as resources permit . it is unclear how the recent series of cancellations of "instruction to restrict distribution" and / or "consumption" by the government of japan influences the import alert , particularly for category 1 products . given historically low import inspection rates of food by fda , some groups want fda to issue an import alert for all food and seafood imported from japan . regarding meat and poultry products , usda points out that because of usda's import equivalency requirements and other trade - related concerns , japan has not exported any beef products to the united states since early 2010 , and japan is not currently eligible to export any poultry products or processed egg products to the united states . some in congress remain concerned that contaminated foods might enter the united states through its food imports . both fda and usda have taken steps to address the current situation in japan . fda has stated: "fda's screening at u.s. borders will remain vigilant and will be augmented with radiation screening of shipments" and its import tracking system "has been programmed to automatically flag all shipments of fda - regulated products from japan. usda has stated that "usda and its federal partners through the food emergency response network are preparing to begin sampling , if necessary. prior notification to fda of food imports into the united states is required under the public health security and bioterrorism preparedness and response act of 2002 ( p.l . 300i ) , which allows the agency to readily identify and track food shipments from japan . enhanced import security measures by fda and usda , in conjunction with existing cbp border inspections , are intended to address concerns about possible contaminated food imports from japan . as noted by usda , cbp is "responsible for monitoring for the presence of radiological materials in cargo shipments coming into the united states at all u.s. ports of entry . this monitoring is a regular part of inspection procedures carried out at every port of entry nationwide ; " fda also notes that cbp officers "routinely use radiation detection equipment to screen food imports , cargo , and travelers.