a number of states provide their own exemptions for firearms . one state , oklahoma , allows an unlimited number of firearms to be exempted so long as the total value of the firearms , alone , is no more than $2,000 . the provisions of these states are provided in table 1 . section 522 of the u.s. bankruptcy code addresses the extent to which an individual debtor may elect to exempt equity in certain property from becoming part of the bankruptcy estate . among the exemptions explicitly provided in the bankruptcy code — the federal exemptions — are a homestead exemption in the amount of $21,625 , a vehicle exemption in the amount of $3,450 , and exemptions for jewelry , tools of the trade , and household goods . there is also a "wildcard" exemption of $1,150 that can also be applied to any property so long as the federal exemptions are available to the debtor . to the extent allowed under state law , the bankruptcy code permits debtors to choose between using the federal exemptions or those available under applicable state law . this is an "either / or" choice — debtors are not allowed to choose to use some state exemptions and some federal exemptions . when a petition is filed jointly by husband and wife or when the individual cases of a husband and wife are ordered to be jointly administered , each spouse must choose the same set of exemptions . however , debtors in many states have no choice to make because their state law prohibits the use of the federal exemptions . these federal exemptions are available to debtors only to the extent they are not prohibited by the applicable state . puerto rico , the district of columbia , and 17 states allow debtors to choose between federal and state exemptions . in 2012 , virginia became the thirteenth state to provide some protection from creditors for debtors' firearms . the conditions for exempting firearms vary among the relevant states . some states specify the number of firearms that may be exempted without regard to the value of the firearms . other states limit the exemption to one firearm and further limit the claimed exemption by either the value of the firearm or the aggregate value of the statutorily exempt property in which the firearm is included . oregon allows an exemption for one pistol as well as one rifle or shotgun , but limits the total exemption value of the two firearms to no more than $1,000 . several states put no limit on the number of firearms that may be exempted so long as the total value of the firearms , when aggregated with the value of certain other property is less than a specific amount . several states , however , exempt only guns that are for personal use . three of these specify that the firearms are to be "held primarily for the personal , family , or household use of [the debtor]. oregon law specifies that the firearms must be "for the own use and defense of the citizen. only one state , louisiana , requires that the exempted firearm be used for business purposes .