appendix a . 110-261 , sec . 101 ( c ) ( 1 ) ] ( a ) a court order directing such assistance or a court order pursuant to section 704 of the foreign intelligence surveillance act of 1978 signed by the authorizing judge , [ p.l . 110-261 , sec . ecpa consists of three parts . the first , sometimes referred to as title iii , outlaws the unauthorized interception of wire , oral , or electronic communications . it also establishes a judicial supervised procedure to permit such interceptions for law enforcement purposes . the second , the stored communications act , focuses on the privacy of , and government access to , stored electronic communications . the third creates a procedure for governmental installation and use of pen registers as well as trap and trace devices . it also outlaws such installation or use except for law enforcement and foreign intelligence investigations . at common law , "eavesdroppers , or such as listen under walls or windows , or the eaves of a house , to hearken after discourse , and thereupon to frame slanderous and mischievous tales , are a common nuisance and presentable at the court - leet ; or are indictable at the sessions , and punishable by fine and finding of sureties for [their] good behavior. although early american law proscribed common law eavesdropping , the crime was little prosecuted and by the late nineteenth century had "nearly faded from the legal horizon. with the invention of the telegraph and telephone , however , state laws outlawing wiretapping or indiscretion by telephone and telegraph operators preserved the spirit of the common law prohibition in this country . congress enacted the first federal wiretap statute as a temporary measure to prevent disclosure of government secrets during world war i . later , it proscribed intercepting and divulging private radio messages in the radio act of 1927 , but did not immediately reestablish a federal wiretap prohibition . by the time of the landmark supreme court decision in olmstead , however , at least forty - one of the forty - eight states had banned wiretapping or forbidden telephone and telegraph employees and officers from disclosing the content of telephone or telegraph messages or both . olmstead was a seattle bootlegger whose prohibition act conviction was the product of a federal wiretap . he challenged his conviction on three grounds , arguing unsuccessfully that the wiretap evidence should have been suppressed as a violation of either his fourth amendment rights , his fifth amendment privilege against self - incrimination , or the rights implicit in the washington state statute that outlawed wiretapping . for a majority of the court , writing through chief justice taft , olmstead's fourth amendment challenge was doomed by the absence of "an official search and seizure of his person , or such a seizure of his papers or his tangible material effects , or an actual physical invasion of his house or curtilage for the purposes of making a seizure. chief justice taft pointed out that congress was free to provide protection which the constitution did not .