such appeals will be expedited by the court of appeals . in order to safeguard classified information that is disclosed , cipa authorizes courts to issue protective orders prohibiting or restricting the disclosure of such classified information . the issues implicated during both of these phases are discussed below . cipa contains a number of provisions that are intended to create opportunities to resolve issues related to the use of classified information in advance of trial in a secure setting . the drake case involved an unauthorized disclosure prosecution against a former nsa employee under the espionage act . drake was accused of leaking classified information relating to the nsa inspector general investigation that found that the agency had inefficiently used resources in developing a specific secret program . after a series of cipa hearings in which the court determined which classified information sought by the defense was relevant and admissible , the government provided the court with proposed evidentiary substitutions for admissible evidence that included substitutions and redactions for both classified and unclassified evidence . as to the substitutions of unclassified evidence , the government argued that though not classified , the evidence was "protected material" under 50 u.s.c . section 402 — a statutory privilege that protects against the "disclosure of the organization or any function of the national security agency , or any information with respect to the activities thereof. in short , the government asserted that admissibility decisions under cipa , including determinations of the adequacy of a substitution , remained subject to statutory , military , and other traditional common law privileges , as cipa had never altered "the existing law governing the admissibility of evidence. in addition , the government argued that courts retain "inherent authority outside of cipa to resolve the legal and evidentiary issues relating to the protected information through the use of substitutions. the defense objected to the government's proposed use of substitutions for unclassified evidence — arguing that cipa provided the exclusive basis upon which a court could permit substitutions for evidence in a criminal case . as cipa , by its terms , applied only to classified information , the court , according to the defendant , had no grounds to permit substitutions , redactions , or summaries with respect to unclassified information . even if the court had authority to permit substitutions for unclassified information protected by a valid privilege , the defense asserted that the nsa privilege , which had previously only been asserted in civil cases , had no application in a criminal trial . the federal district court held that the government was permitted to submit substitutions for unclassified information protected under the nsa's statutory privilege , as cipa does not "foreclose the consideration of substitutions for information based upon an assertion" of an otherwise applicable government privilege . relying on the fourth circuit's decision in u nited s tates v. moussaoui , the district court determined that federal courts have the inherent "authority to allow or reject substitutions for unclassified information that is protected by a government privilege. in moussaoui , the defense had requested access to a witness for use at trial .