the authorizing entity ( i.e. , the administrative agency ( cse agency ) or the court ) issues a notice of intent to withhold , restrict use of , or suspend a driver's license . the notice is served upon the noncustodial parent personally or by certified mail or as otherwise provided by state statute . the notice must stipulate that the driver's license held by the noncustodial parent may be suspended usually 30-90 days after service unless , within that time , the noncustodial parent obligor does one of the following: ( 1 ) pays the entire child support debt stated in the notice ; ( 2 ) enters into a payment plan approved by the department or its agent ; ( 3 ) complies with subpoenas or warrants relating to paternity or child support proceedings ; or ( 4 ) requests a hearing within 15-30 days of receipt of the notice in order to appear and show cause why withholding , restricted use , or suspension of the license is not appropriate . if the noncustodial parent fails to request a hearing within the specified time period , the administrative agency or court will contact the motor vehicle agency to implement the suspension of the noncustodial parent's driver's license . the motor vehicle agency usually sends a final notice to the noncustodial parent informing them that the suspension will take place on a specified date or time period if he or she fails to comply with the provisions mentioned in the original notice . ( 2 ) are license restoration procedures easy to understand and accessible ? and ( 3 ) does state discretion on when and to whom to apply license suspension policy create inequities and unfairness ? the history of the cse program has been marked by the evolution of a variety of enforcement remedies . child support workers and policymakers have long concluded that there is no single intervention that works for all noncustodial parents who owe past - due child support . driver's license suspension is an enforcement mechanism designed to encourage noncustodial parents to pay their child support or risk restriction or suspension of their driver's license . although we do not have child support collections data that corroborate their assertion , many states maintain that driver's license suspension is an effective , efficient , and inexpensive enforcement tool . in contrast , some commentators maintain that attempts to collect child support by threatening the suspension of the noncustodial parent's driver's license in some cases not only lessens the noncustodial parent's ability to pay child support but also may result in severing the emotional ties that these noncustodial parents had previously had with their children . they say that pithy mottos like "parents who don't pay their child support can run , but they can't drive," minimize the quagmire of not being able to meet their financial obligations that many low - income noncustodial parents face . they contend that in some instances , driver's license suspension policies are akin to punishing people for being poor . some observers contend that the broader issue of avoidance or management of child support arrearages is a huge problem for many noncustodial parents .