34 by a vote of 235-193 . the house budget resolution sets general budgetary parameters . among other things , it expresses the desired levels of spending for government health programs over 10 years ( fy2012-fy2021 ) , it creates two health care related reserve funds , and presents a policy statement regarding assumptions about future medicare reforms . the budget resolution does not include instructions for reconciliation . a budget resolution is not intended to establish details of spending or revenue policy and does not provide levels of spending for specific agencies or programs ; it is not a law and is not signed by the president . rather , the budget resolution provides the framework for the consideration of other legislation . while the house budget resolution suggests and assumes certain health care related policy changes , separate legislation would need to be developed ( by the committees of jurisdiction ) and passed to actually modify federally funded health care programs . cbo was asked to provide an analysis of the long - term budgetary impact of chairman ryan's budget proposal , and issued its report on april 5 , 2011 . cbo was provided additional detail by the staff of the house budget committee regarding assumptions that should be made while conducting the analysis that was not included in the budget resolution or the accompanying report . cbo's analysis , however , does not provide an official cost estimate for legislation that might implement the proposal , as it did not conduct its analysis using actual legislative language and was asked to provide an impact analysis beyond the 10-year budgetary window . cbo's most recent long - term projections , which were the basis for its analysis , were issued in june 2010 and were derived from the agency's march 2010 baseline projections . in general , chairman ryan's budget proposal , as outlined in his "path to prosperity," in the committee report , and in cbo's analysis , suggests a change in the structure of the medicare and medicaid programs , the repeal many of the provisions in the patient protection and affordable care act ( ppaca , p.l . 111-148 ) and the health care and education reconciliation act of 2010 ( p.l . 111-152 ) including those that establish insurance exchanges , and changes to tort law governing medical malpractice . chairman ryan provided unofficial 10-year spending estimates in the "path to prosperity" report . these estimates suggest that the budget plan would reduce federal health care spending about $2.2 trillion over fy2012-fy2021 from cbo's baseline estimate . this would include a reduction of approximately $1.4 trillion that would have been spent to implement ppaca health insurance reforms , and a reduction of $771 billion for medicaid and $30 billion for medicare during this time period . in its long – term analysis of the proposal , cbo estimated that government mandatory spending for healthcare would be about 6% of gdp in 2030 , 5.75% in 2040 , and 4.75% in 2050 , compared to 8.75% , 10.75% and 12.25% for the same years under cbo's baseline current - law projections . this report provides a synopsis of the health care related changes in chairman ryan's fy2012 budget proposal .