figs disseminate iirs . these reports are formatted as teletype messages and shared electronically with the law enforcement and intelligence communities . they contain "raw" intelligence — "unevaluated intelligence information , generally from a single source , that has not fully been evaluated , integrated with other information , or interpreted and analyzed. these reports include information "extracted" from fbi case files . the bureau emphasizes that the information in iirs must not be "based solely on the exercise of first amendment protected activities , or on the race , ethnicity , national origin , or religion of the subject. in 2010 , the fbi produced over 25,000 iirs , which included counterintelligence , counterterrorism , and criminal information as well as information related to cyber issues and weapons of mass destruction . this unresolved conflict raises concerns that , despite the more assertive role that fbi headquarters now plays , especially since 9 / 11 in what historically has been a decentralized organization , field offices still prize and protect their autonomy from headquarters . fbi headquarters also does not have a written plan that articulates the division of labor and hierarchy of command - and - control authorities among its headquarters units , field offices , and the jttfs . finally , the fbi has greatly increased its production of intelligence products . as noted earlier , in 2010 the bureau produced over 25,000 intelligence reports on counterintelligence , counterterrorism , and criminal topics as well as information related to cyber issues and weapons of mass destruction . it may be of oversight interest to congress to examine the value of these reports , their accessibility within the intelligence and law enforcement communities , and the views of various consumers about them . awaiting an attack is not an option . that is why the department of justice is doing everything in its power to identify risks to our nation's security at the earliest stage possible and to respond with forward - leaning – preventative – prosecutions . the fbi's post - 9 / 11 transformation is particularly evident in four areas: the usa patriot act provided the fbi additional authorities and enhanced investigative tools . the fbi and doj altered the way the bureau investigated terrorism with the 2008 revision of the attorney general's guidelines for domestic fbi operations . the fbi expanded operationally via a proliferation of jttfs across the united states . in so doing , it also increased its cooperation with state , local , and federal agencies . finally , watershed changes were made in the bureau's intelligence program . the 9 / 11 terrorist attacks have been called a major intelligence failure . in response to criticisms of its intelligence capabilities in the aftermath of 9 / 11 , the fbi has introduced a series of reforms intended to transform the bureau from a largely reactive law enforcement agency focused on criminal investigations into a more proactive , agile , flexible , and intelligence - driven agency that can prevent acts of terrorism . robert mueller , who became the fbi director just prior to 9 / 11 and served until september 2013 , vowed to assert headquarters' control over the fbi's historically fragmented and much - criticized intelligence program .