§ 371 not apply . if the judge is a magistrate judge , the judicial conference may direct the chief judge of the district of the magistrate judge to take such action as the judicial conference deems appropriate . if the judicial conference concurs in the judicial council's determination that impeachable offenses may be involved , or if the judicial conference makes its own determination that consideration of impeachment may be warranted , the conference must certify and transmit the determination and the record of proceedings to the house of representatives for whatever action the house considers necessary . when the judicial conference's determination and record of proceedings are received by the house of representatives , the clerk of the house must make that determination and any reasons for the determination available to the public . if a judge has been convicted of a felony under federal or state law and has exhausted all avenues of direct review of that conviction , or if the time for direct review has passed and no review has been sought , the judicial conference , by majority vote and without any referral or certification from the relevant judicial council under 28 u.s.c . § 354 , may transmit a determination that impeachment may be warranted , together with relevant court records , to the house of representatives for whatever action the house deems necessary . § 372 ( c ) . the current statutory procedures are applicable to complaints against federal circuit judges , district judges , bankruptcy judges , and magistrate judges . they are not applicable to justices of the u.s. supreme court . in addition , the u.s. court of federal claims , the court of international trade , and the court of appeals for the federal circuit are each required to prescribe rules , consistent with the provisions in 28 u.s.c . §§ 351-364 , establishing procedures for the filing of complaints with respect to the conduct of judges of those courts , for investigation of such complaints , and for taking appropriate action with respect to them . in investigating and taking action regarding complaints brought against their respective judges , each of these three courts has the powers granted to a judicial council in dealing with federal circuit judges , district judges , bankruptcy judges , or magistrate judges . the judicial discipline process under 28 u.s.c . §§ 351-364 is initiated by the filing of a complaint by any person , alleging that a judge has engaged in conduct "prejudicial to the effective and expeditious administration of the business of the courts , or alleging that such judge is unable to discharge all the duties of the office by reason of mental or physical disability. a written complaint containing a brief statement of the pertinent facts is filed with the clerk of the court for the circuit within which the judge sits . alternatively , the chief judge of the circuit , in the interests of effective and expeditious administration of the business of the courts and based on information available to him or her , may identify a complaint by written order stating the reasons for the complaint .