the duration of the no - fly zone . the extent to which the united states is joined by international partners in the effort . the extent of "mission creep" — how , if at all , the operation expands to include a broader array of activities designed to achieve the same military , and strategic , objectives . as a rough guide to the range of possible costs , table 1 shows the costs to the u.s. government of u.s. participation in a variety of air operations in the 1990s . of these , operation noble anvil , the air war in yugoslavia designed to address conflict in kosovo , was the most intense . it involved initially limited and later extensive attacks to degrade air defenses throughout the federal republic of yugoslavia , including all of serbia . those were followed by escalating air attacks initially focused on the military infrastructure and later on strategic targets . the operation lasted for two and a half months , from march 24 through june 10 , 1999 . authorization may be not only a question of approval or disapproval . it may also include parameters for the execution of the mission , and conditions under which the authorization for the no - fly zone operation will be considered discontinued . it may not be necessary to achieve all of the broad objectives of grand strategy before discontinuing the no - fly zone — the no - fly zone operation may be designed to catalyze overall progress toward those objectives . in turn , the concept of authorization is typically considered to be linked to the ideas of both "legality" and "legitimacy" — the three concepts overlap but are all distinct . the precise meaning of each of the terms is still debated . in addition to international authorization , debates have addressed the question of congressional authorization — whether and when there is a need for congressional approval based on the war powers resolution for a proposed no - fly zone . the question of whether and how congressional authorization is sought for a proposed operation could have an impact on congressional support — including policy , funding , and outreach to the american people — for the operation . on november 7 , 1973 , congress passed the war powers resolution , p.l . 93-148 , over the veto of president nixon . the war powers resolution ( wpr ) states that the president's powers as commander in chief to introduce u.s. forces into hostilities or imminent hostilities can only be exercised pursuant to ( 1 ) a declaration of war ; ( 2 ) specific statutory authorization ; or ( 3 ) a national emergency created by an attack on the united states or its forces . it requires the president in every possible instance to consult with congress before introducing american armed forces into hostilities or imminent hostilities unless there has been a declaration of war or other specific congressional authorization .