the following is an example of how this occurs . by definition , the skills of the cyclically unemployed at the outset of their displacement match the skills demanded by employers . but the longer these workers remain jobless , the greater the likelihood their skills will become rusty . as economic growth strengthens and firms start hiring workers , the skills of the long - term unemployed may have so deteriorated that they no longer match the skill requirements of available jobs . frictional , structural , and cyclical unemployment are not directly measured , but policy analysts have estimated the nonaccelerating inflation rate of unemployment ( nairu ) . because the nairu is estimated without regard to fluctuations in aggregate demand ( i.e. , without regard to the business cycle ) , it commonly is used as a proxy for the structural unemployment rate . the nairu or natural rate of unemployment reflects the extent of long - term slack in the labor market , which is helpful to know when formulating policy . for example , a substantial increase in structural unemployment implies that there is much less excess labor ( capacity ) in the economy . consequently , the fed cannot reduce the official unemployment rate as much as it previously could without raising the inflation rate . based on the following analysis of changes in multiple labor market indicators by industry and area , a majority of the increase in unemployment between the 2007-2009 recession's onset and its peak in 2010 appears to be cyclical . as discussed in detail below , this finding is supported by several empirical studies which estimated that any increase in structural unemployment that occurred accounted for a minority of the rise in the u.s. unemployment rate . the results do not suggest that the nation is facing a "new normal" of elevated unemployment rates for years to come . the mismatch argument for sustained increases in the unemployment rate and the nairu is predicated on imbalances in labor supply and demand across sectors and skill groups . the extent of such imbalances can be assessed by examining employment growth and unemployment rates across industry sectors , states , and occupations . this approach is pursued below using annual average data from 2007 to 2010 , the year in which the unemployment rate peaked at 9.6% . the 7.8 million jobs lost between 2007 and 2010 occurred across a broad swath of industries . the number of jobs on employers' payrolls plummeted in 18 of the 24 industries shown in figure 1 . cyclically sensitive industries , such as manufacturing and construction , bore the brunt of job losses during the latest recession just as they did during prior recessions . when aggregate employment stopped declining in march 2010 , "the dispersion of employment gains and losses across sectors returned to its pre - recession level , suggesting very little imbalance in the pace of employment growth at that point. the data displayed in figure 1 support delong's statement that "what we have witnessed is not a shift in demand into sectors lacking an adequate number of qualified and productive workers , but rather a collapse in the level of aggregate demand.