the report accompanying h.r . 115-244 ) stated that the trump administration's proposed cap on indirect ( f&a ) costs was "misguided and would have a devastating impact on biomedical research across the country. the fy2019 budget request proposed capping the percentage of an investigator's salary that can be paid with grant funds at 90% . it also proposed capping investigator salaries at $152,000 , a 19% reduction from the current $187,000 limit . in the report accompanying h.r . 6470 , the house appropriations committee stated that it did not include the general provision in the budget request to limit the percentage of a researcher's salary that may be paid for using nih grant funds , as the impact of such a change is unclear . the report stated , "the committee requests an analysis of the projected impact of such a policy change on the number and average cost of nih grants , as well as on academic institutions , in the fiscal year 2020 congressional justification" the fy2020 budget request , again , included the proposal to cap the percentage of an investigator's salary that can be paid with grant funds at 90% . in the requested analysis published in the fy2020 congressional justification , nih stated that "no previous research examines the impact of reducing the salary cap on the number of grants and the average cost per grant. nih noted that a salary cap reduction in fy2011 did not reduce the average cost of nih grants and that the number of nih grants awarded decreased , though other factors may have affected grant numbers and average costs . nih also noted that an unintended consequence of the policy could be that institutions will have to make up for the rest of researchers' salaries , which "may limit the number of applicants with sufficient resources to participate in federally - funded research. nih is concerned about retaining and attracting new scientists for biomedical research careers . in the past two decades , early - stage scientists have received a declining percentage of nih grants and have spent more time in low - paid postdoctoral training positions . the number of traditional faculty positions in biomedical research has declined , while the number of postdoctoral positions has increased , creating a highly competitive and pessimistic outlook for obtaining traditional academic research positions . a 2018 national academies of sciences , engineering and medicine ( nasem ) report stated that , "these obstacles to success have created a research career path that is increasingly unattractive in terms of pay , duration , culture , risk - taking , and future job prospects. a relatively large portion of nih funding goes to older and more established researchers . between 1998 and 2014 , the proportion of nih - funded investigators over the age of 65 increased from 5% to 12% , while those younger than 50 declined from 54% to 39% . the average age at which an investigator first obtained an independent grant increased by more than five years between 1990 and 2016 .