under a separate order included in h.res . 5 , until the house administration committee has an opportunity to designate such a location , these documents will be considered available if they are posted on the rules committee website . it is not a requirement under the rule that the measures be available in the designated location ; instead , the new house rule is meant to provide an additional means through which members , congressional staff , and the general public can access these documents . 5 established was that , where existing house rules require that a matter be "available to members , delegates , and the resident commissioner," that requirement can be met by placing the document online on a publicly available website designated by the house administration committee . to fulfill the requirement in this way , the document placed on such a website must be the one that has been formally filed , introduced , or submitted . posting online the text of a bill that has not yet been introduced , for example , or a draft of a committee report that has not yet been formally filed with the clerk , will not meet the requirement of the rule . prior to this rules change , a committee report could be considered available only after it was prepared by the government printing office ( gpo ) . committee reports are distributed in print form to document rooms in the capitol , and also are placed online through the legislative information system ( lis ) and are available to the general public through thomas.gov . the text of measures and reports in electronic form are generally located through lis or thomas by searching a database by bill number or keyword . in contrast , the rules change appears to anticipate the development of a website where measures soon to be considered on the house floor will be identified and made available . in addition , the existing gpo process for making documents available can take a day or two . because it is possible that committee reports will be placed online on the new website faster than they can be prepared and placed online by the gpo , the new rules change might allow the house to consider measures sooner than previously after the formal filing of the report . the public remarks of the speaker and other members of the majority party leadership indicated that the operations of the house , and not just the standing rules , would change in the 112 th congress . in fact , in the first months of the 112 th congress , the practices of the house regarding public availability of legislative proposals in the form to be considered on the floor appear to be changing . specifically , prior to the 112 th congress , if a motion was made to suspend the rules and pass a bill with an amendment , the text of the proposed amendment was typically not publicly available in electronic form prior to the vote . members and staff seeking to see the proposed change would either contact the committee of jurisdiction or examine a printed copy of the amendment available on the floor at the time the suspension motion was made .