the language in p.l . 112-55 specifies that the funds appropriated are for the new programs authorized by the hearth act . research and evaluation . the administration requested $10 million to support research efforts focusing on quantifying and evaluating the benefits and tradeoffs related to sustainable communities , including the long - term benefits of regional integrated planning grants and community challenge grants . in addition , funds would be used to support efforts to improve the technical capacity of entities involved in regional and community planning and development . it should be noted that , as proposed by the administration , these three initiatives were to be administered through the recently created office of sustainable housing and communities within hud . the house draft bill did not include funding for the administration's sci , while the senate bill recommended $90 million for the sci activities , which was $60 million less than the amount requested by the president and $9 million less than appropriated for fy2011 . 112-55 did not include a specific appropriation for sci activities . however , the conference report accompanying h.r . 112-55 ) noted that such activities could be carried out with cdbg and the agency's transformation initiative funds . the home investment partnerships program provides block grant funding to states and certain localities ( known as "participating jurisdictions" ) to be used for a variety of affordable housing activities . home funds can be used for either owner - occupied or rental housing activities , and they must benefit households that are considered to be either low - income ( i.e. , incomes at or below 80% of area median income ) or very low - income ( i.e. , incomes at or below 60% of area median income ) . between the program's inception in 1992 and the end of fy2010 , the home program has funded nearly 979,000 units of affordable housing and funded tenant - based rental assistance for nearly 234,000 families . the president's fy2012 proposed budget requested $1.65 billion for the home program . this represented an increase of $43 million from the enacted fy2011 funding level of $1.607 billion , but a reduction of $175 million from the enacted fy2010 funding level of $1.825 billion . the house draft bill included $1.2 billion for the home program , $450 million less than the president's budget request and $400 million less than the enacted fy2011 funding level . the senate bill included $1 billion for the home program , $650 million below the president's budget request and $607 million below the fy2011 enacted level . the senate bill also included a number of provisions relating to the expenditure of home funds . the proposed reductions , and the additional provisions in the senate bill , were partially in response to concerns raised in an article in the washington post related to the use of home funds . the article alleged that some home funds used for rental housing developments had been mismanaged by participating jurisdictions , and that hud did not provide sufficient oversight of participating jurisdictions' use of funds . a 2009 hud office of the inspector general ( oig ) report also stated that hud should improve its oversight of home funds .