the record disclosure exceptions are similar . government access : the circumstances and procedural requirements for law enforcement access to stored wire or electronic communications and transactional records are less demanding than those under title iii . they deal with two kinds of information — often in the custody of the communications service provider rather than of any of the parties to the communication — communications records and the content of electronic or wire communications . the stored communications act provides two primary avenues for law enforcement access: permissible provider disclosure ( section 2702 ) and required provided access ( section 2703 ) . as noted earlier in the general discussion of section 2702 , a public electronic communication service ( ecs ) provider or a public remote computing service ( rcs ) provider may disclose the content of a customer's communication without the consent of a communicating party to a law enforcement agency in the case of inadvertent discovery of information relating to commission of a crime , or to any government entity in an emergency situation . ecs and rcs providers may also disclose communications records to any governmental entity in an emergency situation . federal , state , and local agencies , regardless of the nature of their missions , all qualify as governmental entities for purposes of section 2702 . section 2702 authorizes voluntary disclosure . section 2703 speaks to the circumstances under which ecs and rcs providers may be required to disclose communications content and related records . section 2703 distinguishes between recent communications and those that have been in electronic storage for more than 180 days . the section insists that government entities resort to a search warrant to compel providers to supply the content of wire or electronic communications held in electronic storage for less than 180 days . it permits them to use a warrant , subpoena , or a court order authorized in subsection 2703 ( d ) to force content disclosure with respect to communications held for more than 180 days . a subsection 2703 ( d ) court order may be issued by a federal magistrate or by a judge qualified to issue an order under title iii . it need not be issued in the district in which the provider is located . the person whose communication is disclosed is entitled to notice , unless the court authorizes delayed notification because contemporaneous notice might have an adverse impact . government supervisory officials may certify the need for delayed notification in the case of a subpoena . subsection 2703 ( d ) authorizes issuance of an order when the governmental entity has presented specific and articulable facts sufficient to establish reasonable grounds to believe that the contents are relevant and material to an ongoing criminal investigation . some courts have held that this "reasonable grounds" standard is a terry standard , a less demanding standard than "probable cause," and that under some circumstances this standard may be constitutionally insufficient to justify government access to provider held email .