in this context , . the federal trade commission act ( the ftc act ) prohibits unfair and deceptive practices in and affecting commerce . the ftc act authorizes the commission to seek injunctive and other equitable relief , including redress , for violations of the act , and provides a basis for government enforcement of certain fair information practices ( eg , failure to comply with stated information practices may constitute a deceptive practice or information practices maybe inherently deceptive or unfair ) . the ftc recently released a staff report on a preliminary framework on protecting consumer privacy which includes three major elements: ( 1 ) companies should integrate privacy into their regular business operations and throughout product development ; ( 2 ) provide meaningful privacy options while preserving beneficial uses of data , and provide choices to consumers in a simpler , more streamlined manner ; and ( 3 ) improve the transparency of all data practices . the framework's basic building blocks are scope , privacy by design , simplified choice , and greater transparency . the framework applies to all commercial entities that collect or use consumer data that can be reasonably linked to a specific consumer , computer , or other device . the ftc recommends that companies provide consumers with reasonable access to data about themselves depending on the sensitivity of the data and the nature of its use , and provide prominent disclosures and obtain affirmative express consent before using consumer data in a materially different manner . the ftc staff report includes a recommendation to implement a universal choice do not track mechanism for behavioral tracking or behavioral advertising . the commerce department's internet policy taskforce ( iptf ) is examining how commercial data privacy policy advances the goals of protecting consumer trust in the internet economy and promotes innovation . the taskforce released a "green paper" on consumer data privacy in the internet economy on december 16 , 2010 , and made 10 separate recommendations about how to strengthen consumer data privacy protections . the iptf concluded that the basic element of current consumer data privacy framework , the privacy policy , is ineffective because it is often a lengthy , dense , and legalistic document . online privacy concerns are widespread . stakeholders routinely acknowledge that the continued success of electronic commerce depends upon the resolution of issues related to the privacy and security of online personal information . the u.s. department of commerce recently reiterated that the large - scale collection , analysis , and storage of personal information is central to the internet economy ; and that regulation of online personal information must not impede commerce . the commerce department's report on commercial data privacy calls on congress to create a "privacy bill of rights," and concludes that privacy policies are now widely viewed as ineffective for the protection of personal information . unless otherwise provided , title iii prohibits wiretapping and electronic eavesdropping ; possession of wiretapping or electronic eavesdropping equipment ; use or disclosure of information obtained through illegal wiretapping or electronic eavesdropping ; and disclosure of information secured through court - ordered wiretapping or electronic eavesdropping , in order to obstruct justice .