the study did not estimate the cost of these retrofits . seismic retrofitting of highway infrastructure is an eligible expense for federal highway funds apportioned to states ( i.e. , distributed by formula ) , via the surface transportation block grant program and the national highway performance program , and as preventive maintenance under other federal - aid highway programs . to this end , the usgs operates a nationwide network of seismographic stations ; it also operates a notification system to disseminate information regarding the location , magnitude , and epicenter of earthquakes . these data have multiple uses related to highway systems . for a specific project , a state generally must provide at least 20% of the money , or at least 10% if the project is on the interstate highway system . although federal funds may help states with the cost of retrofitting , any federal money directed to this purpose by a state is not available for other uses ; that is , there is an opportunity cost of using the funds for retrofitting in lieu of other highway or bridge improvements . state and local governments and other highway and bridge owners also may use their own funds for seismic retrofitting . in some situations additional federal funds have been provided for infrastructure improvements , including seismic retrofitting . for example , tea - 21 , enacted in 1998 , authorized $25 million in fy1998 for the seismic retrofit of the golden gate bridge . apart from its role in administering federal - aid highway funds that may be used for seismic retrofitting , dot and its fhwa also fund seismic hazard research and training and coordinate with other federal agencies working on enhancing resilience . the fixing america's surface transportation ( fast ) act ( p.l . 114-94 ) provided funding for the highway research and development program to sponsor research including "to study vulnerabilities of the transportation system to seismic activities and extreme events and methods to reduce those vulnerabilities. the fast act allows funding for the "maintenance of seismic research activities , including research carried out in conjunction with other federal agencies to study the vulnerability of the transportation system to seismic activity and methods to reduce that vulnerability" ( 23 u.s.c . the fast act authorized $125 million annually for fy2016 through fy2020 for the highway research and development program . the fast act also authorized $67 million for fy2016 and $67.5 million annually for fy2017 through fy2020 for the technology and innovation deployment program , which funds projects to accelerate the implementation of highway - related innovations and technologies . other planning and research are funded through the state planning and research ( spr ) program . states are required by the fast act to set aside 2% of highway funds from five core highway programs for the spr program . fhwa's national highway institute ( nhi ) currently offers several courses on bridge seismic design and retrofitting . under the national earthquake hazards reduction program ( nehrp ) , the federal government supports efforts to assess and monitor earthquake hazards and risk in the united states .