option two . a dco member or enumerated entity regardless of dco membership may not: own more than 5% of any class of voting equity in the dco ; or directly or indirectly vote an interest exceeding 5% of the voting power of any class of equity interest in the dco . some opponents of the proposed rules argue that mandating a more fragmented ownership structure for dcos could lead them to be under - capitalized . during conference deliberations on h.r . how do the winners know that the losers will meet their contractual obligations ? the clearinghouse guarantees payment of all contracts , offering an efficient alternative to requiring each trader to monitor the financial resources of other traders . to ensure that it can make good on its guarantees , a clearinghouse requires all derivatives traders to put down cash to cover potential losses ( called initial margin ) at the time they open a contract , and requires subsequent cash deposits ( called maintenance or interim margin ) on a daily basis to help cover any actual losses to the position . if traders fail to answer a call for additional maintenance margin , their positions may be liquidated . the effect of the margin system is to eliminate the possibility that any market participant can build up an uncapitalized exposure ( or paper loss ) so large that default would cause the clearinghouse to fail . initial margin rates are calculated to approximate the largest daily loss that a contract might experience under extreme market conditions . margin rates are adjusted frequently to reflect shifts in volatility . in addition to the margin system , members of the clearinghouse contribute capital to a fund to cover defaults , in the event that ( 1 ) the customer , ( 2 ) the broker , and ( 3 ) the clearing broker are unable to meet the terms of a contract . no futures clearinghouse in the united states has ever failed . although the clearinghouse system was developed by private markets to deal with credit risk , posting margin to cover potential and actual losses has important consequences for systemic risk as well . if a large derivatives trader fails , and the losses are not margined , its counterparties will be exposed to losses . there may be a widening circle of defaults , in the manner of dominos falling . this was a consideration that led the federal reserve and the treasury to inject hundreds of billions of dollars into the american international group ( aig ) in 2008 — the fear that aig's large bank counterparties would fail ( or be perceived by the market as likely to fail , which can become a self - fulfilling prophecy if other institutions withhold credit ) . clearinghouses limit the size of a cleared position based on a firm's ability to post margin to cover its potential losses . if aig had been required to clear its contracts and post margin , it would likely have run out of money long before its derivatives position reached a size that could threaten systemic stability .