nor did it include any restrictions on carsi aid . however , it did maintain the human rights conditions on security assistance for honduras that were enacted in fy2012 . after consulting with congress , the state department allocated $145.6 million for carsi in fy2013 . the conference report to the act ( h.rept . common crime is also widespread . according to 2014 polling data , nearly a fifth of salvadorans , hondurans , nicaraguans , and guatemalans had been victims of a crime within the past year ( see figure 2 ) . multiple studies have found that those who have been victims of crime or who perceive that crime is increasing in their countries express less support for the political system and the rule of law than other citizens . in extreme cases , some people — including on - and off - duty police — have carried out vigilante killings of those suspected of committing crimes . recent killings of suspected gang members in el salvador appear to be one recent manifestation of that phenomenon . confronting the increasing threats posed by both domestic and transnational organizations has become a central concern of governments throughout central america . governments in the northern triangle countries have tended to adopt more aggressive approaches than those in the rest of the region , enacting tough anti - gang laws and deploying military forces to help police perform public security functions . in general , such policies have been put in place in reaction to rising violence rather than formulated as part of proactive , forward - looking strategies to strengthen citizen security . they have failed to stave off rising crime rates and have had several negative unintended consequences . experts have urged central american governments to adopt more holistic approaches , leading some countries to experiment with alternative policies , such as gang truces , and to place more emphasis on modern policing techniques and crime and violence prevention programs . while national strategies have diverged , central american governments have continued to pursue closer regional coordination . given the geographic proximity of central america , the united states has long been concerned about potential security threats from the region and has provided central american nations with assistance to counter those threats . central america was a major focus of u.s. policy during the cold war , but attention to the region waned in the 1990s following the dissolution of the soviet union and the end of the region's civil conflicts . u.s. - central american engagement has increased again over the past decade , as u.s. policymakers have become concerned by rising levels of violence and increasing emigration from the region . the principal component of this renewed engagement , until recently , has been the central america regional security initiative . although more than seven years have passed since congress first appropriated funding for carsi , central america continues to face significant security challenges . as congress continues to oversee the implementation of carsi and considers additional funding for the initiative , there are a number of issues it might opt to examine .