appendix a . recent efforts to support the deposit insurance fund as noted in figure 1 and figure 2 , the dif began declining in 2008 , and it became negative by the third quarter of 2009 . the designated reserve ratio ( drr ) was - 0.16 during the third quarter of 2009 , and reached a low of - 0.39 during the fourth quarter of 2009 . the drr rose to 0.06 during the second quarter of 2011 and has so far remained positive . the decline in the drr was due to both an increase in deposit insurance coverage during the crisis and the increase in bank failures . congress and the fdic took actions to support the dif , which are discussed in this appendix . increase in fdic borrowing authority on february 3 , 2009 , the fdic asked congress to increase its line of credit from the u.s. treasury to $100 billion from $30 billion . the increased borrowing authority would be used in case funds from the dif were not immediately available to meet the demands of rising bank closures . hfstha temporarily increased the fdic's borrowing authority from $30 billion to $500 billion until december 31 , 2010 ; as of january 1 , 2011 , the fdic has $100 billion of permanent borrowing authority from the u.s. treasury . elimination of a procyclical bias in deposit insurance pricing the federal deposit insurance corporation improvement act of 1991 ( fdicia ) granted the fdic authority to implement a risk - based assessment system , which was implemented on january 1 , 1993 . under a risk - based assessment system , financial institutions that pose more risk to the dif are assessed higher deposit insurance premiums relative to those that pose lower risk . the deposit insurance funds act of 1996 , however , mandated that institutions that are both well - capitalized and have received high examination ratings shall not be charged premiums when the dif is at or above the statutorily set drr . some economists have argued that this limitation injected a procyclical bias into the pricing of deposit insurance . in other words , the dif would not be permitted to accumulate reserves in excess of the drr during financially stable periods ; consequently , deposit premiums may increase dramatically during a financial downturn , when it is more difficult for banks to pay higher assessments while maintaining sufficient profitability . in 2001 , fdic chair donna tanoue testified that this statutory provision resulted in 92% of insured depository institutions in the fdic's best - risk category not having to pay deposit insurance assessments , which rendered its risk - based premium system ineffective . for this reason , the fdic requested elimination of the statutory restrictions on its ability to charge risk - based premiums to all institutions even when the dif level exceeds its statutory requirement . on february 8 , 2006 , the federal deposit insurance reform act of 2005 ( reform act ; p.l .