data presented in both p.l . 105-100 and figure 4 indicate that diversity immigrants included more children and youth than did lprs generally in fy2009 . indeed , figure 4 shows that diversity immigrants were more likely to obtain lpr status as they begin their working years than were lprs overall . the immigrant population of the united states is typically more likely to be in the prime working age group than the native - born population , and the youthful skew of the diversity immigrants' age distribution in fy2009 is even more striking . diversity immigrants were somewhat less likely to be married than lprs generally in fy2009 , perhaps a function of their relative youth . over half ( 54% ) of diversity immigrants were single , in contrast to 37% of lprs overall . few of either group were likely to be widowed , divorced or separated . in addition , 57% of diversity immigrants were males while only 45% of all lprs were males in fy2009 . legislation to eliminate the diversity visa category , the security and fairness enhancement for america act of 2011 or safe for america act ( h.r . 704 ) , has been introduced in the 112 th congress . in the senate , §4 ( c ) of the strengthening our commitment to legal immigration and america's security act ( s. 332 ) would also eliminate the diversity visa category . during the 109 th congress , provisions eliminating the diversity visa lottery comparable to h.r . 704 and those in s. 332 were incorporated into h.r . 4437 , which the house passed on december 16 , 2005 . at that time , there were two themes that characterized the debate over the diversity visa lottery: fairness and security . these issues of fairness and security are likely to arise again when or if the 112 th congress considers h.r . the policy questions discussed below are framed in terms of issues that might arise if debate occurs . as congress weighs whether to eliminate or revise the diversity visa category , various aspects of the diversity visa might be considered . this report concludes with four policy questions that would be pertinent to this discussion . these selected questions are illustrative of an issue that is nested in the broader immigration debate — a debate often characterized as a "zero - sum game. some might cite the latest national visa center data , which indicated there were 4.7 million approved family - based and employment - based petitions waiting for a visa to become available at the close of fy2010 . they might advocate that the 50,000 diversity visas would be better used for backlog reduction of the other visa categories . others might observe that the family - based , employment - based , and diversity visa categories are statutorily designed as independent pathways to lpr status and that the problems of the family - based and employment - based backlogs could only be addressed through comprehensive immigration reform .