most commonly , the agencies quantified or monetized only costs . as noted at the beginning of this report , crain and crain's estimate that federal regulations cost $1.75 trillion in 2008 has been cited as evidence of the need for regulatory reform legislation . however , crain and crain told crs that their report was "not meant to be a decision - making tool for lawmakers or federal regulatory agencies to use in choosing the 'right' level of regulation . for example , even if all federal regulations did cost $1.75 trillion in 2008 ( which at least some commenters believe may not be correct ) , if the monetized benefits of those regulations were determined to be greater than those costs , then policymakers may conclude that those costs were ( in the words of executive order 12866 ) "justified. but a valid , reasoned policy decision can only be made after considering information on both costs and benefits . in an effort to assess the sensitivity of crain and crain's results , crs ran a linear regression using similar , but somewhat different , data and methods . on the other hand , if the monetized benefits of federal regulations were estimated to be less than the estimated costs , policymakers may reach another conclusion , or may decide to examine any non - monetized costs and benefits of those rules . the four identical independent variables were ( 1 ) the world governance indicators regulatory quality index , ( 2 ) broadband penetration rates , ( 3 ) country population , and ( 4 ) foreign trade as a percentage of gdp . data for these four variables were obtained from the oecd website ( http: / / www.oecd.org ) . crain and crain also included one other variable in their analysis: primary school enrollment as a share of the eligible population . in their analysis , the associated coefficient had an unexpected negative sign ( indicating that as primary school enrollment went up , gdp per capita went down ) . crain and crain told crs that the negative coefficient could be due to "aging pyramid" demographic effects . in the crs analysis , two variables were added to account for such demographic effects: the proportion of the population under 14 and the proportion of the population over 65 . these variables were calculated from data obtained from the u.s. census bureau international population statistics . these demographic measures may capture "aging pyramid" effects more directly than the primary education variable . crs ran a cross - country fixed effects panel estimator with year indicator variables . natural logarithms of all variables except the regulatory quality index were used in the regression . estimation results using stata 11 xtreg procedure , using robust ( white ) standard errors that are used by most empirical researchers . estimation results run with conventional standard errors , which are very similar , are available upon request . the estimation output is shown in table a - 1 below . the estimated coefficient on the world governance indicators regulatory quality index is very small and is not significantly different from zero .