another issue is how the receipts should be used . migratory bird conservation fund , $52.3 million in fy2009 — receipts from the sale of "duck stamps" ( $22.9 million in fy2009 ) and from import duties on arms and ammunition ( $29.4 million in fy2009 ) are permanently appropriated for wildlife refuge land acquisition . some advocate using the fees to reduce the fiscal burden on taxpayers generally . payments are made to counties at the highest of ( 1 ) 25% of net receipts ; ( 2 ) 0.75% of fair market value of the land ; or ( 3 ) $0.75 per acre . however , some fees are intended to recover administrative costs , while others are intended to fund activities to restore lands and resources to pre - sale conditions . in general , users may be more likely to tolerate higher fees or prices if they see that the additional federal receipts are to be used for management programs that they benefit from , at least in the long run , if not immediately . each agency has an array of additional activities that also generate receipts . many of these include permanent appropriations of receipts from specific sources for specific purposes . mandatory spending also can affect federal spending levels and the budget deficit . other receipts are "reinvested" in federal land or resource management in some way . with a few exceptions ( eg , usfs recreation and special land use permits listed below ) , these permanent appropriations are fully dedicated to the specified purposes . each agency's accounts with receipts of more than $10 million in fy2009 ( other than those discussed above ) are listed below in decreasing size . park concessions franchise fees , $58.2 million in fy2009 — administrative fees are collected from national park system concessions to approximate fair market value . collections are permanently appropriated ; 80% are for use at the park unit where the funds were collected , and 20% are available to the secretary for high priority management and operations throughout the national park system . donations , $31.2 million in fy2009 — contributions from the public are permanently appropriated for management and operations of the national park system . operation and maintenance of quarters , $20.0 million in fy2009 — salary deductions from employees living in nps housing are permanently appropriated for the operations and maintenance of that housing . concessions improvement accounts , $13.7 million in fy2009 — concessionaire deposits are permanently appropriated for facility improvements at the park units where the funds were collected . transportation system , $11.0 million in fy2009 — fees collected for public transportation services to any national park system unit , authorized by p.l . 105-391 ( the national parks omnibus management act of 1998 ) are permanently appropriated to the nps . recreation fees ( other than under flrea ) , $50.2 million in fy2009 — receipts from ski area permits , cabin fees , and other permitted recreation activities . fees are disposed to states ( 25% payments ) , to the roads and trails fund ( 10% ) , and to the general treasury ( 65% ) .