not all municipalities can file . a municipality must be specifically authorized by its state to file under chapter 9 . the municipality must be insolvent and must be willing to negotiate a plan to adjust its debts . it generally must also show that it has negotiated in good faith with its creditors . challenges to an entity's eligibility to file under chapter 9 are a prime area for litigation by creditors following a chapter 9 filing . the municipality carries the burden of proving that it is eligible to file under chapter 9 . if it is not , then the case will be dismissed . litigation of challenges to chapter 9 eligibility can be a time - consuming process . most people , hearing the term "municipality," probably think of cities and towns . however , under the bankruptcy code , the term encompasses a broader variety of entities . section 101 ( 40 ) of the bankruptcy code states that the term "means political subdivision or public agency or instrumentality of a state. thus , although states are not included in the definition , counties are , since counties , like cities , towns , villages , etc. most recently , the county has lost a source of revenue after the alabama supreme court found the county's occupational tax unconstitutional for lack of sufficient notice . in 1934 , legislation was enacted as "emergency temporary aid" for insolvent municipalities whose revenues had dropped during the great depression . the provisions were modified slightly by legislation enacted in april 1936 and were extended to january 1 , 1940 . two years and one day after the original legislation was enacted , the u.s. supreme court , in a 5 to 4 opinion , found it to be unconstitutional . the next year , 1937 , new legislation was enacted that established a new chapter of the bankruptcy code . the legislation expanded the definition of "municipality," but continued to require the entity to have the power to tax . the constitutionality of the new law was challenged , but the u.s. supreme court found the provisions to be constitutional , noting that a federal provision for municipal bankruptcy was needed because adequate relief could not be provided by the states due to the constitutional prohibition on enacting any law that would impair contracts . this legislation was also enacted as a temporary provision and was due to expire on june 30 , 1940 . it was extended for two years in 1940 and for four more years in 1942 . in 1946 , the provisions were amended and made permanent . among the changes made in 1946 was the removal of "taxing" as an adjective in the lengthy definition of "municipality. this change allowed the definition of "municipality" to include public agencies that were authorized to either construct or acquire revenue - producing utilities and that issued bonds to finance those public improvements — revenue bonds , whose source of repayment was revenue from the utility that had been constructed or acquired . in the wake of new york city's 1975 financial crisis , the provisions for municipal bankruptcy were again revised .