the resulting proposal is discussed in this report . under the settlement agreement , epa was required to promulgate a final rule by july 27 , 2012 . as described previously in this report , after several delays , epa announced the final rule on may 19 , 2014 . after 1977 and prior to promulgation of the phase i rule in 2001 , applicable cwis requirements for all facilities were developed on a case - by - case bases by permitting authorities , using best professional judgment . as a result of litigation involving all three phases of rulemaking since 2001 and court - ordered and government - requested remands , only certain facilities are subject to technology - based standards in epa cwis rules that remain in effect — new facilities with water - intake flow greater than 2 mgd ( phase i rule ) and new offshore oil and gas facilities ( phase iii ) . until epa promulgation of revised rules , existing facilities of all sizes have continued to be subject to requirements developed on a case - by - case basis by permitting authorities . additionally , new facilities with water - intake flow of less than 2 mgd also are subject to case - by - case permitting , under provisions of the phase i rule unchanged since 2001 . the court approved this request in july 2010 . the cwa does not require that the benefits of regulation exceed or even equal the costs . moreover , the supreme court , in its ruling on the use of cost / benefit analysis in the development of 316 ( b ) regulations , said that epa has the discretion to consider costs , but is not required to do so . in the 2011 proposal , the agency clearly did consider costs , preferring a flexible , less costly regulatory option than a more costly one that would provide greater reduction in i&e mortality ( and greater economic benefits of reducing i&e mortality ) . even so , critics argued that the costs of the rule were underestimated and were wholly disproportionate to its benefits . the final rule , with its additional flexibility regarding impingement mitigation and other requirements , reflects still more modification in response to concerns by regulated industries about compliance costs and technology options . for example , after commenters questioned the costs and feasibility of monitoring provisions in the 2011 proposal , epa made a number of changes in the final rule to significantly reduce those requirements . stakeholder groups differed in their evaluation of the proposed rule . environmental advocates supported the uniform requirements of the proposed impingement standards , but criticized epa for not requiring uniformity in the entrainment portion of the rule in order to protect aquatic resources and provide for timely permitting . industry groups were pleased that epa did not propose closed - cycle cooling for all existing facilities — as many in industry had feared — so they focused their critiques on the impingement standards and urged epa to revise the rule to provide greater flexibility that would be more cost - effective .