these contributions are for future retirees . payments for already retired or separated workers are a significantly larger expense ( $191 billion in fy2009 ) . these payments are typically funded with employee retirement trust funds , not from general fund revenue . the use of public debt has important economic consequences that extend beyond the comparative metrics presented in this report . economists examine broader issues surrounding government debt and its impact on the financial markets and the economy . these issues , which are not mutually exclusive , include ( 1 ) the degree to which government debt crowds out domestic investment and net exports and ( 2 ) the economic efficiency of using tax - exempt debt to subsidize public capital formation . the two chiefly negative consequences may seem to justify greater oversight of state and local government debt and the implicit federal subsidy . designing a federal oversight role , however , would need to address the underlying constitutional issues governing the federal - state relationship . this report examines the complexities of state and local government finance and how the magnitude of state fiscal stress varies considerably from state to state . congress has recently held hearings examining the fiscal health of state and local governments and has offered legislation in two areas related to state and local fiscal health analyzed in this report: government debt and government pensions . state and local debt , although growing , has not reached the point where widespread default seems likely . to date , few defaults have occurred and interest costs for debt outstanding represented a relatively modest 3.5% of total state and local government expenditures . more recent government budget data may show that for selected local government issuers , such as governmental authorities that rely on specialized revenue streams , interest costs have risen and default — and possible state government intervention — may be more likely than in the past . prolonged weakness in the economy would certainly raise this probability . some policymakers are concerned that state and local governments are issuing too much debt , increasing the risk of potential default . in response , congress may seek to increase oversight of the municipal bond market . historically , the federal government has not actively engaged in regulating how state and local governments finance activities . congress has limited authority as the tower amendment to the securities and exchange act of 1934 explicitly prohibits the federal government from requiring any issuer of municipal securities , directly or indirectly through a purchaser or prospective purchaser of securities from the issuer , to file with the [securities and exchange] commission or the [municipal securities rulemaking] board prior to the sale of such securities by the issuer any application , report , or document in connection with the issuance , sale , or distribution of such securities . congress does confer a tax preference to state and local government bond issuers and could modify this tax preference to induce changes in bond disclosure requirements . also , the internal revenue service ( irs ) currently audits selected outstanding tax - exempt bond issues to determine if the bonds comply with tax law .