861 has not been introduced in the senate . a companion bill to h.r . an alternative measure , s.amdt . with the exception of fy2011 and fy2007 ( when there were no earmarks ) , and fy2010 ( when the obama administration introduced its sustainable communities initiative ) , congressional earmarked projects funded by the edi and ni programs were the dominant elements of cdbg - related set aside appropriations . these two programs are used exclusively for congressionally earmarked projects . the issue of earmarks has been the source of debate during recent congresses . during the fy2007 appropriations cycle congress removed all earmarks from the cdf account . subsequently both houses of congress have instituted new rules governing disclosure of earmark requests . since fy2007 , edi and ni earmarks have been included in subsequent legislation appropriating funds for cdf activities . the reduction in funding for entitlement communities will result in entitlement communities delaying some projects and reducing support for others , including activities undertaken by community - based organizations acting as sub - grantees . of the amounts appropriated each fiscal year to carry out cdbg eligible activities , 70% is allocated to cities and urban counties meeting required minimum population thresholds . these communities are identified collectively as "entitlement communities. the remaining 30% of funds appropriated for cdbg formula distribution is allocated among the 50 states and puerto rico for distribution to small or so - called "nonentitlement communities. cdbg funds awarded to eligible entitlement communities and states are allocated using the highest yield from one of two statutorily based formulas . for each of the two categories of eligible entitlement communities ( metropolitan cities and urban counties ) , formula a , the original formula created with the initial passage of the housing and community development act of 1974 , p.l . 93-383 , allocates funds based on each metropolitan city and urban county's share of the following weighted factors: population relative to the total population for all metropolitan cities or urban counties ( 0.25 ) ; poverty relative to total person in poverty for all metropolitan cities or urban counties ( 0.50 ) ; and overcrowded housing relative to the total number of persons living in overcrowded housing conditions for all metropolitan cities or urban counties ( 0.25 ) . the second formula , formula b , enacted with the passage of the housing and community development amendments of 1977 , p.l . 95-128 , allocates funds to metropolitan cities and urban counties using the following weighted factors: a population growth lag factor intended to measure the extent that a community's population has lagged behind the national average for all metropolitan cities and urban counties since 1960 ( 0.20 ) ; each community's share of poverty relative to the total persons living in poverty for all metropolitan cities or urban counties ( 0.30 ) ; and housing built before 1940 relative to the total number of housing units built before 1940 for all metropolitan cities or urban counties ( 0.50 ) .