charging . electric vehicles will need to be recharged as often as every day , depending on how far the cars are driven . current charging applications using standard 110-volt household current ( called level 1 charging ) can take over 12 hours . homeowners can install more powerful charging stations at home , but a 240-volt charging station ( level 2 ) would still require a car to charge for six hours or more . at commercial 440-volt charging stations ( level 3 ) , a driver would have to leave the vehicle for 30 minutes if its battery is depleted . in addition , the driving range of an electric vehicle drops if many accessories , such as air conditioning , are used , potentially requiring more frequent recharging . a related issue is the availability of charging stations to service electric vehicles . doe counted 5,612 charging stations accessible to the public as of march 2013 . in march 2013 , chargepoint and ecotality , which together handle about 90% of u.s. public car charging , announced a joint venture to make access to chargers easier for motorists . range . many vehicles with ic engines can travel over 350 miles before needing a refill of gasoline . vehicles with electric motors have a shorter range , which may cause some consumers to avoid purchasing them . the u.s. environmental protection agency ( epa ) estimates that the leaf can travel 73 miles before recharging , and the volt , 37 miles . ( the leaf is an all - electric vehicle ; the volt also has a small gasoline tank that extends its total range to 379 miles. ) ranges are lower if the heater or air - conditioning is used extensively , as the power for these accessories is drawn totally from the battery . however , improvements in regenerative braking systems , which provide power for the vehicle and simultaneously recharge the battery , may extend range . price of gasoline . sustained high gasoline prices would be expected to spur stronger demand for fuel - efficient vehicles , including hybrid and electric vehicles . improved ic engine technology . a number of low - cost vehicles with ic engines now tout fuel efficiency of 40 miles per gallon ( mpg ) or more . they include the chevrolet cruze , hyundai elantra , ford fiesta , and ford focus . the hybrid toyota prius is rated at 51 mpg . the most fuel - efficient cars with ic engines sell from just under $14,000 to $23,000 , well below the current cost of either the volt or leaf , even after the $7,500 federal tax credit . improved fuel efficiency in ic engines may reduce the attraction of electric vehicles . subsidies by other governments . the u.s. government is not alone in wanting to establish a li - ion battery supply chain . governments in japan , south korea , and china are providing similar incentives . japan is currently the leader in manufacturing of advanced automobile batteries , although its industry is modest given the low level of global demand .