these proposals have not been scored . the cost recovery provisions would introduce a new depreciation system that would slow depreciation and approximate the present value of economic depreciation . what about the effects on the u.s. economy ? the discussion sometimes focuses on job creation . job creation is an important issue for the government to address during cyclical downturns . standard economic theory suggests such policies should be temporary ; in contrast , advocates of corporate rate cuts are proposing permanent cuts . in any case , temporary or permanent corporate rate cuts are unlikely to be very effective stimulus policies . economic theory suggests that there is no reason to view general job creation as a long - run objective of government policies . the economy can generate the jobs needed by the natural process of growth and market adjustment . in 1961 and 1991 , the unemployment rate was the same , 6.7% . employment , however , rose from 66 million to 117 million . employment tends to grow steadily ; the unemployment rate fluctuates . long - term jobs policies , according to economic theory , therefore , should not be aimed at increasing jobs , although they can be designed to reduce structural or frictional unemployment ( such as improving the skills of disadvantaged workers ) . rather , the capital flows induced by a corporate rate cut generally have effects on the level of output and on wage levels , rather than the number of workers . despite the claimed effects of cutting the corporate tax on encouraging the flow of foreign - owned capital into the country from abroad ( inbound capital ) or discouraging the flow of u.s. capital to other countries ( outbound capital ) , there are many forces that constrain the movement of capital . as capital flows into a country , its greater abundance coupled with a fixed amount of labor drives the wage rate up and the rate of return down , so that the pre - tax return to capital falls . if the economy is large enough to affect the rest of the world's returns , the proportional flow of capital is lessened further , because shift of capital from abroad ( with no change in taxes ) raises the after tax return abroad and draws some of the capital back . capital flows are further reduced if there are significant non - corporate sectors ( because a rate cut would draw capital from the unincorporated sectors of the economy as well as from abroad ) . finally , the flow of capital would be further limited if capital is not perfectly mobile or products are not perfect substitutes . a study by gravelle and smetters used a general equilibrium model to capture the effects of imposing a 35% tax , allowing for four sectors in the u.s. economy and a mirror foreign economy . the estimated change in the capital stock , assuming the conditions most conducive to capital inflows , was 4.5% .