not all income payments are subject to withholding . to account for uncertainty over the forecast period , cbo provided low and high estimates of the output and employment effects of each option . in generating the estimates , cbo assumed that the federal reserve would act at the end of 2011 to gradually lower the risk of inflation . two of the options analyzed in the report were virtually identical to the mwptc and the temporary social security tax reduction for employees: ( 1 ) a reduction in employees' payroll taxes and ( 2 ) an additional refundable tax credit for lower - and middle - income households in 2011 . cbo estimated that the former would boost output cumulatively between 2010 and 2015 by $0.30 to $0.90 for each additional dollar of budgetary cost and would add two to seven cumulative years of fte employment for each additional $1 million of budgetary cost . in the case of the latter , cbo estimated that it would raise output cumulatively between 2010 and 2015 by the same amount as the other option: $0.30 to $0.90 for each additional dollar in budgetary cost ; the estimated employment effect was also similar: three to seven cumulative years of fte employment for each additional $1 million in budgetary cost . these results clearly indicate that it is reasonable to regard the mwptc and the current payroll tax cut for employees as equally cost - effective instruments for promoting economic recovery and growth . as a result of arra and trucjca , many taxpayers have experienced a change in the amount withheld for federal taxes from their paychecks or pension payments in 2011 . the expiration of the mwptc , combined with the implementation of the social security tax reduction for employees , has altered the formulas used to determine how much to withhold . whether the amount withheld in a particular case is larger or smaller than the amount withheld in 2010 depends mainly on a taxpayer's work status and the type of income . the impact of those factors can be seen in the figures shown in the tables below . table 1 addresses the amount withheld for federal income and payroll taxes at different biweekly wage levels in 2010 and 2011 for employees claiming no withholding allowances . the amount withheld for a single person receiving $500 in wages every two weeks is greater in 2011 than in 2010 , reflecting the net loss of tax benefits for lower - wage workers from the shift from the mwptc to the social security tax reduction . but at biweekly wage payments of $1,000 , $1,500 , and $2,000 , the amounts withheld are lower than they were in 2010 , reflecting the net gain in tax benefits from the shift . a similar pattern exists among married persons filing jointly . by contrast , table 2 examines the change in withholding ( determined using the wage - bracket method ) from 2010 to 2011 for retired persons ( federal and non - federal ) who receive monthly pension payments but no wage income and claim no withholding allowances .