most public pension plans are traditional defined benefit plans . some state and local governments maintain defined contribution plans , and there have been proposals in various states to switch from a defined benefit to a defined contribution plan . enacted in 1974 , erisa provides a comprehensive federal scheme for the regulation of pension and other employee benefit plans offered by private - sector employers . benefits often are based on average pay and years of service . to fund the plan , an employer makes contributions to the common pension fund that are actuarially expected to grow through investment to cover the promised benefits . under the terms of the plan , employees may make contributions as well . a defined contribution plan ( eg , a 401 ( k ) plan ) is one in which the contributions are specified , but not the benefits . a defined contribution plan ( also called "an individual account" plan ) is one that provides an individual account for each participant that accrues benefits based solely on the amount contributed to the account and any income , expenses , and investment gains or losses to the account . the employee bears the investment risk in a defined contribution plan . while erisa does not require an employer to offer employee benefits , it does mandate compliance with its provisions if such benefits are offered . title i of erisa imposes various federal standards aimed at protecting the interests of plan participants and beneficiaries , including reporting and disclosure , vesting , participation , funding , fiduciary duty , and civil enforcement requirements . title iv of erisa created a plan termination insurance program , under which pension benefits are paid to plan participants and beneficiaries up to a statutory maximum if the benefits cannot be paid by the employer . public pension plans are generally exempt from these provisions of erisa , but may be subject to federal regulation under the internal revenue code . the internal revenue code grants certain tax benefits to "qualified" retirement plans . among these tax advantages , employer contributions to a qualified plan on behalf of its employees are tax deductible for the employer . in addition , qualified retirement plan participants do not pay tax on employer contributions or the benefits they accrue in the pension plan until the participant ( or beneficiary ) takes a distribution . given that state and local governments do not pay federal taxes , the tax benefit for employer contributions is irrelevant to them . however , public pension plans must be qualified so that the plan participants can avoid paying taxes on their pension benefits until the benefits are actually received . in order to be a qualified plan under the internal revenue code , pension plans must meet several requirements . governmental plans , however , are only subject to a subset of the qualification requirements that private - sector pension plans must meet . in many cases , public pension plans are subject to different requirements under the internal revenue code than private - sector plans , including certain less stringent pre - erisa requirements for vesting and funding .