locklear serves jointly as commander of u.s . naval forces europe and africa , and as commander of allied joint force command , naples , which has operational responsibility for nato missions in the mediterranean . uk and french naval officers are onboard the mount whitney , as well as liaison officers from a number of other countries . air force maj. gen. margaret woodward , commander of 17 th air force , was the initial joint force air component commander for operation odyssey dawn . the coalition currently includes forces from 13 nations either already in the region or en route . as of march 24 , 2011 , non - u.s. coalition aircraft were flying "65 percent" of all sorties , up from 13% on march 20 . france and the united kingdom ( uk ) have been the most vocal proponents of taking action against qadhafi to protect civilians in libya — the two countries sponsored unsc resolutions 1970 and 1973 , and pushed the european union to quickly adopt sanctions against the qadhafi regime . they have also played a central role in the ongoing military operations in libya . within a week after passage of unscr 1970 , both french president nicolas sarkozy and british prime minister david cameron had publicly called on qadhafi to relinquish power and each had instructed their respective military leadership to begin working with allies on plans for a no - fly zone over libya . on march 10 , france became the first and only country to recognize the libyan transitional national council "as the legitimate representative of the libyan people. on saturday , march 19 , two days after passage of unscr 1973 , president sarkozy convened an emergency meeting of allied and arab leaders in paris which endorsed the immediate deployment of military aircraft to stop an assault by qadhafi forces on benghazi and the establishment of a no - fly zone in the country . before the end of the meeting , french fighter planes had attacked armored vehicles and tanks belonging to qadhafi forces on the outskirts of benghazi . some participants at the paris meeting were reportedly critical of the french government both for insisting on convening the meeting before agreeing to endorse air strikes and for then launching strikes before the meeting was over . french officials claim that meeting participants were informed of the operation and argue that the assaults were necessary to prevent an imminent attack on benghazi . in any case , the strikes had clearly been planned and coordinated with the knowledge of key allied militaries , including the united states and uk . french officials add that the meeting was essential to maintaining coalition unity and arab league support for military operations and for securing the participation of some arab governments in the enforcement of unscr 1973 . only the united states and nato possess the command and control capabilities necessary for coalition operations enforcing the no - fly zone over libya and protecting civilians on the ground . in spite of statements underscoring nato unity on steps announced to date , the initial planning and operational phases were also marked by significant levels of discord within europe and nato on the aims and future direction of the mission .