the final regulations provide a list of examples of major life activities . in addition to those listed in the statute ( caring for oneself , performing manual tasks , seeing , hearing , eating , sleeping , walking , standing , lifting , bending , speaking , breathing , learning , reading , concentrating , thinking , communicating , and working ) , the eeoc includes sitting , reaching , and interacting with others . major life activities also include major bodily functions . in addition to the statutory examples ( functions of the immune system , normal cell growth , digestive , bowel , bladder , neurological , brain , respiratory , circulatory , endocrine , and reproductive functions ) , the eeoc includes special sense organs , genitourinary , cardiovascular , hemic , lymphatic and musculoskeletal . the final regulations also provide that the operation of a major bodily function includes the operation of an individual organ within a body system . they include deafness , blindness , an intellectual disability , missing limbs or mobility impairments requiring the use of a wheelchair , autism , cancer , cerebral palsy , diabetes , epilepsy , hiv infection , multiple sclerosis , muscular dystrophy , major depressive disorder , bipolar disorder , post - traumatic stress disorder , obsessive compulsive disorder , and schizophrenia . in addition , the eeoc provides that the focus when considering whether an activity is a major life activity should be on "how a major life is substantially limited , and not on what outcomes an individual can achieve. for example , the eeoc noted that an individual with a learning disability my achieve a high level of academic success but may be substantially limited in the major life activity of learning . the final regulations provide rules of construction to assist in determining whether an impairment substantially limits an individual in a major life activity . generally , the regulations provide that not every impairment is a disability but an impairment does not have to prevent or severely limit a major life activity to be considered substantially limiting . the term substantially limits is to be broadly construed to provide expansive coverage , and requires an individualized determination . the adaaa specifically provides that an impairment that is episodic or in remission is a disability if it would substantially limit a major life activity when active . in its appendix to the regulations , the eeoc states that "[t]he fact that the periods during which an episodic impairments is active and substantially limits a major life activity may be brief or occur infrequently is no longer relevant to determining whether an impairment substantially limits a major life activity. for example , the eeoc notes that an individual with post - traumatic stress disorder who has intermittent flashbacks is substantially limited in brain function and thinking . a mitigating measure , for example , a wheelchair or medication , eliminates or reduces the symptoms or impact of an impairment . the final regulations track the statutory language of the ada but also provide several clarifying interpretations .