the supreme court reversed . in its opinion , the court laid out a two - step procedure to be used when evaluating a claim of privilege to protect state secrets . first , "there must be a formal claim of privilege , lodged by the head of the department which has control over the matter , after actual personal consideration by that officer. second , "the court itself must determine whether the circumstances are appropriate for the claim of privilege , and yet do so without forcing a disclosure of the very thing the privilege is designed to protect. ultimately , the reynolds court determined that the air force's invocation of the privilege was valid and that in camera review of the incident report was not necessary . importantly , the court did not dismiss the claims , but rather remanded the case and directed the district court to provide the plaintiffs with the opportunity to pursue their case without the privileged evidence . the 2010-2011 term saw the supreme court hear its first state secrets privilege case since the 2005 case of tenet v. doe . the federal courts continue to wrestle with the precise contours of the state secrets privilege . although the privilege has been invoked in a significant number of cases in a range of areas of the law , a variety of important questions have yet to be resolved in an authoritative manner . unsettled issues include whether the state secrets privilege is more accurately defined as a common law evidentiary privilege or a constitutional doctrine ; the degree of deference to be accorded to the executive branch during a court's independent evaluation of an assertion of the privilege ; the circumstances under which a valid claim of privilege must result in outright dismissal as opposed to allowing the claim to proceed absent the privileged evidence ; and , finally , the scope of totten and the nature of the relationship between the reynolds privilege and the totten bar . the plaintiffs had sought discovery of the official post - incident report and survivors' statements that were in the possession of the u.s. air force . the air force opposed disclosure of those documents , as the aircraft and its occupants were engaged in a "highly secret mission of the air force" at the time of the crash . the federal district court ordered the air force to produce the documents so that it could independently determine whether they contained privileged information . when the air force refused to provide the documents to the court , the district court ruled in favor of the plaintiffs on the issue of negligence ; the court of appeals subsequently affirmed the district court's ruling . in general dynamics corporation v. united states , the federal government validly asserted the privilege to prevent the disclosure of sensitive stealth technology in a defense contract dispute with a government contractor . however , in addition to asserting the privilege , the government also sought the return of progress payments made to the contractor .