it may not award punitive damages . the claimant must consent to arbitration in writing . chapter eleven does not require that an investor , or an investor and an enterprise , exhaust local judicial or administrative remedies before a claim may be filed . the investor may submit a claim under various arbitral mechanisms , including the convention on the settlement of investment disputes between states and nationals of other states ( icsid convention ) and the icsid rules of procedure for arbitration proceedings , the icsid additional facility rules , united nations commission on international trade law ( uncitral ) arbitration rules , or , if the disputants agree , any other arbitration institution or rules . both the united states and south korea are parties to the icsid convention and may thus avail themselves of the convention and its procedural rules . once an investor claim is filed , a three - member arbitral tribunal will be established . one arbitrator is to be appointed by each disputing party , and the third , the presiding arbitrator , is to be appointed by agreement of the disputing parties . the secretary - general of the international center for the settlement of investment disputes ( icsid ) is to serve as appointing authority for chapter eleven investment disputes . if the tribunal has not been constituted within 75 days after the claim is filed , the secretary - general , if requested by a disputing party , will appoint the outstanding arbitrator or arbitrators . the secretary - general may not appoint a national of either party as the presiding arbitrator unless the disputing parties agree . chapter eleven contains rules for the conduct of the arbitration , including various provisions aimed at transparency and efficiency of the arbitral proceedings . tribunals may accept and consider amicus submissions from persons or entities that are not disputing parties . tribunals are required to rule expeditiously on any preliminary objections by the defending party that the claim submitted is legally not a claim for which a chapter eleven award can be made or that the dispute is not within the competence of the tribunal . as a result , defending parties need not wait for a ruling on a jurisdictional issue until the tribunal rules on the merits and may thus dispose of frivolous claims at an early stage without needing to expend resources on further defense of the claim . multiple claims with certain common elements may be consolidated . subject to provisions aimed at preventing disclosure of protected information , documents submitted by the parties and tribunal orders , awards , and decisions are to be made available to the public . the tribunal must also conduct public hearings . when a claim involves an alleged breach of a korus fta obligation ( as opposed to the breach of an investment agreement ) , the tribunal is to decide the issues in accordance with the korus fta and "applicable rules of international law.