, providing power on demand ) . if increased deployment of renewable electricity technologies is a u.s. policy goal , a recent analysis by the national renewable energy laboratory suggests that the united states could also implement both a renewable electricity standard and a fit . others believe that renewable energy technologies should rely on venture capital and private sector investment alone , and the market alone should dictate whether they are employed . however , it is noted that the united states relies more on investment from venture capitalists for clean energy technology development than the rest of the world combined . few if any of these less efficient producers remain open . most of the energy savings in the 12 th fyp are expected to come from structural changes in china's economic structure and technological improvements . energy efficiency benchmarks have been established for china's top 1,000 energy consuming industries ( which accounted for 33% of national and 47% of industrial energy usage in 2004 ) with energy reduction goals set for each enterprise . china is the world's largest market for new construction with approximately 2 billion square meters of floor space added annually . china's existing building codes ( for both residential and public buildings ) focus on heating , ventilation and air conditioning , as well as lighting , hot water and power use . new standards have been in development since 2005 with national energy design criteria for residential buildings . energy efficient building codes are a key tool in establishing passive measures for energy savings in new future housing stock . the "weak link" in china's electricity planning has been transmission . targets have been set for building renewable electric power generation without effective measures for accomplishing grid connection and integration , especially for remote wind power . china's grid companies must accept subsidized wind power , but costs of building transmission lines to connect to wind farms ( especially those in remote regions ) are not subsidized . as a result , as much as one - third of wind power generation in china is not connected to the grid due to a lack of transmission capacity . when combined with low tariffs , this likely means that china's wind power sector has been operating at a loss . to help remedy the imbalance , the state grid corporation has begun to build a pilot "smart grid" in china's larger cities to help integrate renewable energy sources . formal goals for a smart grid are expected to be incorporated into china's 12 th five - year plan , with a "unified strong and smart grid" to be built nationwide by 2020 . the lack of grid integration for wind has improved only slightly in the last few years , with curtailment of wind capacity ( due to inadequate transmission capacity ) being especially acute in the less populous northern western provinces of china . china today is dealing today with some of the same issues that the united states is likely to face as it considers building the infrastructure to take advantage of potentially huge wind and solar resources of the u.s. west and southwest .