no further action was taken . s. 29 , the biennial budget act , was introduced on january 25 , 1989 . the measure was jointly referred to the senate committee on the budget and committee on governmental affairs . the committees on budget and governmental affairs held joint hearings on the measure on october 18 , 1989 . s. 29 was reported by the committee on governmental affairs on march 21 , 1990 ( s.rept . this bill contained provisions providing for a biennial budget cycle . the measure was referred to the committee on the budget , which reported the measure with an amendment on july 14 , 2006 ( s.rept . no further action was taken . 114 , the biennial budgeting and appropriations act of 2011 , was introduced on january 5 , 2011 . the measure was jointly referred to the committees on the budget , oversight and government reform , and rules ( and subsequently referred to the subcommittee on the legislative and budget process ) . the subcommittee on the legislative and budget process held a hearing on january 24 , 2012 . no further action was taken . during senate consideration of s.con.res . 8 , the fy2014 budget resolution , an amendment was offered that created a deficit neutral reserve fund for the establishment of a biennial budget and appropriations process ( s.amdt . the amendment was adopted , 68-31 . the resolution passed the senate , 50-49 , but final action on resolving differences did not occur before the end of the congress . 1869 , the biennial budgeting and enhanced oversight act of 2014 , was introduced on may 8 , 2013 . the measure was jointly referred to the committees on the budget , oversight and government reform , and rules . the committee on the budget reported the measure with an amendment on march 21 , 2014 ( h.rept . after the measure was discharged from the committee on oversight and government reform on march 21 , 2014 , and the committee on rules on december 11 , 2014 , no further congressional action occurred . again the experience at the state level is inconclusive . both annual and biennial budget cycles have been coupled with varying degrees of executive branch discretion and authority . for example , maine , with a biennial budget , has far stricter limits on the governor's authority to transfer funds or cut spending unilaterally than does south dakota , with an annual budget . the natural tension between the desire for longer planning horizons and the increasing inaccuracy of budget projections when stretched over longer periods has not been solved at the state level . this is because the same basic system of funding stability and incremental budget changes that characterizes federal budgeting also operates in the state context . few state programs are subject to sweeping changes in any given year , regardless of the budget cycle . this might suggest that both the assertions of a need for a longer budget cycle to ensure better planning and fears related to the inadequacy of long - term forecasts of budgetary needs might be overstated .