some have banned food from the prefectures most affected . at many chinese ports , japanese ships with food cargo are being denied customs inspections . international shipping companies reportedly are charging higher rates for calling at japanese ports . premiums being required by ship owners to enter japanese ports can be from $147,000 to $588,000 . the debris washed out to sea from the tsunami is being picked up by pacific ocean currents and is projected to spread eastward from japan and in about three years likely will reach the u.s. west coast . as of may 17 , 2011 , fda's import alert 99-33 has reduced the area of concern to three prefectures — fukushima , ibaraki , and tochigi — and applies to food products from japan across four categories . fda's import alert 99-33 establishes an order for "detention without physical examination" ( dwpe ) for specified products from specified prefectures . accordingly , fda's import alert detains all shipments of items subject to the alert , and places the burden upon the importer to demonstrate , through testing , that a given shipment is "not violative" and may be imported . u.s. food imports are regulated by fda , which monitors the safety of most types of food imports , and usda's food safety and inspection service ( fsis ) , which regulates the safety of meat and poultry imports . some in congress have indicated concern that radioactive contaminated foods might enter the u.s. through its food imports . both fda and usda have issued formal statements regarding the current situation in japan . fda has stated: "fda's screening at u.s. borders will remain vigilant and will be augmented with radiation screening of shipments" and its import tracking system "has been programmed to automatically flag all shipments of fda - regulated products from japan. usda has stated that "usda and its federal partners through the food emergency response network are preparing to begin sampling , if necessary. existing u.s. trade laws , including the tariff act of 1930 ( 19 u.s.c . 1304 ) , generally require all imported articles to be marked with the english name of the country of origin . various other country - of - origin labeling requirements also apply under other laws that govern fda and usda and other usda programs . several international organizations , including organizations within the united nations , are monitoring international concerns over the safety of food produced in japan . many u.s. and international industry sources have indicated that the current situation in japan might cause disruption in global food markets , but also have indicated the likelihood that japanese demand for imported food might increase . historically , japan has been an important trading partner with the united states , and is our fourth - largest agricultural export market . it is still not clear what effect , if any , japan's food supply and demand situation will have on world farm commodity markets and food prices . 172 ( honda ) . expressing heartfelt condolences and support for assistance to the people of japan and all those affected in the aftermath of the deadly earthquake and tsunamis of march 11 , 2011 .