these offers were rejected . in 2010 , the south korean and u.s. governments made small donations of aid , some of which ngos distributed . in january 2010 , south korea donated 10,000 tons of food through the south korean red cross . in march 2010 , south korea sent 20 tons of milk powder . in september 2010 , u.s. agency for international development ( usaid ) made $600,000 available to fund flood assistance via samaritan's purse , global resource services and mercy corps . ngos have offered programs oriented to build capacity in agriculture and health , sponsoring projects on water and sanitation , seed improvement , animal husbandry , and land management . other ngos have promoted programs for study abroad , and courses in english language , banking , and trade . specific examples include founding a digital library at a north korean university ; establishing of a u.s. - dprk scientific engagement consortium ; creating a privately run foreign university in pyongyang , sponsoring exchange programs on economics , urban development , and technology ; and establishing a reference laboratory for the diagnosis and treatment of multidrug resistant tuberculosis . one of the fundamental problems in dealing with the north korean regime is its deep isolation , which makes traditional diplomatic exchanges difficult . some ngos have sought to organize track ii exchanges — that is , sponsoring informal communications between north korean scientists , academics , military officers and private citizens , and their counterparts in the united states or overseas . the creation of the u.s. - north korean tb project , the kim chaek - syracuse digital library project and the u.s. - dprk scientific engagement consortium owe much to track ii diplomacy . other ngos seek to address political issues of the korean peninsula directly . some ngos that have sponsored track ii exchanges include the korea society , stanford university , syracuse university , the national committee for american foreign policy , the university of california ( the northeast asia cooperation dialogue ( neacd ) ) , and the asia society . track ii dialogues often rely on the participation and reputation of retired diplomats or government officials . for example , the korea society , the national committee on american foreign policy , and the asia society played roles in engaging north korean diplomats during moments when the six - party talks appeared to be deadlocked . the center for international security and cooperation at stanford university and the university of california's northeast asia conflict dialogue ( neacd ) have also held meetings with officials participating in six - party talks . north korean diplomats last attended a neacd session in 2009 . diplomats from both the north korean permanent mission to the united nations and the ministry of foreign affairs in pyongyang , rather than academics or scientists , have attended . by virtue of their experience as either past negotiators with north korea or their expertise , some u.s. representatives have also opened doors for diplomacy , for example former president jimmy carter , former new mexico governor bill richardson , and retired director of los alamos national laboratory dr. siegfried hecker .