the objectives were to impede document fraud and unauthorized employment . since the terrorist attacks of september 11 , 2001 , the policy priorities have centered on document integrity and personal identification , with a sharp focus on intercepting terrorist travel and other security risks . in recent years , congress has enacted several specific laws aimed directly at closing perceived loopholes of citizenship self - attestation and identity document integrity . in the 112 th congress , the issues of how best to verify legal status for employment or to obtain entitlements are likely to arise . there is a broad - based consensus that the u.s. immigration system is broken . this consensus erodes , however , as soon as the options to reform the u.s. immigration system are debated . substantial efforts to comprehensively reform immigration law failed in the 109 th and 110 th congresses , prompting some to characterize the issue as a "zero - sum game" or a "third rail. the number of foreign - born people residing in the united states is at the highest level in u.s. history and has reached a proportion of the u.s. population — 12.5% — not seen since the early 20 th century . of the 38 million foreign - born residents in the united states , approximately 16.4 million are naturalized citizens . the remaining 21.6 million foreign - born residents are noncitizens . an estimated 12.5 million foreign - born residents of the united states in 2009 were legal permanent residents . according to the latest estimates by the department of homeland security ( dhs ) , about 10.8 million of the 21.6 million noncitizens were unauthorized aliens living in the united states in january 2010 , down from a peak of 11.8 million in january 2007 . some observers and policy experts maintain that the presence of millions of unauthorized residents is evidence of inadequacies in the legal immigration system as well as failures of immigration control policies and practices . whether and how the 112 th congress will address immigration reform in the midst of historically high levels of unemployment and budgetary constrictions is difficult to project . current circumstances may sharpen the social and business cleavages as well as narrow the range of options . nonetheless , selected immigration issues are likely to be a major concern for the 112 th congress , even if legislative action on such contentious issues appears daunting . the bureau of population , refugees and migration in dos handles overseas processing of refugees , and uscis in dhs makes final determinations about eligibility for admission . in the post - september 11 world , there is particular concern that potential terrorists — especially aliens from trouble spots in the mideast , northern africa , and south asia — could try to gain legal entry into the united states as refugees or asylees . more generally , some regard as a key challenge for refugee and asylum policy the increasing difficulty in differentiating the persecuted from the persecutors in light of the religious , ethnic , and political violence in various countries around the world . the efficacy of refugee resettlement programs in the united states is a related concern .