r . evid .

 ) , incorporate procedural rights that the constitution and various statutes demand . unlike with the federal courts , the supreme court does not promulgate procedural rules for military courts - martial . as discussed above , congress regulates the armed forces largely through title 10 of the u.s. code . the military courts - martial system is specifically addressed in the uniform code of military justice ( ucmj ) , chapter 47 of title 10 . article 36 of the ucmj authorizes the president to prescribe rules for "pretrial , trial , and post - trial procedures , including modes of proof , for cases arising under this chapter triable in courts - martial. such rules are to "apply the principles of law and the rules of evidence generally recognized in the trial of criminal cases in the united states district courts" insofar as the president "considers practicable" but that "may not be contrary to or inconsistent" with the ucmj . pursuant to that delegation , the president created the rules for courts - martial ( rcm ) and the military rules of evidence ( mre ) . congress , in creating the military justice system , established three types of courts - martial: ( 1 ) summary court - martial , ( 2 ) special court - martial , and ( 3 ) general court - martial . while the promulgated rcm and the mre are applicable to all courts - martial , the jurisdiction and authorized punishments vary among the different courts - martial types . the function of the summary court - martial is to "promptly adjudicate minor offenses under a simple procedure" and "thoroughly and impartially inquire into both sides of the matter" ensuring that the "interests of both the government and the accused are safeguarded and that justice is done. however , special and general courts - martial function to adjudicate more serious offenses with more severe punishments and thus the procedures are more complex . although a discussion of the rcm and mre is beyond the scope of this report , the procedures employed in courts - martial are intended to afford servicemembers basic constitutional rights . appended as table 1 is an excerpt from crs report rl31262 , selected procedural safeguards in federal, military , and international courts , by [author name scrubbed] , which compares selected constitutionally based trial procedures in federal courts and general courts - martial . the summary court - martial can adjudicate minor offenses allegedly committed by enlisted servicemembers . it can adjudge maximum punishments of 30 days' confinement ; hard labor without confinement for 45 days ; restriction to specified limits for 45 days ; forfeiture of two - thirds' pay per month for one month ; and reduction to the lowest pay grade . in the case of enlisted members above pay grade e - 4 , the summary court - martial may not adjudge confinement or hard labor without confinement and can only reduce them to the next lower pay grade . summary courts - martial are composed of one commissioned officer who need not be a lawyer . the accused must consent to the proceedings and normally is not entitled to a lawyer .