generation . some may advocate a preference for renewable energy in the form of a specific percentage of generation dedicated to renewable energy or through a multi - tiered ces credit approach that provides more credit value for electricity generated from renewable sources . electric power annual 2009 — data tables: 1990-2009 net generation by state by type of producer by energy source ( epa 2009 ) . 2009: eia - 923 january - december final , nonutility energy balance and annual environmental information data ( eia - 923 ) . how should energy efficiency be treated under a federal ces ? how might a ces align and interact with renewable portfolio standards currently established in 29 states , dc , and puerto rico ? on march 21 , 2011 , the senate energy and natural resources committee released a clean energy standard white paper . this white paper solicits feedback on 6 broad policy design questions along with 36 clarifying questions . the six broad design questions listed in the white paper are ( 1 ) what should be the threshold for inclusion in the new program ? ( 2 ) what resources should qualify as "clean energy" ? ( 3 ) how should the crediting system and timetables be designed ? ( 4 ) how will a ces affect deployment of specific technologies ? what should be the guidelines for credit trading under a ces policy ? how might a federal ces affect other economic sectors , such as coal and coal electricity generation ? ( 5 ) how should alternative compliance payments , regional costs , and consumer protections be addressed ? ( 6 ) how would a ces interact with other policies ? appendix a . comparative analysis of selected clean energy standards proposed during the 111 th congress appendix b. state - level baseline compliance calculation methodology data sources two eia data sources were used to perform the baseline ces compliance assessment: 1 . methodology calculating the generation mix for each state started with data from epa 2009 , which provides information regarding state - by - state electricity generation . a pivot table was created to organize electricity generation data by state and by fuel source . however , the epa 2009 data do not provide the detail necessary to distinguish between natural gas combined cycle ( ngcc ) generation and other natural gas generation technologies . as a result , eia - 923 data were used to extract ngcc generation figures . with electricity generation from ngcc power plants now available , the pivot table from the epa 2009 was modified to include ngcc generation and "other natural gas" generation . to be consistent with president obama's clean energy standard proposal , electricity generation sources were categorized as either "clean energy generation" or "other generation.