other funding mechanisms . the fy2012 request included an increase over fy2011 for research training stipends for individuals supported by the ruth l. kirschstein national research service awards program . the budget request would have raised funding for the program by $13 million to $794 million , allowing nih to support 16,831 full - time training positions , 29 more than in fy2011 . it also adopts language from h.rept . 112-169 supporting planned nsf activities in advanced manufacturing and agreed to language from s.rept . 112-78 providing $165.6 million for cybersecurity research . these reports can be accessed via the crs website at http: / / crs.gov / pages / clis.aspx ? also , the status of each appropriations bill is available on the crs webpage , status table of appropriations , available at http: / / www.crs.gov / pages / appover.aspx . congress supports research and development in the department of defense ( dod ) primarily through its research , development , test , and evaluation ( rdt&e ) appropriation . the appropriation supports the development of the nation's future military hardware and software and the technology base upon which those products rely . nearly all of what dod spends on rdt&e is appropriated in title iv of the defense appropriation bill . ( see table 6 . ) however , rdt&e funds are also appropriated in other parts of the bill . for example , rdt&e funds are appropriated as part of the defense health program , the chemical agents and munitions destruction program , and the national defense sealift fund . the defense health program supports the delivery of health care to dod personnel and their families . program funds are requested through the operations and maintenance appropriation . the program's rdt&e funds support congressionally directed research in such areas as breast , prostate , and ovarian cancer and other medical conditions . congress appropriates funds for this program in title vi ( other department of defense programs ) of the defense appropriations bill . the chemical agents and munitions destruction program supports activities to destroy the u.s. inventory of lethal chemical agents and munitions to avoid future risks and costs associated with storage . funds for this program have been requested through the procurement appropriation . congress appropriates funds for this program also in title vi . the national defense sealift fund supports the procurement , operation and maintenance , and research and development of the nation's naval reserve fleet and supports a u.s. flagged merchant fleet that can serve in time of need . requests for this fund are made as part of the navy's procurement appropriation . congress appropriates funds for this program in title v ( revolving and management funds ) of the defense appropriations bill . the joint improvised explosive device defeat fund ( jieddf ) also contains rdt&e monies . however , the fund does not contain an rdt&e line item as do the three programs mentioned above . the joint improvised explosive device defeat office , which now administers the fund , tracks ( but does not report ) the amount of funding allocated to rdt&e . the jieddf funding is not included in the table below .