which sources should be included ? should legislation account for other sources and technologies that are not yet developed ? how much clean electricity can be generated in the time frame specified from each qualifying energy source ? should a carbon accounting factor be assigned to each qualifying energy source ? there are at least two purposes of such a cap . one purpose is to provide flexibility to regulated entities that may have a limited amount of clean energy resources . another purpose is to limit the amount of efficiency resources that could have lower costs , in order to avoid diluting the main ces focus on developing new higher - cost forms of power supply . policy questions for energy efficiency as a qualifying ces energy source could include the following: do potential benefits of energy efficiency , such as lower power costs and reduced pollution , justify its inclusion as an eligible resource under a ces ? many energy efficiency measures are capable of rapid implementation and are available at costs well below those for supply - side resources . in this regard , efficiency may be seen to have less need for new incentives and regulatory policies , such as the ces . if energy efficiency measures were included in a ces , would the relatively low costs inhibit the development and implementation of some clean energy and other supply - side power generation options ? could a cap on the maximum contribution from efficiency measures help avoid such a concern ? some previous proposals for an res ( i.e. 2454 in the 111 th congress ) included energy efficiency as a qualified source , but with a cap that set a maximum for its contribution . a key purpose for including efficiency was to increase flexibility for those states or regions that had limited renewable energy resources . if energy efficiency measures were included in a ces , would additional federal funding and regulatory policies ( e.g . , to help realign utility incentives for profitability ) still be needed to help overcome barriers to broader use of energy efficiency measures to defer or displace power plants ? the napee study suggests that efficiency could make a major contribution , effectively providing the equivalent of up to 20,000 mw of new generating capacity over 10 to 15 years , conditioned on a major increase in efficiency program funding and alignment of the utility profitability incentive . congress has discussed a clean energy standard and its role in the larger national energy debate . at least two bills pertaining to a clean energy standard were introduced during the 112 th congress — the fulfilling u.s. energy leadership act of 2011 ( s. 1220 ) and the clean energy standard act of 2012 ( s. 2146 ) . legislative examination of a ces could raise multiple questions , including similar questions posed during the renewable fuel standard ( rfs ) debate . will a time come when some resources ( eg , wind , solar ) used to generate clean electricity cease to be considered a "free" resource ? if so , what impact might this have on using that resource to meet the ces mandate ?