the supreme court has narrowed the reach of the exclusionary rule over the years . however , the supreme court subsequently extended the good - faith exception to good - faith reliance on a clerical error within the police department — namely , a mistake in a police database file regarding the status of the suspect's arrest warrant . in herring v. united states , the court held in 2009 that "to trigger the exclusionary rule , police conduct must be sufficiently deliberate that exclusion can meaningfully deter it , and sufficiently culpable that such deterrence is worth the price paid by the justice system. supporters of the exclusionary rule criticized the decision for undermining the fourth amendment by expanding the good - faith exception's applicability . however , the court wrote that "the flagrancy of the police misconduct" has always "constituted an important step in the calculus" of the exclusionary rule , and it characterized the exclusionary rule's evolution as a series of cases excluding evidence obtained as a result of flagrant or deliberate violations of suspects' rights . united states v. davis was the first case in which the supreme court was asked to apply the herring standard and determine whether particular police conduct was "culpable. prior to the supreme court's opinion , the federal circuit courts of appeals had reached conflicting decisions about the admissibility of evidence seized in an unconstitutional search that , at the time it was conducted , complied with precedent . the supreme court held that this evidence is admissible because police do not act culpably by conducting an unconstitutional search that conformed with "binding appellate precedent. the case confirms that , under the herring test , police culpability is now the sole relevant factor in determining whether the exclusionary rule applies . congress has occasionally considered supplementing the supreme court's exclusionary rule jurisprudence with legislation codifying the exclusionary rule or the good - faith exception . over the years , some members have expressed displeasure that the exclusionary rule substantially interferes with law enforcement and the conviction of criminal defendants against whom there is probative evidence that they have committed a crime . however , congressional efforts to curtail the exclusionary rule's reach have encountered resistance over concerns that , in the name of fighting crime , these efforts will result in the violation of the rights of innocent people . in 1968 , congress codified the exclusionary rule to a limited extent with respect to information obtained illegally through interceptions of certain wire or oral communications . more recently , the 104 th congress considered codifying a good - faith exception to the exclusionary rule in the exclusionary rule reform act of 1995 . notably , congress would not be able to curtail the exclusionary rule's application in circumstances in which it is constitutionally required . however , the supreme court has consistently emphasized that the rule has no constitutional basis . it is therefore widely accepted that congress has broad authority to bar ( or require ) the exclusionary rule in federal cases , and the court's opinion in davis supports this position .