and we cannot conclude that the repeal was reasonable in the light of changed circumstances . with regard to whether a state law is "necessary," the court in u.s. trust explained that a determination should be based on two considerations . first , whether a less drastic modification of a contract could accomplish the state's purpose . and , second , whether a state could achieve its goal by adopting alternative means , without contract modification . it is not entirely clear whether the fiscal accountability act or a similar measure would satisfy all of the factors identified by the court . the fiscal accountability act does appear , however , to have been drafted with the factors in mind . section 19 ( 1 ) ( k ) of the michigan law states , in relevant part , the rejection , modification , or termination of 1 or more terms and conditions of an existing collective bargaining agreement under this subdivision is a legitimate exercise of the state's sovereign powers if the emergency manager and state treasurer determine that all of the following conditions are satisfied: ( i ) the financial emergency in the local government has created a circumstance in which it is reasonable and necessary for the state to intercede to serve a legitimate public purpose . ( ii ) any plan involving the rejection , modification , or termination of 1 or more terms and conditions of an existing collective bargaining agreement is reasonable and necessary to deal with a broad , generalized economic problem . ( iii ) any plan involving the rejection , modification , or termination of 1 or more terms and conditions of an existing collective bargaining agreement is directly related to and designed to address the financial emergency for the benefit of the public as a whole . ( iv ) any plan involving the rejection , modification , or termination of 1 or more terms and conditions of an existing collective bargaining agreement is temporary and does not target specific classes of employees . at the outset , it seems possible that a rejection , modification , or termination of at least some of the provisions of an existing collective bargaining agreement would be viewed as a substantial impairment . in baltimore teachers union v. mayor and city council of baltimore , a 1993 case involving a salary reduction plan that was implemented in response to budget shortfalls in baltimore city , the u.s. court of appeals for the fourth circuit observed , "in the employment context , there likely is no right both more central to the contract's inducement and on the existence of which the parties more especially rely , than the right to compensation at the contractually specified level. ultimately , whether the fiscal accountability act survives a possible challenge under the contract clause may not be known until an emergency manager identifies the terms and conditions to be rejected , modified , or terminated , and it becomes clear that no alternatives were available to accomplish the state's purpose . as states continue to explore legislative solutions to resolve their budget issues , the contract clause may act to forestall measures that repudiate a state's contractual obligations .