in addition , p.l . would require states to establish policies that prevent the use of tanf cash assistance in any transaction that occurs in a liquor store , a casino , or a strip club . states that fail to implement a policy could be penalized with a funding reduction of up to 5% of the state family assistance grant . amended version passed the house february 2 , 2012 . 628 ( cleaver ) . 3193 ( fincher ) . would require state tanf programs to operate random drug testing programs for tanf applicants and recipients and would require state tanf programs to deny assistance to individuals who test positive for illegal drugs or are convicted of drug - related crimes . the state family assistance grant would be reduced by 10% if a state does not implement a drug testing program . 3226 ( lee ) . would reestablish the emergency contingency fund for state tanf programs to provide funding related to increased caseload , increased expenditures for non - recurrent short - term benefits , and increased expenditures for subsidized employment . s. 83 ( vitter ) and h.r . 1769 ( boustany ) . would require states to operate drug testing programs for recipients of tanf assistance , and would require states to sanction individuals who fail drug tests . the american public human services association and the national association of state tanf administrators , temporary assistance for needy families: recommendations for reauthorization , december 2010 , http: / / www.aphsa.org / home / doc / aphsa - nastatanfrecommendations.pdf . the table shows that some of the circumstances of 2010 were very different from those of 1995 . the cash assistance rolls are significantly diminished and reach a far smaller share of poor children than in 1995 . the rate at which single mothers work is even higher in 2010 than in 1995 ( despite the lingering effects of the 2007-2009 recession ) , and the poverty rate for children living in families headed by mothers is lower in 2010 than in 1995 . however , some of the indicators of social and economic disadvantage commonly associated with welfare issues have changed little or have even worsened in an era of lower cash assistance caseloads . the poverty rate for all children declined in the late 1990s — but this improvement was ephemeral , as the child poverty rate increased in the 2000s even before the onset of the recession that began in december 2007 . the rate at which children are born to unmarried mothers climbed in the 2000s , reaching a historical high . the continued high rates of child poverty and children being born into and living in single - mother families raise policy issues . research has linked both being raised in a poor family and being raised in a single - parent family to lower chances of success later in life . that is , while many poor children and many children raised by a single parent do well , these factors increase the likelihood that a child will fail in school or suffer other negative outcomes .