the answer is no. although not at harmful levels , significant radiation from cesium - 137 was reported to be detected 400 miles offshore of japan three months after the tsunami . there is also the possibility that there could be bioaccumulation of longer - half - life radioactive elements by fish whose migratory habits subsequently may take them far from japanese waters . scientists at the woods hole oceanographic institution advised that radiation levels in seafood should continue to be monitored , but stated that radiation in the ocean very quickly becomes diluted and should not be a problem beyond the coast of japan . should people in hawaii and california be concerned ? the same is true of radiation carried by winds around the globe . radioactive contaminants from fukushima appear to have become sufficiently dispersed over time that they will not prove to be a serious health threat elsewhere , unless they bioaccumulate in migratory fish or find their way directly to another part of the world through food or other commercial products . however , there remains the slight potential for a relatively narrow corridor of highly contaminated water leading away from japan and a very patchy distribution of contaminated fish — extensive monitoring will determine the exact dispersion of these radioactive contaminants . it does not appear that nuclear contamination of seafood will be a food safety problem for consumers in the united states . among the main reasons are that damage from the disaster limited seafood production in the affected areas , radioactive material would be diluted before reaching u.s. fishing grounds , and seafood imports from japan are being examined before entry into the united states . according to the u.s. food and drug administration ( fda ) , because of damage from the earthquake and tsunami to infrastructure , few if any food products were being exported from the affected region . for example , according to the national federation of fisheries cooperative associations , the region's fishing industry stopped landing and selling fish . furthermore , a fishing ban has been enforced within a 2-kilometer radius around the damaged nuclear facility . u.s. fisheries are unlikely to have been affected because radioactive material that entered the marine environment would be greatly diluted before reaching u.s. fishing grounds . however , some have advocated vigilance , especially for seafood from areas near the damaged nuclear facility . it has been suggested that cesium - 137 could move up the food chain and become concentrated in fish muscle or that radiation hot spots could occur . another potential concern is related to accumulation of strontium - 90 in fish bone , because its chemical properties are similar to those of calcium . radioactive contaminants have been collecting in sediments in coastal areas near the damaged nuclear facility and exposing bottom - dwelling fish , shellfish , and other organisms to relatively high contaminant levels . the japanese ministry of health , labor , and welfare has reported fish samples from fukushima prefecture that are above the provisional regulation values for cesium - 134 and cesium - 137 . contaminated fish samples have included greenling , several types of flounder , common skate , rock fish , japanese seabass , and brown hakeling .