the data are weighted to reflect the population . all differences discussed in the text of this report are statistically significant at the .05 level unless otherwise specified . the comparisons in this report are based on three groups residing in the united states: ( 1 ) native - born u.s. citizens , ( 2 ) naturalized u.s. citizens , and ( 3 ) noncitizens . although one of the issues surrounding health insurance coverage for noncitizens is the number of unauthorized aliens living in the united states , it is not possible using cps data to differentiate between aliens who are in the united states legally or illegally , nor is it possible to differentiate between different categories of noncitizens ( eg , legal permanent residents , temporary workers , students , refugees , asylees ) . the cps asks whether the respondent has had various types of coverage during the previous year . thus , respondents may have more than one type of health insurance during the year . theoretically , an uninsured respondent is someone who lacked any type of health insurance during the past year and the term does not capture people who were uninsured for part of the year . however , research has shown that the cps estimates appear to reflect the number of people uninsured at a point in time ( that is , when the survey was taken ) rather than the number uninsured for the entire previous year . the types of health insurance used in this report are private insurance ( both employer sponsored and individually purchased ) , medicare , medicaid , and military or veterans coverage . if the respondent reported not having any of these types of coverage , they are considered uninsured . as shown in figure 1 , noncitizens are more than three times as likely as native - born u.s. citizens , and more than two times as likely as naturalized u.s. citizens , to be uninsured: 46% of noncitizens lacked any type of health insurance , compared with 14.1% of the native - born population and 19% of the naturalized population . similarly , noncitizens have the lowest rate of private insurance coverage ( 37.1% ) , while native - born citizens have a slightly higher rate of private health insurance than naturalized citizens ( 66.3% and 60.5% , respectively ) . the noncitizen population also has the lowest rate of medicare coverage , most likely due to the relatively young age of the population and the decreased likelihood that noncitizens would meet the eligibility requirements for medicare . naturalized citizens have the highest rate of medicare coverage , which may be attributable to the fact that the naturalized population is , on average , older than both the native - born and the noncitizen populations . noncitizens are slightly less likely to have medicaid coverage ( 15.4% ) than native - born citizens ( 15.9% ) , while naturalized citizens are the least likely to have medicaid coverage ( 12.4% ) .