both the eu and the united states heavily support their agricultural sectors . however , strong budgetary pressures coupled with a shifting policy preference towards greater market orientation have motivated both the united states and the eu to modify their farm programs since the 1980s . traditional price and income support programs have been progressively replaced by support that is decoupled from production or prices . many commodity groups and members of congress representing agricultural districts , have historically defended u.s. farm support programs as a means to ensure that the united states has continued access to the "most abundant , safest , and cheapest food supplies in the world. even the more western eu member country of italy has 1.7 million farms with an average holding of about 23 acres . this small farm size limits the benefits from the economies of scale inherent in the advanced - technology agricultural production used in the united states . the eu also has a much larger commercial animal population , nearly double that of the united states , but with smaller average animal numbers per farm with animals . in general , the small size of eu farm holdings , their substantially larger number relative to the united states , and the generally larger share of rural population in the eu ( 26.3% versus 18% ) has played a strong role in the formation of eu farm policy — it tends to have a stronger rural development flavor and allows frequent exemptions for identifiably small farming units from certain restrictions and payment limitations . because the united states and the eu figure so dominantly in the development and use of agricultural policy on the global level , information comparing the eu and u.s. farm support programs will likely continue to be of interest to congress as the united states prepares for another round of domestic farm bill negotiations and the world trade organization ( wto ) doha negotiations move forward . this report uses data from two public sources to compare agricultural support between the united states and the eu: ( 1 ) estimates of domestic support for agricultural programs based on wto notifications ; and ( 2 ) the oecd's country - level policy database . each of these data sources uses a slightly different metric to evaluate agricultural support but arrives at very similar conclusions . both the united states and the eu have relied on similar policy instruments to support their respective agricultural sectors — price and income supports , direct payments to producers , supply controls , and border measures — although their implementation and the range of affected commodities has been fairly different over the years . to fully appreciate the current status of u.s. and eu farm policy , it is useful to briefly review the origins and evolution of their respective policies . as a general rule , since the mid - 1980s total farm sector support ( measured in annual outlays ) in the united states has increased substantially while outlays in the eu have declined slightly .