factoryless manufacturing . import price indexes play a critical role in measuring value added in manufacturing . around 40% of all imports are inputs for business use , such as parts and components , rather than consumer goods . government statistics may understate the declines in input prices if manufacturers are shifting quickly from using a domestic input to a competing foreign - made input that is lower in cost . if this is occurring , it would mean that u.s. factories are using a greater quantity of the foreign input than assumed , and less of the domestically made alternative . these measurement problems may result in official data overstating the output of u.s. manufacturing workers , and hence their productivity , while understating the use of imported components in u.s. factories . this implies that value added in u.s. factories may be lower than statistics indicate . table 1 summarizes the effects of these various measurement issues on reported value added in the manufacturing sector . the net effect is ambiguous . although the statistical problems are serious , it is uncertain , on balance , whether they collectively make value added larger or smaller , relative to manufacturers' shipments , and whether they change the growth rate of value added in manufacturing . the declining share of domestic value added in particular industries is related to a broad change in businesses' strategies that emphasizes the use of global supply chains . in such arrangements , made possible by low freight transportation and communication costs , a retailer or manufacturer organizes its production on a worldwide basis rather than on a country - by - country basis . it may then obtain economies of scale in manufacturing by using a factory in one country to supply most or all of its need for a particular product worldwide , shipping intermediate inputs from place to place for additional processing in order to deliver the final product at the lowest total cost . the globalization of supply chains manifests itself in the increased use of imported inputs — so - called "intermediate inputs" — by manufacturers . this trend is strongly in evidence in the united states . in 1998 , 24% of intermediate inputs used in u.s. manufacturing were imported . according to one analysis , the figure started rising in 2003 and reached 34% in 2006 . moreover , u.s. factories' use of domestic components and other materials ( excluding energy ) is estimated to have declined at an annual rate of 3.9% between 1998 and 2006 , while their use of imported components and materials is estimated to have risen at a 3.5% rate . one consequence of increased reliance on international supply chains has been an increase in the share of manufactured goods' final value that is imported . this appears to be the case not just for the united states , but globally . according to a recent study for the world bank , "for the world as a whole , there has been a discernible drop in the value added content of exports , relative to gross exports , since 1992. .