submarines . turkey will acquire six type 214 submarines ( to replace some of its 1970s - era atilay - class type 209 submarines ) from germany's howaldtswerke - deutsche werft ( hdw , turkey's longtime submarine supplier ) and its united kingdom - based commercial partner marineforce international ( mfi ) under a $3.96 billion contract signed in july 2009 , with delivery expected between 2015 and 2020 . turkish minister of national defense vecdi gonul said in july 2008 that turkish industrial participation is expected to reach about 80% of the contract , with approximately 20 systems and subsystems produced and integrated locally . aspirations for indigenous turkish defense industrial capabilities extend to large drone aircraft ( turkey already produces small drones for deployment ) and missile defense systems , but current turkish plans indicate that in the near term , turkey seeks to acquire this equipment and possibly share in its assembly in the hopes that it may receive technology and develop a knowledge base and infrastructure that shortens the timeline for indigenous design and production . as it begins to meet its own security demands and develops higher quantities of more advanced equipment , external demand for turkish arms has led to increased exports . according to jane's world defence industry , to date , turkish industries have exported only eight platforms: among these are missiles , rocket launchers , radios , tracked and wheeled vehicles , electronic systems , pilot simulators and coastguard craft . the electronic systems and pilot simulators alone represent "big ticket" items that can generate the necessary income for turkey's indigenous industries to develop not only the production base but also the research and development ( r&d ) institutions necessary for large - scale expansion . the ssm [defense procurement undersecretariat] has highlighted the netherlands , pakistan , the united arab emirates , south korea , algeria and bahrain as recent destinations for turkish defence materiel . in addition , in june 2008 , turkey's foreign trade minister , kursad tuzmen , highlighted the asia pacific region as a potential target region for defence sales . nevertheless , according to the stockholm international peace research institute , in 2009 turkey was the world's 10 th largest arms importer and only its 26 th largest exporter . appendix a . historical overview cold war era u.s. - turkey defense cooperation began near the end of world war ii when turkey , having been neutral until february 1945 , declared war on germany and japan to become a founding member of the united nations . when it became clear after the war that stalin's soviet union had designs on territory in eastern turkey and on privileged naval access through turkey's bosporus and dardanelles straits to the mediterranean , turkey welcomed the april 1946 arrival of the u.s. battleship u.s.s . missouri in istanbul harbor . president harry truman's subsequent pledge in march 1947 of economic ( marshall plan ) and military assistance to both turkey and greece solidified turkey's role as a western ally and geographic buffer against soviet influence . after turkey's participation in united nations forces during the korean war gained it the reputation of a reliable and capable ally , turkey joined nato in 1952 .