114-113 ) on december 18 , 2015 . the total fy2016 appropriation for ssa's lae account was nearly $12.2 billion — 2.8% less than the $12.5 billion requested in the president's budget for that year ( table 5 ) . as shown in figure 3 , for each year since ssa became an independent agency , the commissioner's budget has exceeded the president's request in nominal ( unadjusted ) dollars . benefit payments account for approximately 98.4% of total projected spending . ssa estimates that the average number of federal beneficiaries of its core programs ( adjusted for double counting ) will be 68.4 million in fy2017 . as noted earlier , benefit outlays for ssa's core programs are considered mandatory spending and therefore are not controlled by annual appropriations acts . spending on benefit payments for these programs is determined by the eligibility requirements and payment levels specified in each program's authorizing statute . table 1 shows administrative outlays for each core program as a percentage of benefit payments and for social security , as a share of trust fund income . the right column of the table excludes non - ssa administrative expenses and certain other costs , except in the row labeled "total," which includes costs associated with medicare . for more information on the annual appropriations process , see crs report r42388 , the congressional appropriations process: an introduction . the regular lhhs appropriations bill was passed as part of the consolidated appropriations act , 2016 ( p.l . in all but two of these fiscal years , fy1997 and fy2009 , the final appropriation from congress , taking into account any rescissions , has been less than the commissioner's budget . only in fy1997 , fy2008 , fy2009 , and fy2014 has the final appropriation exceeded the president's request . in fy2014 , the president's request included a legislative proposal for a dedicated source of funding for program integrity activities , instead of a request for discretionary cap adjustment funding . if the funding associated with this legislative proposal is included , then the final appropriation for fy2014 is less than the president's request . figure 4 shows historical trends in appropriations for ssa's lae account using three measures: nominal dollars , price - indexed dollars , and wage - indexed dollars . the lower line labeled "nominal dollars" shows a steady increase in the appropriation for the lae account over the last 20 years , although the rate of this increase seems to have slowed since fy2010 . the middle line labeled "price indexed to 2016 dollars" shows the trend in ssa's lae appropriation adjusted for changes in prices , as measured by the consumer price index for all urban consumers ( cpi - u ) . although the price - indexed line is flatter than the nominal line , there is a noticeable rise in the appropriation for ssa's lae account during the fy2000s . between fy2010 and fy2013 , however , the value of appropriation declines in real terms , only to increase slightly through fy2016 . another method for examining historical trends in ssa's lae account is to adjust the annual appropriation for wage growth .