if it does not , our inquiry is complete . if it does , we evaluate the law under some form of means - end scrutiny . these three inquiries are explained below . on june 28 , 2010 , the supreme court issued its decision in mcdonald v. city of chicago . the petitioners , otis mcdonald and other residents of chicago and the village of oak park , illinois , asserted that certain municipal ordinances prevented them from keeping handguns in their homes for self - defense . the chicago ordinance provided: "no person ... shall ... possess ... any firearm unless such person is the holder of a valid registration certificate of such firearm. the chicago code , however , prohibited the registration of most handguns , which "effectively ban[s] handgun possession by almost all private citizens who reside in the city. similarly , oak park made it "unlawful for any person to possess ... any firearm," a term that included "pistols , revolvers , guns and small arms ... commonly known as handguns. petitioners advocated for incorporation of the second amendment against the states either under the fourteenth amendment's privileges or immunities clause or under the fourteenth amendment's due process clause . it is worth noting that the petitioners devoted much of their brief and oral argument for application of the second amendment via the privileges or immunities clause of the fourteenth amendment . the court , instead of examining " any civilized system," now asks "whether a particular guarantee is fundamental to our scheme of ordered liberty and system of justice. the second feature the court has shed was any prior "reluctance to hold that rights guaranteed by the bill of rights met the requirements for protection under the due process clause," stating that the court has incorporated almost all of its provisions , as discussed above . lastly , the court has "abandoned 'the notion that the fourteenth amendment applies to the states only a watered - down , subjective version of the individual guarantees of the bill of rights,' stating that it would be 'incongruous' to apply different standards 'depending on whether the claim was asserted in a state or federal court.' with some exceptions , the court has held that incorporated bill of rights protections "'are all to be enforced against the states under the fourteenth amendment according to the same standards that protect those personal rights against federal encroachment.' with this modern framework for analyzing if a right comes under the protection of the due process clause , the court turned to the issue of whether the second amendment was just such a right that was incorporated in the concept of due process . the court , similar to the ninth circuit , analyzed whether "the right to keep and bear arms is fundamental to our scheme of ordered liberty , ( citation omitted ) or as [it has] said in a related context , whether this right is 'deeply rooted in this nation's history and tradition' washington v. glucksberg , 521 u.s. 702 , 721 ( 1997 ) ( internal quotation marks omitted ) .