the current cr ( p.l . 1363 ) provides funding until april 15 , 2011 . the bill reflecting the last minute compromise reached on april 8 , 2011 , h.r . 1473 , the department of defense and full - year continuing appropriations act , 2011 , is expected to be considered this week . budget authority ( ba ) , which gives federal agencies the legal ability to obligate federal funds , has been compared to funds in a checking account . table 1 shows both short - term and longer - term continuing resolutions considered during the 112 th congress . congressional discussions of fy2011 measures have opened a vigorous interchange of views on the federal budget , with a strong focus on restraining federal spending . deficits , however , are computed as the difference between revenues and outlays . some contend that fy2011 funding decisions should take a first step in reshaping the size and responsibilities of the federal government . others note that the economy has not yet fully recovered from the 2009 recession , and criticize the proposed reductions for their likely impact on programs and services provided by the government , and potentially on a still fragile economy . outlays occur once the u.s. treasury department disburses funds to discharge those obligations . the last part of this report summarizes long - term trends in federal spending and presents projections of fy2011 and fy2012 federal spending in terms of outlays . congress approved a series of seven short - term continuing resolutions to fund government activities since october 1 , 2010 , when the fiscal year began . in particular , unemployment rates remain high in most parts of the country , the housing sector remains weak , and the number of banking and financial institutions on watch lists is at historically elevated levels . discretionary spending is provided and controlled through appropriations acts , which fund many of the activities commonly associated with such federal government functions as running executive branch agencies , congressional offices and agencies , and international operations of the government . essentially all spending on federal wages and salaries is discretionary . discretionary spending , in general , funds costs of administering federal programs such as medicare and social security , whose benefits are funded by mandatory spending . mandatory spending , by and large , has grown more rapidly than discretionary spending over the past several decades . figure 1 shows trends in spending , as measured by budget authority , since fy1976 . outlays occur once the u.s. treasury disburses funds to federal contractors , employees , grantees , or other payees . congressional analysts often consider spending in terms of budget authority , which congress controls , rather than outlays , which can depend on decisions made in the executive branch . cbo baseline projections presume that discretionary spending remains constant in inflation - adjusted ( real ) terms . this report compares the various funding levels that have been considered during the 112 th congress with h.r . 1473 , a compromise reached just before the expiration on april 8 of the sixth cr ( p.l .