wind patterns . amount of material released: the more material released , the more likely some of it is to travel long distances . melt vs. burn: if nuclear fuel rods ( fresh or spent ) melt and form a pool of very hot , highly radioactive liquid , that liquid might be contained by a containment structure . if it melts through that structure , it might contaminate groundwater . if the fuel rods burn , the fire would loft radioactive material into the air . the larger and hotter the fire , and the longer it burns , the more material would be injected into the air . travel time: the longer radioactive material is in the air , the more of it will decay . distance: the farther radioactive material travels , the greater the volume of air in which the material disperses , diluting it . rain and snow: precipitation washes some particles out of the air . the first four of these factors depend on circumstances ; the other three would reduce the amount of material reaching the united states under any circumstances . according to u.s. nuclear authorities , the reactor incident does not appear to pose an immediate threat to the united states . on march 13 , the nuclear regulatory commission ( nrc ) stated , "given the thousands of miles between the two countries [united states and japan] , hawaii , alaska , the u.s . territories and the u.s. west coast are not expected to experience any harmful levels of radioactivity. on march 18 , epa and the department of energy stated that a monitoring station in sacramento "today … detected minuscule quantities of iodine isotopes and other radioactive particles that pose no health concern at the detected levels," and that between march 16 and 17 , a detector in washington state detected "trace amounts of xenon - 133 , which is a radioactive noble gas produced during nuclear fission that poses no concern at the detected level. in a briefing to the nuclear regulatory commission on march 21 , bill borchardt , nrc executive director for operations , said , "natural background from things like … rocks , sun , buildings , is 100,000 times more than any level that has been detected to date . we feel confident in our conclusion that there is no reason for concern in the united states regarding radioactive releases from japan. a press report of march 22 stated that equipment in charlottesville , va , detected radiation from the reactor incident , but that "health experts said that the plume's radiation had been diluted enormously in its journey of thousands of miles and that—at least for now , with concentrations so low—its presence will have no health consequences in the united states. it is useful to put these doses in perspective . using the figure that natural sources provide 100,000 times the dose recorded in california and washington state , it is possible to calculate a rough approximation of the dose from the japanese incident , using the improbable assumption that the dose persists at the detected rate for an entire year .