appendix a . 2013 dod guidance on operations during a lapse of appropriations below are excerpts ( in italics ) from the september 25 , 2013 , guidance issued by deputy secretary of defense ashton b. carter , "guidance for continuation of operations in the absence of available appropriations. general guidance is followed by a specific list of excepted activities in an attachment . excerpts from memorandum the department will , of course , continue to prosecute the war in afghanistan , including preparation of forces for deployment into that conflict . the department must , as well , continue many other operations necessary for the safety of human life and protection of property , including operations essential for the security of our nation . these activities will be "excepted" from cessation ; all other activities would need to be shut down in an orderly and deliberate fashion , including — with few exceptions — the cessation of temporary duty travel . all military personnel will continue in a normal duty status regardless of their affiliation with excepted or non - excepted activities . military personnel will serve without pay until such time as congress makes appropriated funds available to compensate them for this period of service . civilian personnel who are engaged in excepted activities will also continue in normal duty status and also will not be paid until congress makes appropriated funds available . civilian employees not engaged in excepted activities will be furloughed , i.e. , placed in a non - work , non - pay status . the responsibility for determining which functions would be excepted from shut down resides with the military department secretaries and heads of dod components , who may delegate this authority as they deem appropriate . the attached guidance should be used to assist in making this excepted determination . the guidance does not identify every excepted activity , but rather provides overarching direction and general principles for making these determinations . it should be applied prudently in the context of a department at war , with decisions guaranteeing our continued robust support for those engaged in that war , and with assurance that the lives and property of our nation's citizens will be protected . excerpts from attachment: examples of "excepted" activities following are excerpts ( in italics ) from the 2013 dod shutdown planning guidance which , although not comprehensive , provides in more detail illustrative examples of the types of dod activities that would and would not be excepted , in case of a lapse of appropriation . the information provided in this document is not exhaustive , but rather illustrative , and is intended primarily to assist in the identification of those activities that may be continued notwithstanding the absence of available funding authority in the applicable appropriations ( excepted activities ) . activities that are determined not to be excepted , and which cannot be performed by utilizing military personnel in place of furloughed civilian personnel , will be suspended when appropriated funds expire . the secretary of defense may , at any time , determine that additional activities shall be treated as excepted . military personnel military personnel are not subject to furlough .