domestic spending ( i.e. , non - defense spending excluding international affairs ) increased after the attacks of september 11 , 2001 , after having fallen for much of the 1990s . the downward spike in fy2017 and fy2018 reflects a chimp ( change in mandatory spending program ) affecting the state children's health insurance program ( chip ) . most of that increase in domestic spending occurred in areas related to non - defense security spending , as the federal government overhauled airport security procedures , and then established the department of homeland security . since 2001 , several definitions of "security spending" have been used , most recently in the 2011 budget control act ( bca ) . figure 4 shows funding trends divided by bca security and non - security categories . discretionary spending is provided and controlled through appropriations acts . these acts fund many of the activities commonly associated with federal government functions , such as running executive branch agencies , congressional offices and agencies , and international operations of the government . thus , the figures showing trends in discretionary budget authority ( ba ) presented below do not reflect the much larger expenditures on program benefits supported by mandatory spending . for some program areas , such as surface transportation , the division of expenditures into discretionary and mandatory categories can be complex . thus , outlays follow ba with a lag . for personnel costs , lags are generally short and outlays mostly occur in the same year that ba is provided . for large and complex projects , outlays may be spread over several years . nearly all budget authority eventually results in outlays , although some major federal initiatives were later curtailed or cancelled , resulting in the rescission of ba . the legislative functions ( 801 ) subfunction includes activities of congress and congressional agencies , such as the government accountability office ( gao ) , the congressional budget office ( cbo ) , and the congressional research service ( crs ) . the subfunction also includes the capitol police and the architect of the capitol , along with various congressional commissions and boards . 111-5 ; arra ) , often known as the recovery act . arra includes support for state and local governments , as well as tax cuts and rebates among other provisions . according to initial cbo estimates , arra provisions were expected to total $787.2 billion in increased spending and reduced taxes over the fy2009-fy2019 period or just over 5% of gdp in 2008 , while a more recent cbo estimate put the total at $814 billion . the effects of recovery act spending can be seen in most of the figures shown below . since 2010 , however , total non - defense discretionary spending has declined in real ( i.e. , inflation - adjusted ) terms . non - defense discretionary spending as a share of the economy been has declining more rapidly . although economic growth has been relatively sluggish , most components of federal spending have grown even more slowly . funding trends for most budget categories since fy2010 have been less volatile than in past decades .