during the 111 th congress , p.l . in addition , congress could specify additional information that the sba , and other federal agencies , must maintain and report annually to congress concerning their mentor - protégé programs . these programs typically seek to pair new businesses and more experienced businesses in mutually beneficial relationships . protégés may receive financial , technical , or management assistance from mentors in obtaining and performing federal contracts or subcontracts , or serving as suppliers under such contracts or subcontracts , whereas mentors may receive credit toward subcontracting goals , reimbursement of certain expenses , or other incentives for assisting protégés . four federal agencies have sba - approved mentor - protégé programs: department of energy , department of homeland security ( dhs ) , national aeronautics and space administration , and u.s. small business administration ( sba ) . two federal agencies have mentor - protégé programs that do not require sba's approval because their programs are not covered by the small business act: department of defense ( dod ) and federal aviation administration . three federal agencies have mentor - protégé programs that , in 2018 , were awaiting sba's approval: department of health and human services , department of transportation , and department of the treasury . mentor - protégé programs seek to assist small businesses in various ways . for example , the 8 ( a ) mentor - protégé program assists "small businesses owned and controlled by socially and economically disadvantaged individuals" participating in the sba's minority small business and capital ownership development program ( commonly known as the 8 ( a ) program ) in obtaining and performing contracts with executive - branch agencies ; the sba's all small business mentor - protégé program is "a government - wide mentor - protégé program for all small business concerns , consistent with the sba's mentor - protégé program for participants in the sba's 8 ( a ) business development program. the dod mentor - protégé program assists various types of small businesses and other entities in performing as subcontractors or suppliers on dod contracts ; and other agency - specific mentor - protégé programs , such as that of the dhs , provide mentor firms incentives to subcontract agency prime contracts with small businesses . congressional interest in small business mentor - protégé programs has increased in recent years , in part because of reports that large businesses serving as mentors have improperly received federal contracting assistance intended for small businesses . the sba's suspension ( and later reinstatement ) of a mentor in the 8 ( a ) mentor - protégé program for possible fraud , as well as reports of other fraud in several of the sba's contracting programs , has also contributed to congressional interest . 111-240 , the small business jobs act of 2010 , authorized the sba to establish mentor - protégé programs for small businesses owned and controlled by service - disabled veterans , small businesses owned and controlled by women , and small businesses located in a hubzone "modeled" on the 8 ( a ) mentor - protégé program . 111-240 also required the government accountability office ( gao ) to assess the effectiveness of mentor - protégé programs generally .