this section examines these issues point by point . the korus fta appears likely to have only a minimal impact on whether u.s. sanctions on north korean imports are put to the test . the korus fta's preferential terms would not apply to finished goods made in the kic , and the provisions for bringing the kic into the agreement include multiple opportunities for the united states , including congress , to block such a move by a future south korean government . the agreement also contains provisions that aim to help preserve the united states' ability to maintain its restrictions on imports of north korean goods and components . as long as u.s. sanctions on north korean imports remain in place and are adequately enforced , the korus fta's rules of origin — which are used to determine the country of origin of imported products — would apply only in cases where an importer has received a license from ofac to bring in a south korean good that contains north korean components . thus , the issue of how best to handle imports from north korea appears to center on customs controls , cooperation , and enforcement . at present , because north korea exports a minimal amount of manufactured goods to the outside world , the application of u.s. restrictions against north korean imports has not been significantly challenged . however , this situation may change if at some future date north korean industry revives and its manufacturers become more integrated into the global economy . the most likely ways this integration would occur would be through increased economic ties between the north korean and chinese provinces straddling the dprk - chinese border or through a decision by the south and north korean governments to significantly expand the kaesong industrial complex . if either or both of these events occur , the possibility of circumventing u.s. import restrictions against north korea could become a bigger problem than it is today . there is no means to determine with one hundred percent certainty that there are no goods or components originating in north korea entering u.s. commerce without proper authorization . an example of the challenge faced is the automobile supply chain , in which chinese or south korean producers could source one of thousands of components from a low - wage north korean producer and then seek to evade u.s. customs authorities by not reporting the item to ofac or cbp . in the case of south korea , these imports could receive preferential treatment if the korus fta is passed and if the imports meet the agreement's rules of origin . the ability of the united states to enforce its restrictions would then depend to a large extent upon the level of u.s. - south korea customs cooperation — which arguably would be enhanced by the korus fta — and the severity of the penalties charged for non - compliance with u.s. import restrictions . their arguments tend to fall into three categories: 1 . the korus fta in the future could allow products made in the kaesong industrial complex to be covered by the agreement , thereby conferring preferential treatment to these products .