no explicit criteria or qualifications were defined . more recently , the selection process was discussed during various g - 20 summits . language was included in the 2009 pittsburgh summit communiqué , stating that "[a]s part of a comprehensive reform package , we agree that the heads and senior leadership of all international institutions should be appointed through an open , transparent and merit - based process. the issue was not addressed , however , in either of the two most recent g - 20 meeting communiqués ( toronto and seoul ) . outside of the official sector , various non - governmental organizations have also expressed concerns about the process . an april 2011 statement by european civil society organizations is indicative of their concerns and recommendations: an open process is necessary to bolster public confidence . the following steps are uncontroversial and should be the minimum that apply: •    the job description , timetable and application procedure should be publicly available , and open to any individual to apply . •    the vacancy should be widely advertised . •    search committees or other professional assistance in finding suitable candidates can help the process , but should not be a substitute for a public application procedure . a fair process would mean ending the current overt discrimination on the basis of nationality , and tackling any underlying discrimination on the basis of gender or other factors . furthermore , a 2010 report requested by mr. strauss - kahn , representing a wide - range of ngos , recommended that: the selection of the managing director and of his deputies should be based on a merit - based and transparent selection , without any restriction to the nationality of the candidates . as with the executive directors , the selection should rely on a thorough job description and a list of high professional requirements . mr. strauss - kahn resigned his post on may 18 , 2011 . earlier that day , u.s. treasury secretary timothy geithner commented that mr. strauss - kahn "is obviously not in a position to run" the organization and it is important that the board of the imf formally ratify mr. lipsky as acting managing director . according mohamed el - erian , pimco chief executive , "the imf is like an army , and the general is very important in that institution," he added , "the imf is involved right now in the debt crisis in europe . newly democratic countries like egypt are looking to it for help . and you need the imf to coordinate this global healing . it is the worst possible time to lose your general. some analysts had expressed concerns that the imf executive board did not act quickly enough , and should have terminated his employment with the imf immediately following his arrest . the managing director serves at the pleasure of the country membership and can be removed by the executive board at any time and for any reason . mr. strauss - kahn served via a contract with various benefits due him upon separation . reportedly , some imf members were reluctant to force mr. strauss - kahn out prior to more details emerging , or the conviction of mr. strauss - kahn for any crime .