sustainability . a common criticism of traditional development activities is that they never become self - sustaining and fade away when government funding ends . ppps attempt to avoid this problem by tapping into core business interests and making sustainability profitable . in the success alliance , for example , small vietnamese cocoa farmers were integrated into mars's global supply chain , having elevated their cocoa production and processing to international standards with assistance from usaid , mars , and the world cocoa foundation . in theory , market demand should sustain the partnership and the improved farmer incomes . while the sustainability argument seems logical and is supported by anecdotal evidence , there has been no comprehensive study of how ppp sustainability compares to that of non - ppp approaches . market access / networks . corporations and private entities often have networks of customers , suppliers , supporters , and employees that can broaden the reach of a development program beyond where a development agency could go . by partnering with mtv in several regional alliances , for example , usaid tapped into a vast global audience of young people for its messages against human trafficking and promoting hiv / aids prevention in the exit alliance . mtv , for its part , saw an opportunity for positive public relations and an association with usaid that could potentially enhance its reputation in developing countries . technology and intellectual property . effective use of technology , which many experts believe is crucial to economic development , can be a daunting challenge in developing countries . through partnering with cisco , microsoft , and other global technology companies , development agencies are able to overcome technical , legal , and financial barriers to accessing certain technology . the technology companies , in turn , are developing relationships and support infrastructure to position themselves to compete for the next generation of technology consumers , many of whom will live in developing countries . cutting - edge business practices . while usaid and other federal aid agencies can provide technical expertise in a wide range of development sectors , they often do not have the specialized industry knowledge that a private company has . in guatemala's inclusive market alliance for rural entrepreneurs ( imare ) , for example , walmart supplies crucial market information that augments the impact of technical assistance and access to credit provided through ngo partners by enabling better farm planning and quality control of targeted crops . more than 600 rural small - scale farmers earned higher incomes by selling to the region's largest retailer , while walmart strengthened its supply chain . in partnering with sesame street , usaid gained access to advanced pedagogy and production capacity , while sesame street was able to extend its global reach into more developing countries . reputation enhancement . positive public relations are often a significant consideration for corporate entities entering into ppps . partnering with a u.s. government entity can lend legitimacy to a private entity , and association with development activities can enhance a corporation's reputation for being socially responsible . the small export vegetable alliance in zambia , for example , was inspired in part by private sector partner agroflora's desire to project a more populist image .