dod's current unclassified guidance does not prioritize . the 2010 qdr names four "priority objectives": "prevail in today's wars ; prevent and deter conflict ; prepare to defeat adversaries and succeed in a wide range of contingencies ; and preserve and enhance the all - volunteer force. under the "defeat" objective , in turn , the qdr describes a range of future challenges , which include "defeating aq and its allies. if it is determined that obl remained an active decision - maker in the development of core aq strategy and terrorist operations , his death may have negative implications for the organization's ability to continue as a viable threat to u.s. interests . while some analysts suggest that obl may have provided some level of support to aq - affiliated organizations , most of these entities appear to be self - sufficient and it is likely regionally focused terrorism - related activities would not be affected . some fear that the death of obl could lead to a further degradation of the standing of core aq , which in turn may lead to an attempt by a leader of an affiliated aq organization to pursue a more aggressive global terrorist agenda in hopes of rising to place of prominence . while some experts argue that obl's limited ideological appeal and operational role in aq suggest that the implications of his death will also be limited , senior u.s. counterterrorism officials view the death of obl as the possible beginning of the end of aq . in a press briefing at the white house on may 2 , 2011 , an unnamed senior administration official offered the following assessment of the significance of obl's death and the prospect of continued threats to the nation: without a doubt , the united states will continue to face terrorist threats . there's also no doubt that the death of osama bin laden marks the single greatest victory in the u.s. - led campaign to disrupt , dismantle , and defeat al qaeda . it is a major and essential step in bringing about al qaeda's eventual destruction . although al qaeda may not fragment immediately , the loss of osama bin laden puts the group on a path of decline that will be difficult to reverse . as intelligence operations in the wake of the recent raid on obl's compound shed light on core aq and its affiliates' activities , policymakers may be presented with new information to help in determining how the u.s. and international counterterrorism communities might initiate changes to transnational security and foreign policy strategies . these actions coupled with the ongoing activities by individuals in the middle east pursuing changes to the policies of current regimes may offer an opportunity for a reevaluation of u.s. foreign policy in the region . some analysts argue that recent anti - authoritarian demonstrations and political change in some arab states run counter to obl's vision for the region . others suggest that the outcome of political upheaval in the region has yet to be determined and that groups and individuals supportive of obl's ideology may yet successfully exploit recent developments .