convertibility into gold was suspended . private holdings of gold were nationalized . a new parity with gold was established amounting to a devaluation of approximately 40% . this parity was only important for international transactions , however . it is not a discussion of the merits of such a system . money exists to facilitate exchange , functioning as a "medium" or middle part of a transaction . in a modern economy , every time someone purchases something , that person engages in half of an exchange: one thing of inherent value has changed hands , with the buyer getting what he or she wants , but the seller still looking to get something of value in return . money is a token given the seller signifying that he or she is still owed something of value . officially , the united states began not with a gold standard , but with a bimetallic standard in which both gold and silver were used to define the monetary unit . the first coinage act , based on the recommendations of treasury secretary alexander hamilton , defined the dollar as 371.25 grains of pure silver minted with alloy into a coin of 416 grains . gold coins were also authorized in denominations of $10 ( "eagle" ) and $2.50 ( "quarter - eagle" ) . the ratio of silver to gold in a given denomination was 15 to 1 . these coins were declared legal tender . in 1965 , the requirement to hold gold reserves against federal reserve deposits was repealed . in 1968 , the requirement to hold gold reserves against federal reserve notes was repealed . although there was no private market for gold in the united states , such markets did exist abroad . by the late 1960s , prices in these markets were tending to deviate from official currency prices . the united states and other countries tried to combat this through a series of market interventions in which sizable amounts of the official gold stock were sold . in 1968 , these "gold pool" arrangements collapsed . a new policy was adopted in which the private market price of gold would be allowed to deviate from the official settlements price . this made the international monetary arrangement a gold standard in name only . it was also necessary for the united states to avoid large official settlements in gold . through diplomatic channels it was made clear that other countries could not expect to redeem large quantities of dollars for gold . this "closing of the gold window" was not an official action , so that it did not constitute an official abandonment of gold . nor was it an absolute prohibition on gold redemption . however , what had previously been routine became a matter of negotiation . in august 1971 , the nixon administration announced that it would not freely convert dollars at their official exchange rate . the measure was intended to be temporary . the gold price of the dollar and official rate of exchange into other currencies were not changed . the intention was to put pressure on other countries to revalue their currencies ( and make other concessions ) . the country did not officially move to a "floating" rate .