offsets use . an offset is a measurable reduction , avoidance , or sequestration of ghg emissions from a source not covered by an emission reduction program . to a limited degree ( discussed below ) , covered entities may submit offsets in lieu of the emission allowances needed to satisfy compliance obligations . although rggi is one of the more aggressive state programs addressing ghg emissions , the program's first emission cap exceeded actual emissions since its inception in 2009 . as discussed below , this result was unintentional . the first cap never compelled regulated entities to make internal emission reductions or purchase emission credits ( or offsets ) . after the program review in 2012 , rggi states lowered the emissions cap by 45% . this change took effect in january 2014 . this section includes a discussion of both the initial emissions cap and the revised emissions cap . one of the more controversial and challenging questions for policymakers when designing a cap - and - trade program is how , to whom , and for what purpose to distribute the emission allowances . cost containment . in 2014 , rggi states established a "cost containment reserve" ( ccr ) , which provides additional allowances to be sold at auction if certain price thresholds are met . in general , rggi states have answered the "how" question by employing auctions to distribute the vast majority of allowances . rggi is the nation's first mandatory cap - and - trade program for ghg emissions , which went into effect january 1 , 2009 ( see text box , "what is a cap - and - trade system ? " allowance value includes revenues generated through allowance auctions or by giving the allowances away at no charge to either covered or noncovered entities . a covered entity recipient could use the allowances for compliance purposes , sell the allowances in the marketplace ( eg , to other covered entities ) , or bank the allowances for future use . to realize the value of allowances received , a noncovered entity recipient would need to sell the allowances in the marketplace , either through a broker or directly to a covered entity . rggi currently involves nine states — connecticut , delaware , maine , maryland , massachusetts , new hampshire , new york , rhode island , and vermont . the results of the rggi program may be informative to policymakers , because rggi may serve as a possible test case for a federal cap - and - trade program , providing insights into implementation complexities , the mechanics of various design elements , and lessons of potential design pitfalls . several of rggi's design elements generated considerable interest during the development and debate of federal proposals to address ghg emissions . the first section of this report provides an overview of the rggi cap - and - trade program and the participating rggi states . the subsequent sections discuss selected issues raised by rggi that may be of interest to congress . the final section provides some final observations that may be instructive to policymakers . in such a scenario , the quantity of leakage would depend on the sources of electricity generation involved in the tradeoff .