appendix a . the section of p.l . both measures were adopted . 112-166 , the presidential appointment efficiency and streamlining act of 2011 , removed the requirement for senate confirmation for appointees to 163 positions , empowering the president alone to appoint the official . originally introduced into the senate in march 2011 as s. 679 , the senate passed an amended version of the bill by a vote of 79-20 on june 29 , 2011 . the house of representatives passed the senate's version of the bill under suspension of the rules on july 31 , 2012 . president barack obama signed the bill into law on august 10 , 2012 . parts of the act took effect immediately , and other parts took effect on october 9 , 2012 , 60 days after its enactment . 116 , a resolution "to provide for expedited senate consideration of certain nominations subject to advice and consent," established a potentially faster senate confirmation process for a second group of nominees . on june 29 , 2011 , the senate agreed to an amended version of s.res . 116 , by a vote of 89-8 . the provisions of s.res . 116 are now a standing order of the senate and took effect for nominations received after august 28 , 2011 . this report provides a brief background on advice and consent issues , an overview of the appointment process in both the executive and legislative branches , and a brief discussion of recent concerns about the system . next , the report explores the events in the 112 th congress leading up to the introduction and passage of p.l . 116 , and it concludes with an analysis of the two measures . this report does not discuss the nomination and confirmation of federal judges , which are not covered by the two measures introduced . while the constitution includes the senate in the confirmation process , it does not spell out how the chamber should fulfill its stated role of providing advice and consent to a nomination . the extent of legislative and executive control of the process has in many respects remained undetermined , and there has been debate since the earliest days of the country over how the senate has chosen to exercise its responsibilities . some have asserted that the senate should have a co - equal role with the president in the process . the senate's responsibility for confirming presidential nominees , although fixed firmly in the constitution , remains unsettled in its application . the senate was not meant to be a passive participant . delegates to the philadelphia convention believed that the senate would be knowledgeable about nominees and capable of voting wisely . yet , for the most part , it has acted cautiously , uncertain of the scope of its own constitutional power . the source of this uncertainty is not the constitution . nowhere in that document , or in its history , is there an obligation on the part of the senate to approve a nomination . on the contrary , the burden should be on the president to select and submit a nominee with acceptable credentials .