senate . rept . washington: gpo , 1978 . william s. sessions to be director of the federal bureau of investigation . report to accompany the nomination of william sessions to be director of the federal bureau of investigation . 100 th cong. , 1 st sess. , september 15 , 1987 . exec . rept . washington: gpo , 1987 . a bill to extend the term of the incumbent director of the federal bureau of investigation . report to accompany s. 1103 . 112 th cong. , 1 st sess. , june 21 , 2011 . washington: gpo , 2011 . appendix a. reappointment of robert s. mueller iii the 10-year term of director robert s. mueller iii was due to expire in august or september 2011 . in early may 2011 , the white house announced that president barack obama would seek legislation to permit mueller to stay for an extra two years , citing the need for continuity in national security at the fbi while leadership transitions take place at other intelligence agencies . on may 26 , 2011 , senator patrick j. leahy , chairman of the senate committee on the judiciary , introduced s. 1103 , a bill to extend the term of the incumbent director of the fbi for an additional two years . the bill would not have required renomination or reconfirmation of the incumbent . s. 1103 was cosponsored by the ranking member of the committee , senator chuck grassley , as well as the leadership of the senate select committee on intelligence , chairman dianne feinstein and vice chairman saxby chambliss . on june 8 , 2011 , the senate committee on the judiciary held a hearing on the proposed extension of mueller's tenure . mueller was the first witness , and responded to members' questions about both the proposal to extend his term in office and substantive issues related to the policies and operations of the fbi . during the second , and final , panel of the hearing , the questions and statements of committee members , as well as the testimony of witnesses , was primarily directed toward constitutional considerations related to the bill . on june 16 , 2011 , the senate committee on the judiciary considered the bill , and adopted , by unanimous consent , a substitute amendment offered by chairman leahy that added a section on findings to the original text . the committee tabled an amendment offered by senator tom coburn that would have authorized an additional two - year term to which the current incumbent could be nominated and confirmed with the consent of the senate . the committee voted to report favorably the bill , as amended , and issued an accompanying report on june 21 , 2011 . a few days later , at the request of senator coburn , minority views on the bill were printed in the congressional record by unanimous consent . subsequent news reports indicated that the administration had agreed to the coburn approach to renominate the director for an extra two - year period .