neutrons . some radionuclides decay by emitting a neutron . neutrons are lighter than alpha particles but much heavier than beta particles . where would it go ? material remaining after cleanup , especially gamma emitters , would increase dose to people in the affected area . filtering might not remove radioactive material from drinking water . plants grown on contaminated land might take up radioactive material , and cattle eating contaminated plants might retain such material . ingesting food or water with radioactive material would increase dose . radioactive materials and sources how large a source is required for an rdd , and what materials are most suitable ? the nuclear regulatory commission ( nrc ) has established thresholds for quantities of material requiring certain protective measures: "the theft or diversion of risk - significant quantities of radioactive materials could lead to their use in a radiological dispersal device ( rdd ) or a radiological exposure device ( red ) . table a - 1 presents the risk - significant quantities of 16 materials that might be of use in an rdd . note that these quantities are very small , often a fraction of a gram . these materials and quantities are from the international atomic energy agency's code of conduct on the safety and security of radioactive sources , which that agency's board of governors approved in 2003 and which nrc helped prepare . the iaea decided that the code "should serve as guidance to states for — inter alia — the development and harmonization of policies , laws and regulations on the safety and security of radioactive sources. for each radionuclide , the code lists three categories of radiation ( expressed in curies and terabecquerels ) and the threshold radiation value for each category based on potential to cause deterministic effects . category 1 sources are those that , if not safely managed or securely protected , could cause permanent injury to someone who handled them for a few minutes , and death to someone who handled them unshielded for a few minutes to an hour . for category 2 sources , the corresponding figures are minutes to hours and hours to days . category 3 sources , if not safely managed or securely protected , could cause injury to someone handling them for some hours . the energy policy act of 2005 ( p.l . 109-58 , section 651 ( d ) ) mandates use of category 1 or 2 sources as defined by the code of conduct as the basis for protecting radiation sources . separately , the national nuclear security administration ( nnsa ) commissioned a study by sandia national laboratories to identify radionuclides suitable for use in an rdd . sandia started with all 3,715 nuclides discovered so far and eliminated all but 14 radionuclides plus nuclear reactor spent fuel . the code of conduct , while nonbinding , sets worldwide standards for protection of radioactive sources . the united states adopted its categories to make its practice consistent with the code even though the sandia study arrived at a slightly different list of radionuclides . the code urges all states to have an effective system of legislative and regulatory control of the specified radioactive sources .