the house version of h.r . 2055 funding levels in new budget authority represent a 20.5% ( $3.6 billion ) reduction from fy2011 enacted amounts . the major portion of that reduction comes from the $2.1 billion less in brac 2005 funding needed to support the first post - implementation year of that program . the president's fy2012 request is less than one - quarter of the amount needed during the last year of brac construction and movement . the president also requested no funds for the overseas contingency operations construction account . this represented $1.2 billion in the fy2011 appropriation . even though the fy2012 base budget request includes $80 million in construction for afghanistan , plus another $137 million elsewhere in central command , this marks a substantial reduction in construction activity in the area of the most intense u.s. military operations . the house passed its version of a military construction appropriations bill ( h.r . 2055 ) on june 14 , 2011 . the senate committee on appropriations reported its amendment to h.r . 2055 on june 30 , and the chamber may take up the measure in the near future . as members of congress and the defense committees consider the president's request for fy2012 , a number of questions may suggest themselves: to what extent did the delay in fy2011 appropriations disrupt executive branch planning and commitment of construction funds ? do the findings made by the gao regarding u.s. basing in asia indicate inadequate management and planning on the part of dod , or are there extenuating circumstances that inhibit dod's ability to effectively plan and execute the adjustment of its military posture there ? how , and to what extent , will limits on government debt impact both the timing and the number of military construction projects that can be undertaken ? does the prohibition on congressionally directed spending ( "earmarks" ) limit congress's ability to exercise its constitutional power to "raise and support armies" and "provide and maintain a navy," and if so , how and to what extent ? is it appropriate for dod to assist local jurisdictions in absorbing the demands on infrastructure and services created by significantly increased military community size ? if so , what legislation is required to create the necessary authority and / or additional funding ? would new authority to extend implementation of some recommendations of the 2005 brac commission reflect the complexity of the current brac round , or have the military services not adequately planned to the mandatory deadline ? federal funding for fy2011 was provided through a series of eight continuing appropriations of varying lengths . normally , a continuing appropriation permits government agencies to operate at the same rate as experienced in the most recent full - year appropriation — in this case fy2010 — for the duration of the appropriation . the first bill of the series , the continuing appropriations act , 2011 ( p.l . 111-242 ) , was enacted on september 30 , 2010 , and provided funding through december 3 , 2010 . this original act , rather than merely extending existing appropriations into the new year , adjusted the amounts available to several appropriations accounts from their prorated fy2010 levels .