appendix a . title iv - b funding appendix b . services or activities that may be supported under title iv - b appendix c. title iv - b funding by state appendix d. promoting safe and stable families program funding history and reservations appendix e. court improvement program ( cip ) : funding history and funding by grant type and state appendix f. regional partnership grants children and adults served most of the children served lived at home with their parent or other caretaker ( 71% ) and did not enter foster care during the time they were served by the regional partnerships . a sizeable share of children served ( 39% ) had a past history of child maltreatment that was not associated with their current enrollment in the regional partnership grant program . the average age of children served was 5.7 years , although close to half ( 47% ) were three years of age or younger . among children served , close to 44% were white , a little more than 21% were hispanic , more than 16% were black , 13% were alaska native or american indian , close to 5% were of two or more races , and a more than 1% were asian , native hawaiian , or other pacific islander . the majority of adults served were women ( 73% ) , the biological parent of a child served in the program ( 71% mothers ; 20% fathers ) , the child's primary caregiver ( 81% ) , and never married ( 55% ) or currently separated / divorced ( 19% ) . figure 1 . states planned use of federal title iv - b funding for fy2013 , by purposebased on estimated fy2013 title iv - b services funding of $589 million in 50 states , dc , and puerto rico source: figure prepared by the congressional research service ( crs ) based on data included in u.s. department of health and human services ( hhs ) , administration for children and families ( acf ) , administration on children , youth and families ( acyf ) , children's bureau , report to congress on state child welfare expenditures 2013.note: funding level differs from the actual federal funding provided for cws and pssf in fy2013 both because the plans were required to be submitted before final funding levels were determined and because , as described in the report , most but not all of the funding appropriated for these programs is distributed to state child welfare agencies . in fy2014 , these two programs received combined federal funding of $649 million , of which $269 million was for cws and $380 million was for the pssf program . as shown in figure 2 , nominal dollar funding for cws has been relatively flat for roughly two decades . across that same time period , the nominal dollar funding for the pssf program grew from its initial year of authorization in fy1994 through the middle 2000s , but has generally been in decline since fy2007 . the dotted trend line shown in figure 2 represents funding for the two programs combined as shown in inflation - adjusted ( constant ) dollars .