table 2 identifies stand - alone measures from the period . table 3 identifies bills considered as other than stand - alone measures and provides brief background information on the nature of each measure and by what means the measures were considered . crs report r44874 , the budget control act: frequently asked questions , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] . crs report rl31967 , the debt limit: history and recent increases , by [author name scrubbed] . crs report r43389 , the debt limit since 2011 , by [author name scrubbed] . crs report rs21519 , legislative procedures for adjusting the public debt limit: a brief overview , by [author name scrubbed . roll call votes on final enactment can be extracted through the actions tab for each measure within congress.gov back to 1993 . table 1 also contains cross - references to the notes columns in table 2 and table 3 . the notes columns in those tables provide additional details on how each measure was considered . this report provides tallies of votes on final passage for each enacted measure that adjusted or suspended the statutory debt limit from 1978 to present . note that because the process for congressional consideration of bills can be complex , attempting to interpret the intent of votes prior to the final vote on passage of a measure may yield various , and sometimes conflicting , interpretations . for the sake of clarity , this report only provides vote information on the final passage of each measure . in addition to information on debt limit legislation and votes on final passage in the house and senate , other data elements identified in the tables below include bill numbers ; roll call votes , voice votes , or passage by unanimous consent ; dates of final passage and vote tally information ; dates of enactment and public law numbers for the enacted laws ; and brief background information on whether the measures were considered as stand - alone measures ( i.e. , dealing entirely with just a change to the federal debt limit and not including provisions on other matters ) . table 1 provides information on all enacted measures to adjust or suspend the federal debt limit from 1978 to 2018 , including data on the specific changes to the federal debt limit set at the time of enactment . the bill number and public law columns of the table provide links to congress.gov bill summary and status information for each measure . since 1978 , 58 measures adjusting or suspending the statutory debt limit either as stand - alone legislation or as part of legislation dealing with other matters have been enacted into law . during the 115 th congress , on march 15 , 2017 , a previously enacted debt limit suspension period expired . on march 16 , 2017 , the treasury department reset the debt limit at $19,809 billion , and treasury secretary steven mnuchin notified congress that the treasury department would use extraordinary measures to temporarily prevent the united states from defaulting on its obligations . these measures were in use until september 8 , 2017 , when president trump signed p.l .