this section presents some of the arguments against the proposed merger without discussion . the critics take exception to at&t's characterization of t - mobile as stuck somewhere between the high - end providers ( at&t , verizon wireless , and sprint ) and the value - driven providers ( metropcs , leap ) and unable to carve out its own niche . in fact , t - mobile is a national provider that offers high - end service , as demonstrated by its television commercials comparing the speed of its network to those of at&t and verizon wireless . its high - end service at comparatively low prices constrains the ability of at&t and verizon wireless to raise prices to their relatively price inelastic customers . the proposed merger would eliminate this important option for consumers . critics also contend that the proposed merger would leave sprint as the only remaining national provider to compete with at&t and verizon wireless . but sprint would be less than half the size of either of its competitors . the old bell monopoly also included an equipment manufacturing subsidiary , but the current mobile wireless providers rely on a competitive supplier market . it is useful to note the early history of the mobile wireless industry . when the fcc first made the cellular spectrum available in 1982 , the band was divided into two blocks , licensed by cellular market area . at the time of the initial licensing , one of the two cellular blocks in each market was awarded to a local incumbent wireline carrier , while the other block was awarded using a slow process that did not award of majority of licenses until 1991 . the bell companies served 80% of the population then and thus the bell companies received half the spectrum and a multi - year head start in the cellular market for most of the country . the bell companies had little incentive to develop a new technology that could threaten their wireline telephone service . mobile wireless developed much more quickly after the fcc made additional spectrum available and companies without legacy wireline investments entered the market . the at&t submission makes no mention of the impact of the proposed merger on global competition and barely mentions the enterprise market that serves large ( often multinational or even global ) businesses . it is noteworthy that ( 1 ) the cities where at&t has faced the greatest capacity challenge , new york and san francisco , are global business centers and therefore places that have large numbers of international travelers who are likely to use global voice and data communications ; and ( 2 ) the proposed merger would give deutsche telekom an 8% share of at&t . and they will have to compete using spectrum with inferior propagation characteristics for mobile wireless transmission , for which network equipment manufacturers may have little incentive to develop network equipment . for all of these reasons , critics have voiced concern that if the proposed merger goes through , leaving two wireless behemoths , the remaining providers will be under great pressure to seek partners to provide the scale needed to have any opportunity to compete .