eds. , unlocking the power of networks: keys to high - p erformance government . at what risk ? : correcting over - reliance on contractors in contingency operations ( second interim report to congress ) . february 24 , 2011 . section ii: agencies do not treat contingency planning as a core function ; and section iii: interagency organizational structures do not support contingency operations . available at http: / / www.wartimecontracting.gov ( reference "reports" ) . davis , geoff . "interagency reform: the congressional perspective. military review . july / august 2008 , vol . 88 , pp . defense science board , office of the under secretary of defense for acquisition , technology , and logistics , department of defense . enhancing adaptability of u.s. military forces . dod: washington , dc , 2010 . george , roger and rishikof , harvey , eds . the national security enterprise : navigating the labyrinth . georgetown university press: washington , dc , 2011 . government accountability office . interagency collaboration: key issues for congressional oversight of national security strategies , organizations , workforce , and information sharing . gao - 09-904sp . september 2009 . national security: an overview of professional dev elopment activities intended to improve interagency collaboration . gao - 11-108 . november 2010 . national security: key challenges and solutions to strengthen interagency collaboration ( statement of john h. pendleton , director , defense capabilities and management , gao ) . gao - 10-822t . june 2010 . government business council . can the department of defense be more collaborativewithout jeopardizing security ? a candid survey of federal executives in the department of defense . available at http: / / www.govexec.com / gbc / dodcollaboration . kean , thomas h. and hamilton , lee h. ( co - chairs ) . bipartisan policy center . national security preparedness group . statement in u.s. senate committee on commerce . the state of aviation security , testimony at hearings , 111 th congress , 2 nd sess . january 20 , 2010 . available at http: / / bipartisanpolicy.org / library / testimony / congressman - lee - hamilton - and - governor - tom - kean . lamb , christopher j. and marks , edward . chief of mission authority as a model for national security integration . center for strategic research , institute for strategic studies , national defense university: washington , dc , 2010 . mcchrystal , stanley a . ( retired general ) . "it takes a network: the new frontline of modern warfare. foreign policy , march / april 2011 , pp.1-6 . meyer , david a . ( major , u.s. army ) . normalizing executive department boundaries: a timely first step to improving interagency coordination . available at http: / / www.dtic.mil / cgi - bin / gettrdoc ? office of the director of national intelligence [odni] . reforming intelligence: the passage of the intelligence reform and terrorism prevention act . odni: washington , dc , 2008 . project on national security reform ( pnsr ) . forging a new shield . pnsr: arlington , va , 2008 ; and toward integrating complex national missions: lessons from the national counterterrorism center's directorate of strategic operational planning .