appendix a . federal obligations for science and engineering r&d to the 100 universities and colleges receiving the largest amounts , ranked by the total amount received in fy2007 appendix b . federal obligations for science and engineering r&d to the 100 universities and colleges receiving the largest amounts , ranked by the total amount received in fy199 . how can research and teaching be made to be complementary activities ? does the role of federal r&d funding distort priorities ? as one example , a group of research scientists at howard hughes medical institute ( hhmi ) maintain that [r]esearch and teaching need not be mutually exclusive but are instead intertwined and can interact synergistically to increase the effectiveness of both . the distinction between research and teaching is somewhat artificial ; professors teach students how to learn from sources in the classroom , but also how to create new knowledge in their research laboratories . a november 2010 report that examined the changing landscape of the global research base and the geography of who published in internationally influential journals determined that [t]he us is no longer the colossus of science , dominating the research landscape in its production of scientific papers , that it was 30 years ago . it now shares this realm , on an increasingly equal basis , with the [european union nations , eu27] and asia - pacific . in terms of relative citation impact — an indicator of utility , influence , significance and similar concepts — the us still holds a commanding but eroding peak position . europe is beginning to match us performance in citation impact , and analysts are likely to be tempted to predict that , in a decade or two , asian nations will do so as well . as previously stated , u.s. colleges and universities are experiencing a decline in their financial support at the federal , state , and private sector levels . all of this is occurring in a climate when the operating costs are increasing and , in many cases , student tuition and fees are increasing . at the request of congress , the national academies , board on higher education and workforce committee , was charged with examining the state of the u.s. research institutions and reporting on how to maintain the health of these institutions . the panel examined various topics , including the commercialization of research with industry , time to degree for students in the institutions , and the employment of additional technology . congress had asked the academies to offer 10 actions that could be undertaken by institutions , state governments , and congress itself to enable colleges and universities to "compete , prosper , and achieve national goals in health , energy , the environment , and global security. an analysis of internationally co - authored journal articles shows that in 2008 , approximately 30% of u.s. articles were internationally coauthored , up from 20% in 1998 . u.s. - based researchers authored 43% of the world's total international coauthored journal articles in 2008 , a slight decline from the 44% in 1998 .