other designations . the national park service administers a number of areas in the washington , dc , region that do not easily fit into the above classifications . the park service classifies these 11 units as having "other designations" than the standard types , and they bear a variety of names . what is indicated by these different designations ? do they mean that units receive different protections with respect to development ? are certain activities permitted in one type of unit but not another ? are the units managed differently ? this report addresses questions that legislators have asked about park unit titles , when considering proposals to establish new park units , to redesignate existing units , or to change the provisions governing a unit . it also discusses potential advantages and disadvantages of systemwide recommendations to simplify park nomenclature . currently , there are no definitive criteria for naming a park unit . bills to designate new units of the national park sys tem , or to rename existing units , may specify any title , even one not previously used in the park system . the statutory authorities and management policies of the national park service ( nps ) generally apply to all units , regardless of title . also regardless of title , congress may specify exceptions to nps laws , regulations , and policies in a given unit — for example , congress may authorize hunting or mining , generally prohibited in the national park system , in a particular unit . while few statutory distinctions exist among the designations , their differences can nonetheless be meaningful . in practice , congress has grouped similar units under similar titles , and has often followed precedents regarding the activities and management arrangements authorized in particular types of units . the designations have thus developed distinctive characteristics . in addition , a park's title can influence public perceptions of the park . changes in designation may affect visitation patterns , which may have local and regional economic repercussions . finally , a few designations indicate that units , in addition to being in the national park system , are also part of other legislatively established systems that confer their own protections . the units of the national park system vary widely in their physical features and the purposes for which they were designated . these differences are reflected in the names congress has bestowed when creating units . more than 20 different designations have been used . some ( such as "national park" ) are unique to the national park service , while others ( such as "national recreation area" ) are also used by other agencies . in naming a new unit , congress may choose any existing title , or create a new designation . national parks . often referred to as the "crown jewels" of the park system , the 59 national parks contain some of the country's best - known natural attractions . they are generally large , diverse areas with outstanding natural features and ecological resources . they tend to be among the most strictly protected units in the park system , in that congress has historically been reluctant to authorize consumptive activities such as mining or hunting in the national parks .