mortgages . gmac / ally financial historically had significant mortgage operations , but ally financial exited the large portions of their residential mortgage operations with the rescap bankruptcy filing and with the divestment of other mortgage financing activities . the bankruptcy court confirmed the bankruptcy plan in december 2013 . ally's mortgage operations had $8.2 billion of assets on december 31 , 2013 , and generated $76 million of total net revenue in 2013 . depository banking . ally bank raises deposits through the internet , telephone , mobile , and mail channels . its consumer banking activities include savings and money market accounts , certificates of deposit , interest - bearing checking accounts , and individual retirement accounts . at the end of 2013 , it had $52.9 billion of deposits , including $43.2 billion of retail deposits . gmac / ally financial's past role as a mortgage servicer led to further interactions with tarp as the company participated in the tarp home affordable modification program ( hamp ) . gmac / ally financial has received approximately $96 million in servicer incentive payments for participating in hamp . the company faced criticism for documentation issues in its foreclosure proceedings and reported a $230 million charge to the company's 2011 earnings due to foreclosure - related complaints . gmac / ally financial benefited from both general and specific government assistance during the financial crisis . such assistance included ( 1 ) federal reserve lending facilities , where an institution could borrow cash from the fed in return for less liquid securities ; ( 2 ) the fdic's temporary liquidity guarantee program ( tlgp ) , which guarantees debt issued by banks ; and ( 3 ) the tarp , which primarily provided additional capital to strengthen the company's balance sheet . the tarp assistance for gmac / ally financial , like most of the tarp assistance , was initially provided through financial instruments that were expected to be repaid or repurchased by the recipients . in some cases , including gmac / ally financial , the u.s. treasury converted all or some of tarp assistance into common equity in the company . assistance converted to common equity was not subject to repayment by the company , but represented an ownership stake in the company . conversion into common equity meant that the government's ability to recoup its assistance depended on the price received when the government sold its shares . if the value of the shares when sold was less than the amount of the government's assistance , ally financial had no obligation to compensate the government for the difference . conversely , if the common equity stake were sold for more than the amount of the assistance , the government would retain any excess . in addition to the funds repaid through asset sales , the tarp assistance also produced other income , such as interest , dividends , or capital gains , which could be considered as offsetting losses on common equity sales should such losses occur . as specified by the tarp statute , proceeds from tarp assistance "shall be paid into the general fund of the treasury for reduction of the public debt.