that is just what we do not want . your invention would destroy the only hope the minority have of influencing legislation . it would deliver them over , bound hand and foot , to the majority . the present system gives them a weapon which is invaluable , and as the ruling majority always know that it may some day become a minority , they will be as much averse to any change as their opponents. in 1886 , electric and mechanical voting was proposed for the house with the introduction of two separate resolutions . representative lewis beach introduced a resolution in february directing the committee on rules to "inquire into the feasibility of a plan for registering votes. in june , representative benjamin le fevre submitted a resolution on the electrical recording of the yeas and nays . the resolutions were referred to the committee on rules . no further action was taken on either resolution . during the 63 rd congress ( 1913-1914 ) , representative allan walsh introduced h.res . 513 , providing for an electrical and mechanical system of voting for the house of representatives . a special subcommittee of the committee on accounts held hearings on an automated system where each member would have a voting box with three or four buttons attached to a desk . each voting box would have a unique key and each member would be assigned to a box that only his or her key would operate . the votes would then be transmitted electrically and recorded mechanically by a machine installed on the clerk's desk , with votes displayed on boards throughout the chamber and in the cloak rooms . following the subcommittee's hearing , no further action was taken on h.res . a similar proposal , h.res . 223 , was introduced in the 64 th congress ( 1915-1916 ) by representative william howard . hearings were held by the committee on accounts on the proposal and testimony was heard from outside experts , including representatives of the company then installing an electrical voting system in the wisconsin legislature . 223 was favorably reported by the committee on accounts , but was not acted upon by the house . during the hearings on h.res . 223 , members' statements and questions dealt with the length of time needed to vote in the house , the accuracy of such roll - call votes , and the cost of developing and implementing an electrical vote recording system . for example , during his testimony on h.res . 513 , representative walsh testified that "taking 45 minutes as the average time consumed in a roll call , the time consumed in the sixty - second congress in roll calls was 275 hours , or 55 legislative days. members of the committee on accounts , however , were concerned that shortening votes could "flood the country with legislation" as well as speed up the voting process , thus disrupting then - used delaying tactics resulting in "filibuster by means of roll calls. the hearings also addressed members' concerns that voting mistakes could be made using an electrical and mechanical system . in the hearings on h.res .