each has advantages and disadvantages . there is no single set of criteria for comparing these options . where might the funding come from ? how might the funding be delivered ? the final section of the report summarizes past and current u.s. contributions to international climate change initiatives . calls continue domestically and internationally for high - income countries to increase financial assistance to low - income countries to address climate change . many in congress and the public at large may question why the united states should help finance other countries' efforts to reduce ghg emissions or to adapt to climate variability and change . some claim that international financing would incur costs to the united states , or redirect funds that could be used for domestic purposes and send them overseas . others , however , contend that international financing may offer potential benefits to the united states in terms of environmental protection , expanded commercial markets , and national security . below is a brief outline of some of the arguments in support of and in opposition to the role of the u.s. government in foreign aid in general and international climate change assistance in particular . the financial costs of coping with climate change may reach trillions of dollars . these costs would aim to address some combination of mitigation activities ( i.e. , actions taken to eliminate or reduce the long - term risk and hazards of climate change ) and adaptation activities ( i.e. , actions taken to adjust to climate change , moderate potential damage , or cope with the consequences ) . estimates of the projected costs vary widely depending upon assumptions made about the accepted levels of pollution , the ambitiousness of the global response , its structure , timing , and implementation , the potential climate - related damages , the affected sectors , as well as the methods of sourcing and delivering the necessary funds . the stricter the emissions target , the higher the estimate . the longer the response is delayed , the more threatening the damages may be , and the greater the resources required to respond to the threats . bearing the costs of action ( or inaction ) are individuals , firms , local communities , national governments , and / or the international community . as outlined in the previous section , trillions of dollars may be advocated over the coming decades to provide scaled - up , new , additional , predictable , and adequate financing for lower - income countries to enable and support their actions on climate change . these investments would aim to upgrade and expand energy , industry , and transport infrastructure ; to manage land use , land use changes , and forestry practices ; and to support the implementation of adaptation activities for reducing climate vulnerability and building climate resilience . having estimated the potential financial costs for climate change investment , the next step in the process would be to consider the sources from which these funds may be generated .