a smarter grid is largely the result of the modernization of the grid . most sectors of business and industry have gone from the analog age of knobs and dials to the digital age of sensors and electronic displays in the recent past , and that process is now reaching into the nation's electric power infrastructure . part of the delay has been due to the long - lived nature of the capital assets which make up the industry . the power plants and other expensive components of the grid can function for many productive years if maintenance of the systems is kept up . tcipg is led by the academic sector as a public - private research partnership , supporting the development of resilient and secure smart grid systems , leveraging research previously funded by the national science foundation: tcipg's research plan is focused on securing the low - level devices , communications , and data systems that make up the power grid , to ensure trustworthy operation during normal conditions , cyber - attacks , and / or power emergencies . at the device level , new key functionality is being designed in hardware in order to detect attacks and failures and to restore proper system operation . likewise , virtual machine technology is being developed and adapted for advanced power meters in order to permit new power use scenarios while preserving privacy . at the protocol level , new techniques are being developed to detect , react to , and recover from cyber attacks that occur while preserving integrity , availability , and real - time requirements . participating in tcipg are the university of illinois at urbana - champaign , dartmouth college , cornell university , the university of california at davis , and washington state university . current tcipg projects are focused on developing "trustworthy cyber infrastructure and technologies" for active demand management and wide - area monitoring and control , response to and managing cyber events , and risk / security assessments . several bills introduced in the 112 th congress addressing the cybersecurity of the smart grid are summarized below . much of the federal efforts related to the cybersecurity of the smarter grid relate to efforts to stay ahead of cyber - threats . but such is the complexity of the cyber - threat universe ( with defined threats , perceived weaknesses , and the possibility of continual upgrades of both hardware and software systems ) that staying ahead of the threats could quickly evolve into a rapidly growing , never - ending cost center for utilities . while a key to cost control is in assessment of the likely risks , cost recovery for reliability under current federal law is based on mandatory compliance with cip cybersecurity standards for reliability purposes . cost recovery for smart grid expenditures or upgrades is voluntary under current law . such discretionary treatment may possibly result in liability claims if damages result from an attack on smart grid systems .