for example , h.r . 1938 would direct the president to expedite the consideration and approval of the keystone xl pipeline linking canadian oil sands production to refineries in the gulf of mexico . 909 would encourage petroleum and natural gas production on the outer continental shelf , would prescribe requirements for coordination with adjacent states regarding associated pipeline construction , and would allow production of petroleum and natural gas from the arctic national wildlife refuge , among other provisions . nafta states , in part , "it is desirable to strengthen the important role that trade in energy and basic petrochemical goods plays in the free trade area...." by virtue of nafta and the private sector orientation of the energy sectors in both countries , u.s. and canadian companies have become integrated in the development , production , transportation , and marketing of petroleum and natural gas . joint ventures between u.s. and canadian companies on petroleum and natural gas projects are common . these close connections , and geographic proximity , have led the u.s. and canadian energy markets to be viewed as one . although the united states and canada have a long - established trade relationship in petroleum and natural gas — both have been shipped across the border since the late 1800s — several aspects of that relationship have been undergoing a transformation in recent years . in 2010 , 30% of primary energy consumed in the united states was imported ( figure 1 ) . approximately 29% of these energy imports were canadian petroleum ( 18% ) and canadian natural gas ( 11% ) . taken together , canadian petroleum and natural gas accounted for 9% of total u.s. primary energy consumption in 2010 , the largest contribution from any one foreign supplier . the value of energy imports from canada in 2010 was $83.6 billion , accounting for about 3.5% of all u.s. imports of goods and services that year . these payments were primarily for petroleum and natural gas ( figure 2 ) . in addition to these imports , the united states exported $13.5 billion worth of energy commodities to canada , including $5.3 billion of refined petroleum products . the north america free trade agreement's ( nafta's ) extensive energy provisions have facilitated energy trade between the united states and canada , underscoring the importance of this trade for both countries . these changes include the rapid growth in petroleum supplies from canadian oil sands , the siting of major cross - border petroleum pipelines , renewed attempts to commercialize arctic natural gas , a sharp rise in natural gas production from u.s. shales , and the development of new liquefied natural gas ( lng ) facilities . in each of these areas new technology and infrastructure investments may have a significant effect on the balance of energy supply , demand , and trade between the united states and canada . in some cases , they may also create new competition between the two countries in developing specific mineral resources and infrastructure projects . the united states and canada , while independent countries , effectively comprise a single integrated market for petroleum and natural gas .