, insourced ) . it will be updated as developments occur . since january 1955 , the federal government has consistently had policies promoting the use of the private sector to produce commercial products and perform commercial services , although the wording of such policies and , particularly , the degree to which they have been implemented by the executive branch have varied over time . the george w. bush administration , for example , promoted this policy vigorously under the name of "competitive sourcing" ( later "commercial services management" ) , which was a key component of the president's management agenda . its doing so prompted concern among some commentators , who asserted that competitive sourcing represented a concerted effort to shift work to the private sector and resulted in contractors performing functions that should have been performed by government employees . responding , in part , to such concerns , the 109 th congress enacted legislation directing the secretary of defense to "prescribe guidelines and procedures for ensuring that consideration is given to using federal government employees for work that is currently performed or would otherwise be performed under department of defense [dod] contracts. these guidelines and procedures are to ensure that "special consideration" is given to using government personnel to perform functions that had been performed by government employees at any time on or after october 1 , 1980 ; are closely associated with the performance of inherently governmental functions ; are performed under contracts that were not competitively awarded ; or have been performed poorly by a contractor due to excessive costs or inferior quality . subsequent congresses expanded upon these requirements . first , the 110 th congress required that dod guidelines and procedures also give consideration to using government employees to perform new functions , as well as those that had been contracted out . then , the 111 th congress imposed similar requirements upon civilian agencies . when president obama took office , these and related legislative actions were supplemented by a number of executive branch initiatives that also promoted insourcing of at least certain functions . president obama himself paved the way for such initiatives with a march 4 , 2009 , memorandum on government contracting , which suggested that "contractors may be performing inherently governmental functions. although explicitly focused on impermissible and inappropriate outsourcing of inherently governmental functions , this memorandum implied that at least certain functions that have been outsourced should be returned to government performance ( i.e. dod and the office of management and budget ( omb ) both subsequently issued additional guidance regarding insourcing . for example , in a may 28 , 2009 , memorandum , the deputy secretary for defense called for the development of insourcing plans and stated that insourcing should be part of a "total force approach to workforce management and strategic human capital planning. omb took a similar approach in its july 29 , 2009 , memorandum on "managing the multi - sector workforce," directing agencies to conduct pilot human capital analyses of programs where the agency has concerns about reliance on contractors .