this report focuses only on federal outlays . a number of programs ( medicaid , snap , housing assistance , and family support ) are actually administered at the state or local level . states may supplement ssi with their own funds . in fy2013 , ssi outlays of $57 billion accounted for 1.6% of all federal outlays and 0.3% of gdp . family support , as categorized for this report , includes outlays for the temporary assistance for needy families ( tanf ) block grant , the child support enforcement ( cse ) program , and federal grants to help support state child care subsidy programs . in fy2013 , family support outlays of $26 billion accounted for 0.8% of all federal outlays and 0.2% of gdp . states also contribute financially to medicaid , snap ( administrative and employment and training costs ) , and family support . further , the bulk of financing for elementary and secondary education represents state and local dollars . additionally , this report focuses on programs classified as "major" by their current spending level . this focus might leave out some programs that historically comprised a greater share of aid to low - income persons . for example , employment and training programs had much higher spending levels in the 1970s than they do today . excluding such programs has the effect of somewhat depressing historical spending levels ( in the late 1970s ) and overstating growth since then . it also leaves out the part of the story regarding low - income assistance: training and employment , particularly public service employment in the late 1970s , were once a greater part of low - income aid . the period since the 1960s saw large changes in programs that assist low - income families . first , there were large expansions in noncash medical , food , and housing assistance . the great society era also produced expanded educational aid for elementary and secondary education for school districts with large concentrations of low - income children , and the early 1970s saw the establishment of grants to help students from low - income families attend college . second , there was the increasing dominance of medical assistance in spending for low - income families . by fy2013 , medicaid and the state children's health insurance program ( chip ) accounted for almost half of all spending on major low - income assistance programs . third , low - income aid became increasingly federalized . in the 1970s , the federal government assumed the costs of providing a cash income floor for the aged , blind , and disabled ; by mid - decade , the expanded food stamp program provided 100% federally funded benefits nationwide using uniform benefit and eligibility rules ; and housing aid shifted to 100% federally financed vouchers . in the last two decades ( the 1990s and the 2000s ) , the major expansion of aid was done through refundable tax credits for families with children , 100% federally financed and administered through the tax code . the exception to the rule of increasing federalization — and it is a major exception — is that the costs of medicaid and chip are shared with the states .