appendix a . select legislation related to mongolia appendix b . results of mongolian elections 1992-presen . japan is the only other asian member . in november 2008 , mongolia and russia held their first joint military exercises in mongolia since the departure of the last russian troops from mongolian soil in 1992 . mongolia says it considers the united states to be the most important of mongolia's "third neighbors," countries that do not share borders with mongolia , but that mongolia looks to for support of its independence and sovereignty and for balance against the influence of china and russia . the united states established diplomatic relations with mongolia in january 1987 , after the rise of mikhail gorbachev in the soviet union produced a cautious warming in soviet - united states relations . in that context , moscow , which had previously objected to diplomatic relations between mongolia and the united states , softened its position . the united states embassy in mongolia opened in september , 1988 . for its part , china has lingering concerns about the potential for a "pan - mongol" movement , linking mongolians on both sides of the chinese - mongolian border , to undermine stability in inner mongolia . beijing is also deeply uncomfortable with mongolia's close ties to tibet's exiled spiritual leader , the dalai lama , whom china blames for resistance to chinese control in the tibet autonomous region and other tibetan areas of china . mongolia and tibet have a long shared history . in 1578 , a mongolian ruler , altan khan , originated the title of the dalai lama , the title held by the spiritual leader of tibet . altan khan conferred the title — "dalai" means "oceanic" in mongolian — on a tibetan buddhist leader who was the third incarnation of his gelugpa sect's reincarnation line . the man became the 3 rd dalai lama and his two predecessors retroactively became the 1 st and 2 nd dalai lamas . after the 3 rd dalai lama's death , a great - grandson of altan khan was identified as his reincarnation , becoming the 4 th dalai lama and the only mongolian dalai lama in the history of the institution . for centuries , tibetan buddhism , and specifically the dalai lama's gelugpa order of tibetan buddhism , was the predominant religion in mongolia . close religious ties were a backdrop to mongolia and tibet's decision in 1913 to sign a treaty declaring themselves free from manchu chinese rule and recognizing each other as independent states . despite decades of religious suppression during the soviet era , tibetan buddhism has revived in mongolia in the democratic era . according to the pew forum on religion and public life , 55.1% of mongolia's population is buddhist , making mongolia one of seven nations in the world with buddhist majorities . mongolian monks train in the monasteries of the exile tibetan movement in india , and the current incarnation of the dalai lama , the 14 th , has made six ostensibly private visits to mongolia since the 1990 democratic revolution , in 1991 , 1994 , 1995 , 2002 , and 2006 , and 2011 , despite objections from china .