instead . users of this service must be given access to all information broadly available on the network within the clearance levels of the individual user , and consistent with applicable privacy and civil liberties guidelines . as the bush administration's 2007 national strategy for information sharing stated: information acquired for one purpose , or under one set of authorities , might provide unique insights when combined , in accordance with applicable law , with seemingly unrelated information from other sources , and therefore we must foster a culture of awareness in which people at all levels of government remain cognizant of the functions and needs of others and use knowledge and information from all sources to support counterterrorism efforts . a particular complication of using information sharing to support counterterrorism efforts is the difficulty in maintaining separate procedures for handling information regarding u.s. persons . many types of information including phone or email traffic may involve u.s. persons even if the particular target is a foreign national . congress and the executive branch continue to address these and related issues in regard to provisions of the foreign intelligence surveillance act ( fisa ) and related legislation . , and profile matching ( "is this a typical charge for this individual ? " counterterrorism requires wide varieties of disparate types of information , e.g . visa applications , flight manifests , ties to hostile organizations , conversations with known terrorists , efforts to obtain restricted materials , etc . in counterterrorism and other intelligence missions the intelligence analyst may be involved in piecing together stray bits of information . this greatly complicates establishing need - to - know standards . the wmd commission argued: if rigidly applied , the 'need - to - know rule is incompatible with a networked environment . in a networked environment , providers of information cannot know for sure when a user 'needs' a particular piece of information . information sharing has proven to be essential for the counterterrorism mission and it is likely to be vital in other areas such as cybersecurity and in counterintelligence efforts aimed at preventing foreign exploitation of sensitive u.s. defense technologies . other missions , such as gathering intelligence on the military plans and capabilities of foreign countries , may require less information from law enforcement agencies . a major result of the 9 / 11 investigations was the usa patriot act ( p.l . 107-56 ) and other legislation that removed most of the "wall. subsequently , the justice department modified the federal rules of criminal procedure to permit release of information relating to counterintelligence or foreign intelligence from grand jury investigations to other government agencies with strict protections against misuse . it was recognized , however , that removing restrictions on information sharing was by itself inadequate ; there was a need to establish an organizational structure to ensure that information sharing was not just legally possibly but institutionalized in routine agency practice . the intelligence reform and terrorism prevention act of 2004 ( p.l . 108-458 ) established the position of the dni with statutory authorities to foster information sharing .