appendix a . structure of idea part a — general provisions part a includes congressional findings pertinent to the act , the purposes of the act , and definitions . the definitions included in part a are of critical importance in interpreting the requirements of the act . these definitions include , among others , definitions of child with a disability , specific learning disability , free appropriate public education , core academic subjects , highly qualified , individualized education program , local educational agency , related services , special education , supplementary aids and services , transition services , and excess costs . these terms have been defined throughout the body of this report . part b — assistance for education of all children with disabilities part b provides federal funding for the education of children with disabilities and requires , as a condition for the receipt of such funds , the provision of a free appropriate public education ( fape ) to children with disabilities between the ages of 3 and 21 . school districts must identify , locate , and evaluate all children with disabilities , regardless of the severity of their disability , to determine which children are eligible for special education and related services . each child receiving services has an individualized education program ( iep ) , created by an iep team , delineating the specific special education and related services to be provided to meet his or her needs . the statute also contains procedural safeguards , which are provisions to protect the rights of parents and children with disabilities to ensure the provision of fape . section 619 of idea part b authorizes grants to states for preschool programs serving children with disabilities ages three to five . since part b grants to states are used to serve children with disabilities as young as three years of age ( as well as school - age children ) , section 619 is not so much a separate program as it is supplementary funding for services to this age group . in general , the provisions , requirements , and guarantees under the grants to states program that apply to school - age children with disabilities also apply to children in this age group . as a result , section 619 is a relatively brief section of the law and deals mostly with the state and substate funding formulas for the grants and state - level activities . part c — infants and toddlers with disabilities the general purpose of part c is to aid each state in creating and maintaining "a statewide , comprehensive , coordinated , multidisciplinary , interagency system that provides early intervention services for infants and toddlers with disabilities and their families. services focus on children from birth through age two who are experiencing or have a high probability of experiencing "developmental delay" ( as defined by the state ) with respect to physical , mental , or other capacities , and on their families . services are detailed for each child and his or her family in an individualized family service plan ( ifsp ) .