appendix a . sample regional value content calculatio . of these , 7,450 were vehicles imported from the united states . what differs are the methodologies used to calculate rvc . the proposed korus fta does not require that 100% of an automobile or auto component be sourced from parts produced in the united states or south korea in order to receive preferential tariff treatment . a certain percentage of the product's value , as discussed above , must originate in either the united states or south korea . enforcement of the automotive rules of origin therefore depends upon the ability of u.s. and south korean officials to identify and determine how much of an automotive product's value was produced in the two countries . a number of south korean manufacturers use inputs produced at the kaesong industrial complex ( kic ) , an industrial park located in north korea just across the demilitarized zone from south korea . at present , u.s. law prohibits any "direct or indirect" imports from north korea to the united states without approval of the office of foreign assets control ( ofac ) of the department of the treasury . one enforcement issue is whether the korus fta could encourage manufacturers in south korea to incorporate goods produced in the kic into products exported to the united states , effectively circumventing the u.s. restrictions on goods from north korea and also enabling north korea to obtain duty - free access to the u.s. market , to which it is not entitled under the agreement . this issue is important with respect to automotive imports , as the kic's low labor costs may make it an attractive future location to make labor - intensive products that could be used in more complex products assembled in south korea . annex 22-b of the proposed korus fta , titled "committee on outward processing zones ( opz ) on the korean peninsula," establishes a process under which the united states and south korea might ultimately decide that certain goods produced on the korean peninsula should be deemed to be "originating goods" and thus be accorded the preferential tariff treatment and other benefits extended to such goods under the korus fta . the committee on opz on the korean peninsula ( shorthand for kaesong and any other similar zones that might be created in the future within north korea ) would be established by the united states and south korea . it would initially meet on the first anniversary of the entry into force of the korus fta , and at least once annually thereafter , or at any other time mutually agreed upon by the committee . the committee's purpose is to consider whether kic products should receive duty - free treatment . its consideration would be based on various criteria , such as environmental standards , labor standards , or progress on denuclearization of the korean peninsula . although current u.s. regulations effectively prohibit any north korean goods , including auto parts , from being incorporated into south korean products that are exported to the united states , if ofac were to approve a license application , then the korus fta rules of origin for automobiles would apply .