appendix a . aid to africa: selected charts appendix a . appendix b. ma . a project proposal has not yet been fully developed . the malawi compact was signed on april 7 , 2011 . valued at $351 million , it will focus entirely on the electricity sector . ( these initiatives and other bilateral and regional assistance program areas are discussed below. ) the wide range of u.s. policy objectives with regard to africa reflects the continent's size and diversity . it also reflects a central tension of foreign aid policy: aid aims to enable other countries to achieve a certain level of prosperity and governance capacity for their own sake , but it is also a tool for the united states to advance its national and strategic interests . bilateral aid packages thus ostensibly advance u.s. interests , while seeking to meet recipient countries' assessed needs and perceived ability to benefit from u.s. programs . there is additional tension between aid as a tool to achieve specific development outcomes ( such as increasing economic growth , extending life expectancy , improving government service delivery , or contributing to the settlement of conflicts ) and its potential usefulness in obtaining diplomatic leverage . most projects have emphasized infrastructure , especially roads and irrigation , but many also include a component aimed at land titling , financial sector reform , health , water , education , tourism , or artisan crafts . of the 23 compacts signed to date , 12 have been with african countries . of the roughly $8.3 billion in compact funding provided , about $4.8 billion ( 58% ) is committed to african countries . the mcc also has supported two - year threshold programs designed to assist promising candidate countries in addressing shortcomings in one or more of their qualifying performance indicators . nearly all of these threshold programs focus on corruption concerns , a performance measure that must be passed in order to achieve compact - eligible status . of the 21 countries that have received threshold funding to date , 10 are in africa . of the $495 million in threshold program funding , africa represents $161 million ( 33% ) . in fy2011 , the mcc is funding a first compact for malawi and plans to fund a first compact for zambia and a second compact for cape verde . the envisaged $350 million zambia compact is expected to focus on tourism and clean water supply . the cape verde compact is expected to address problems in water sanitation and property rights . the administration's fy2012 request would cover funding for a second compact with ghana . the mcc maintains two types of programs — compacts and threshold agreements . compacts are large - scale grants , most lasting five years , that contain two or three project elements focusing on different sectors . given the inability of many african countries to meet basic development and governance criteria — as a region , africa is not on track to meet the u.n. millennium development goals — policy makers often debate whether poor performance on the part of recipient governments justifies terminating or continuing aid .