a summary of these issues follows . a commonly held view among economists is that a "good" tax ( or more precisely , an efficient tax ) minimizes distortions in consumer behavior . broadly speaking , economists maintain that individuals should make the same choices before and after a tax is imposed . the greater the distortions in behavior caused by a tax , the greater the economic welfare loss . a sales tax levied on all consumer expenditures equally would satisfy this definition of efficiency . as noted earlier , however , under the current state sales tax system , all consumption expenditures are not treated equally . ( 2 ) what will be the impact of changes in the treatment of internet transactions on states that are more reliant on the sales tax ? ( 3 ) what will the potential revenue loss be , absent changes in the treatment of internet transactions ? an alternative theory concerning economic efficiency in sales taxation is referred to as "optimal commodity taxation. under an optimal commodity tax , the tax rate is based on ( or determined by ) what is termed the price elasticity of demand for the product ( sometimes called the "ramsey rule" ) . products that are price inelastic , meaning quantity demanded is unresponsive to changes in price , should be levied a higher rate of tax . in contrast , products that are price elastic should have a lower rate of tax . if products purchased over the internet are relatively more price elastic , then the lower tax rate created by effectively tax - free internet transactions may improve economic efficiency as behavioral changes are reduced . however , the price elasticity of products available over the internet is difficult to measure , and the efficiency gain , if any , is suspected to be small . an additional economic inefficiency arises if vendors change location to avoid collecting sales taxes . the location change would likely result in higher transportation costs . in the long run , it is conceivable that the higher transportation costs would erode the advantage of evading the sales tax . the growth of tax - free internet transactions , both business - to - business and business - to - consumer , will likely amplify the efficiency losses from altered consumer behavior . for example , consider a virginia consumer who wants to buy a set of woodworking chisels . the local virginia hardware store sells the set for $50 ( including profit ) . so , before taxes , the local retailer could offer the chisels at a lower price . the marginal customer , who is indifferent between the two retailers before taxes ( even though the internet is more expensive , it is more convenient ) , is therefore just as likely to buy from the internet retailer as from the local retailer . virginia imposes a state and local sales tax of 5.0% , thus yielding a final sales price to the consumer of $52.50 .