111-148 as modified by p.l . 111-152 ) , the arra moe provisions were extended and expanded . aca's moe provisions were designed to ensure that individuals eligible for medicaid or the state children's health insurance program ( chip ) did not lose coverage in the period between the date of enactment of aca ( march 23 , 2010 ) and the implementation of the state health insurance exchanges ( expected in 2014 ) . generally , beginning in 2014 , medicaid - eligible adults who were no longer protected by moe would presumably have access to subsidized coverage through state exchanges . under the aca moe , with certain exceptions , states are required to maintain their medicaid and chip programs until 2014 with the same eligibility standards , methodologies , or procedures in place as of march 23 , 2010 . for medicaid and chip - eligible children up to age 19 , the moe requirement extends through september 30 , 2019 . failure to comply with these requirements would result in the loss all federal medicaid matching funds . because states are prohibited from curbing the cost of medicaid through restricting eligibility standards due to the moe requirements included in arra and aca , over the past few years , states have focused cost containment strategies on reducing provider rates , making changes to their benefit packages , or implementing limitations on the use of benefits . however , with the june 30 , 2011 , phase - out of the enhanced federal medicaid funding under arra , states have been seeking congressional relief from the moe requirements . states want greater flexibility to restrain their medicaid expenditures through eligibility restrictions . this report summarizes the moe requirements enacted under arra and aca and what these requirements have meant for states in terms of their actions to restrict medicaid and / or state children's health insurance program ( chip ) eligibility . it also summarizes recent legislative activity to repeal the moe requirements . medicaid is a means - tested individual entitlement program that finances the delivery of primary and acute medical services as well as long - term care to more than 68 million people ( fy2010 ) who meet both income and categorical eligibility criteria . while medicaid is considered a mandatory program in federal budget terms , states choose whether to participate , and all 50 states , the district of columbia , and the territories do . the federal and state governments share the cost of medicaid . states are reimbursed by the federal government for a portion ( the "federal share" ) of a state's medicaid program costs . in fy2010 , medicaid spending totaled approximately $406 billion , with a federal share of $274 billion and a state share of $132 billion . as a condition of receipt of any federal financial participation ( ffp ) , states must meet their state share requirements , have a plan for medical assistance approved by the secretary of health and human services ( hhs ) , and comply with medicaid program rules . chip was established by the balanced budget act of 1997 ( p.l .