how other advanced economies address their debt levels has implications for the u.s. economy . increasing participation could help further increase transparency about public debt levels in major economies . higher bond spreads indicate higher levels of risk . u.s. bond spreads have remained substantially lower than greek , irish , and portuguese bond spreads throughout the eurozone crisis . u.s. bond spreads have been much closer in value to uk bond spreads , even during the financial crisis that originated in the u.s. housing market . additionally , one market research firm ( s&p capital iq ) estimates the likelihood of default over the next five years for a number of governments , and publishes the top 10 most and least risky sovereigns on a quarterly basis . for the third quarter of 2013 , it estimated the likelihood of the united states defaulting on its debt over the next five years to be 3.07% , and ranks the united states as the ninth least - likely country to default . markets may perceive the united states favorably not because they believe the deficits are currently at sustainable levels but because they believe that the government will implement policies that reduce the deficit . however , it is important to note that market perceptions can change quickly , and it can be difficult to predict when markets can lose confidence . most advanced economies are addressing high debt levels through fiscal austerity . they are concerned about loss of investor confidence and the loss of the united states' ability to borrow at reasonable interest rates . like these eurozone countries , it is argued , the united states has been reliant on foreign investors to fund a large budget deficit , resulting in rising debt levels and increasing vulnerability to a sudden reversal in investor confidence . other economists argue that the u.s. debt position is much stronger than that of the eurozone economies in crisis . unlike individual eurozone countries , the united states has a floating exchange rate and its currency is an international reserve currency , which can alleviate many of the pressures associated with rising debt levels . additionally , they argue that the stronger levels of economic growth and the lower borrowing costs of the united states put u.s. debt levels on a more sustainable path over time . the united states also has a strong historical record of debt repayment that helps bolster its reputation in capital markets . greece , by contrast , has been in a state of default about 50% of the time since independence in the 1830s . bond market data indicate that investors do not view the united states in a similar light to greece , ireland , or portugal . figure 5 compares the spreads on greek , irish , portuguese , u.s. , and uk 10-year bonds ( over 10-year german bonds ) since 2008 . if large austerity packages in advanced economies slow growth in those countries , demand for u.s. exports could fall . because advanced economies are major trading partners of the united states , this could impact u.s. exports .