110-360 extended the same authorized amount through fy2014 . the justice for all reauthorization act of 2016 ( p.l . 113-182 ) extended the $30 million per fiscal year authorization until fy2019 . the territories are to receive 0.125% of the total appropriation . agencies receiving a grant under the program are required to certify that dna analyses are conducted in laboratories that satisfy the fbi's qas and are operated either by a state or local government or by a private laboratory under contract with the state or local government . grants for conducting analyses of dna samples collected under applicable legal authority for inclusion in the ndis , conducting analyses of forensic casework for inclusion in the ndis , and ensuring that analyses of forensic dna samples are carried out in a timely manner can be made in the form of a contract or voucher for laboratory services that can be redeemed by nonprofit or for - profit laboratories that satisfy the qas and have been approved by the attorney general . state and local governments receiving funding under the program are required to submit a report to doj with a summary of the activities carried out under the grant and an assessment of whether such activities are meeting the needs identified in the grant application , as well as other information the attorney general may require . doj may award not more than 1% of grant funding each fiscal year to states , units of local government , and nonprofit professional organizations of persons actively involved in forensic science and nationally recognized within the forensic science community to help offset the cost of accrediting and auditing laboratories . the safer act of 2013 established a series of conditions for states or units of local government receiving a grant under the debbie smith program for the purposes of conducting an audit of sexual assault evidence . the act , among other things , requires states and local governments receiving grants for this purpose to ( 1 ) submit a plan for performing an audit of samples , ( 2 ) provide an estimate of the number of samples , ( 3 ) complete the audit within one year of receiving the grant , and ( 4 ) submit a report to doj every 60 days for at least one year after the audit is completed that provides data on the number of samples in the state's or unit of local government's possession along with data on new sexual assault evidence the state or local government receives and how those samples are being processed . the safer act of 2013 also requires the fbi , in consultation with federal , state , and local law enforcement agencies , to develop protocols and practices for the accurate , timely , and effective collection and processing of dna evidence , including protocols and practices specific to sexual assault cases .