appendix a . magnitude , intensity , and seismic spectrum earthquake magnitude is a measure of the strength of the earthquake as determined from seismographic observations . magnitude is essentially an objective , quantitative measure of an earthquake's size expressed in various ways based on seismographic records ( eg , richter local magnitude , surface wave magnitude , body wave magnitude , and moment magnitude ) . currently , the most commonly used magnitude measurement is moment magnitude ( m ) , which accounts for the strength of the rock that ruptured , the area of the fault that ruptured , and the average amount of slip . moment is a physical quantity proportional to the slip on the fault times the area of the fault surface that slips . it relates to the total energy released in the earthquake . the moment can be estimated from seismograms ( and from geodetic measurements ) . the moment magnitude provides an estimate of earthquake size that is valid over the complete range of magnitudes , a characteristic that was lacking in other magnitude scales , such as the richter scale . because of the logarithmic basis of the moment magnitude scale , each whole number increase in magnitude represents a tenfold increase in measured amplitude ; as an estimate of energy , each whole number step in the magnitude scale corresponds to the release of about 31 times more energy than the amount associated with the preceding whole number value . in 1935 , charles f. richter of the california institute of technology developed the richter magnitude scale based on the behavior of a specific seismograph manufactured at that time . the instruments are no longer in use and therefore the richter magnitude scale is no longer used in the technical community . however , the term richter scale is so common in use that scientists generally just answer questions about "richter" magnitude by substituting moment magnitude without correcting the misunderstanding . the intensity of an earthquake is a qualitative assessment of effects of the earthquake at a particular location . the assigned intensity factors include observed effects on humans , on human - built structures , and on the earth's surface at a particular location . the most commonly used scale in the united states is the modified mercalli intensity ( mmi ) scale , which has values ranging from i to xii in the order of severity . mmi of i indicates an earthquake that was not felt except by a very few , whereas mmi of xii indicates damage to all works of construction , either partially or completely . while an earthquake has only one magnitude , intensity depends on the effects at each particular location . greater magnitude earthquakes are generally associated with greater lengths of fault ruptures . a fault break of 100 miles might be associated with an m8 earthquake , while a break of several miles might generate an m6 earthquake . the length of the fault break , however , is not directly proportional to the energy released . the induced amplitude of acceleration ( g ) does increase with increasing magnitude ( m ) .