in passing p.l . 106-446 , congress included language that limited liability of claims arising out of such a transfer including , injury , property damage , additional training , etc . there are public concerns for the welfare of these dogs . there are also concerns for any family member of deceased or seriously wounded members of the armed forces who care for these dogs , but who were not responsible for their original training and handling . crs point of contact: [author name scrubbed] , x[phone number scrubbed] . background: the survivor benefit plan ( sbp ) provides an annuity to an eligible spouse of a deceased military member / retiree . dependency and indemnity compensation provides compensation to a surviving spouse of a member / retiree who suffered a disability that is service connected . a surviving spouse who is eligible for both will have his or her sbp reduced or offset on a dollar - for - dollar basis by dependency and indemnity compensation ( dic ) . for certain beneficiaries affected by the offset , section 644 of the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2008 , created a new special survivor indemnity allowance ( ssia ) to be paid to survivors of covered service members . this monthly allowance , effective october 1 , 2008 , was $50 , and is scheduled to increase annually by $10 through fy2013 . the benefit was scheduled to end in 2016 . however , during the 111 th congress , ssia was made more generous in that for the years 2014 through 2017 , the amount would increase from $150 , to $200 , $275 , and finally , $310 , after which the benefit will terminate on october 1 , 2017 ( see the crs report below ) . the amount received under ssia may not be greater than the amount of the sbp - dic offset . ( ssia was extended to survivors of active duty members later in october , 2008. ) critics have noted that with the earlier repeal of the social security offset , survivors could be receiving three government subsidized benefits based on the same period of service ; a form of "triple dipping. discussion: efforts in previous years to end the sbp - dic offset have not been successful . in the current budget situation , ending the offset appears unlikely . advocates for these survivors view ssia as a better option to provide these beneficiaries more money . critics note that providing more money than was contracted for under the original sbp was unjustified , particularly under these budgetary conditions . the senate approach was to eliminate the offset entirely . reference ( s ) : crs report rl31664 , the military survivor benefit plan: a description of its provisions , by [author name scrubbed] . crs point of contact: [author name scrubbed] , x[phone number scrubbed] . background : tricare is a health care program serving uniformed service members , retirees , their dependents and survivors . section 701 of h.r . 1540 would limit future increases in tricare prime enrollment fees for military retirees and their dependents to the annual cost - of - living adjustment ( cola ) for military retirement annuities beginning in fiscal year 2013 .