, discretionary funding or mandatory funding ) required . 111-11 ) , congress redirected a portion of reclamation fund receipts for indian water rights settlement projects . some , including water users and others benefitting from reclamation projects , note that the reclamation fund was intended to benefit water resource projects in western states , and spending its balance on the fund's intended purposes is a logical use of the fund . it includes a brief analysis of the issues associated with using the current surplus balance for other means . the increasing balance of the reclamation fund has caused some to call for directing these funds for new purposes or to supplement ongoing authorized expenditures . such a change could take one or more forms , each of which may have an associated budget scoring impact . for instance , congress could increase appropriations from the reclamation fund in annual discretionary appropriations , but such an increase would have to compete with other appropriations ( including general fund appropriations ) subject to congressional 302 ( b ) allocations . separately , congress could dedicate a stream of revenue from the reclamation fund for a subset of projects and make it available , with or without further appropriations ( i.e. congressional paygo requirements may necessitate offsets in spending corresponding to some of these changes . however , in this case , the appropriation was made outside of the congressional scoring window for paygo costs , and thus did not require an offset . more recently , a bill in the senate in the 113 th congress , the authorized rural water projects completion act ( s. 715 ) , proposes to establish a new fund for rural water projects ( similar to the water settlements fund referenced above ) that would receive , without further appropriation , approximately $80 million per year in funding that would otherwise revert to the reclamation fund . in contrast to the aforementioned water settlements fund , some of this funding would be redirected to projects over the next 10 years . however , others may view other potential uses of the fund's surplus as being more pressing in the current fiscal climate . these same interests argue that the large increases to mineral receipts were not foreseen when those disbursements were originally authorized , and may advocate for redirecting surplus balances to debt reduction or the states . a change to the reclamation fund enacted by congress in 2009 provides an example of the challenges associated with dedicating reclamation fund balances toward a particular purpose . in title x of the omnibus lands act of 2009 ( p.l . the bill established a separate fund ( known as the reclamation water settlements fund ) in the treasury and directed the secretary of the treasury to transfer into the new fund up to $120 million annually between fy2020 and fy2034 that would otherwise go to the reclamation fund . significantly , the law directed that this funding be made available without further appropriation . it originated as a revolving fund supported by the proceeds of the sale of land and water in the western united states .