dna profiles are often compared to fingerprints . as with fingerprints , law enforcement officers collect dna samples from specific classes of individuals , such as prisoners . however , compulsory dna collection generally entails blood or saliva samples rather than finger impressions , and dna profiles can later match any of many types of biological matter obtained from crime scenes . accordingly , compulsory dna collection and profiling laws violate the fourth amendment if they fail the reasonableness test . the federal government and most states authorize compulsory collection of dna samples from individuals convicted for specified criminal offenses , including all felonies in most jurisdictions and extending to misdemeanors , such as failure to register as a sex offender or crimes for which a sentence greater than six months applies , in some jurisdictions . in addition , the federal government and some states now authorize compulsory collection from people whom the government has arrested or detained but not convicted . as amended , the dna analysis backlog elimination act 2000 , discussed below , authorizes compulsory collection from individuals in federal custody , including those detained , arrested , or facing charges , and from individuals on release , parole , or probation in the federal criminal justice system . for example , in united states v. mitchell , discussed above , the arrestee argued that the indefinite retention of his dna profile would violate the fourth amendment . under the federal law , if an individual refuses to cooperate , relevant officials "may use or authorize the use of such means as are reasonably necessary to detain , restrain , and collect a dna sample. state laws vary , but nearly all states authorize compulsory dna collection from people convicted for specified crimes , and a small but growing number of states also authorize compulsory collection from arrestees . this case law suggests that sources of lawfully collected and databanked dna maintain some degree of privacy interests in their dna profiles . however , it is not clear whether convicted felons retain those rights as well , and , if they do , what types of actions would unreasonably intrude upon those rights . despite the "rapid pace of technological development in the area of dna analysis," much of dna's scientific value remains a mystery . as mentioned , fbi analysts rely on junk dna precisely because it is not believed to reveal sensitive medical or biological information . partly for that reason , proponents of expansive dna collection argue that any privacy intrusion resulting from dna storage or analysis is minimal at most . the fourth amendment to the u.s. constitution provides a right "of the people to be secure in their persons , houses , papers , and effects , against unreasonable searches and seizures. two fundamental questions arise in every fourth amendment challenge . first , does the challenged action constitute a search or seizure by federal or local government and thus trigger the fourth amendment right ? second , if so , is the search or seizure "reasonable" ? the supreme court has not accepted a case reviewing a compulsory dna collection statute .