in east texas and truckers mgmt . , the courts found that executive order 11246 , which addressed the use of bona fide seniority systems by government contractors and subcontractors , conflicted with title vii of the civil rights act , which exempted bona fide seniority systems . executive orders on federal contracting promulgated under authorities other than the fpasa potentially could be found invalid under youngstown , although it is unclear that presidents would rely solely on the constitution for such authority given the breadth of presidential authority under the fpasa . however , in building and construction trades department , afl - cio , an executive order on the use of plas in federal contracting was upheld based , in part , on the president's constitutional authority . further developments in the case law are possible , given that recent presidents have continued the practice of their predecessors in terms of issuing executive orders on government contracting . these orders may require agencies to incorporate in their contracts provisions obligating contractors to take steps that some commentators would characterize as extraneous to contractors' provision of goods or services to the government . legislation in this area is also possible , as congress may amend or repeal an executive order , terminate the underlying authority upon which it is based , or use its appropriations authority to limit its effect . in the event that congress sought to enlarge or cabin presidential exercises of authority over federal contractors , congress could amend fpasa to clarify congressional intent to grant the president broader authority over procurement , or limit his authority to more narrow "housekeeping" aspects of procurement . congress also could pass legislation directed at particular requirements of contracting executive orders . for example , the 112 th congress enacted legislation that seeks to forestall implementation of any executive orders requiring disclosure of contractors' political contributions and expenditures . specifically , the national defense authorization act for fy2012 ( p.l . 112-81 , ยง823 ) prohibited the heads of defense agencies from requiring contractors to submit "political information" related to the contractor , a subcontractor , or any partner , officer , director , or employee thereof , as part of the solicitation or during the course of contract performance . the consolidated appropriations act , 2012 ( p.l . 112-74 , ยง743 ) similarly barred the use of appropriated funds to "recommend or require" persons submitting offers for federal contracts to disclose political contributions or expenditures . fpasa authorizes the president to prescribe any policies or directives that he considers necessary to promote "economy" or "efficiency" in federal procurement . for example , there have been legal challenges to orders ( 1 ) encouraging agencies to require the use of project labor agreements on large - scale construction projects ; ( 2 ) requiring that certain contracts include provisions obligating contractors to post notices informing employees of their rights not to be required "to join a union or to pay mandatory dues for costs unrelated to representational activities" ; and ( 3 ) directing departments and agencies to require their contractors to use e - verify to check the work authorization of their employees .