jul . 22 , 2011 ) , the court vacated the sec's proxy access rule . on september 6 , 2011 , sec officials announced that they would not seek an appeal of the court's decision . however , they indicated that a lesser part of the rulemaking , which would permit shareholders to submit shareholder proposals that seek to establish shareholder access regimes in companies , and had not been challenged in court , would go into effect at a later date . it also argued that the sec's rule 14a - 11 was in direct contradiction to the rights that it provides: [i]n 2009 , [delaware] enacted "an amendment to the delaware general corporation law to clarify that bylaws of a corporation could establish a right of proxy access [which] … gives stockholders the ability to decide whether and when stockholders would be granted such a right of access . this amendment , together with the amendments to sec rule 14a - 8 adopted at the same time as rule 14a - 11 , would allow stockholders increased flexibility in shaping the process by which directors are elected . this company - by - company flexibility is consistent with long - standing delaware corporate law principles . sec rule 14a - 11 , which takes away that choice , is completely contradictory to delaware's newly adopted statute governing proxy access . in an amicus brief supporting the chamber and the chamber's lawsuit against the sec's rulemaking , the investment company institute ( ici , a mutual fund trade association ) and its affiliate , the independent directors council ( a trade group for independent fund directors ) were critical of what they called the inapplicability of the agency's "one size fits all" proxy reform to mutual funds: in adopting rule 14a - 11 , the sec adopted a "one - size - fits - all" approach that decidedly does not fit the unique structure of fund governance and rests upon reasoning that is arbitrary and capricious . focusing on how the rule would apply to operating companies , the sec's regulatory statement provides no logical explanation for why the sec deemed the material differences between funds and operating companies to be wholly irrelevant to rule 14a - 11 . after the sec's rulemaking , marcel kahan of new york university and edward rock of the university of pennsylvania released a study which found that the shareholder benefit part of the cost / benefit calculus from proxy access tends to be overstated and that it is likely that a limited number of shareholder nominees would result from the rules . most of those , they argued , were likely to be defeated and the few who prevail are will probably have a marginal impact on the board: overall , we believe that proxy access will have some undesirable effects - it will result in some increase in company expenses and may rarely increase the leverage of shareholders whose interest conflict with those of shareholders at large - and some desirable ones - it may occasionally lead to the election of nominees at recalcitrant boards , where such nominees may have a modest impact on governance and a marginal impact on company value .