appendix a . further discussion of legislation in the 112 th congress to improve emergency communications a number of proposed bills in the 112 th congress commonly depend on federal grant guidance and rule - making to bring about needed changes . the bills would help to move public safety agencies away from the incremental development of narrowband voice networks to next - generation ip - enabled networks that fully support voice , data , and video transmissions . they all would assign the d block license to the public safety broadband licensee for a new broadband network . 607 would give the fcc a central role in decision - making and planning for network construction . 607 would include dhs in planning efforts and assign to it the responsibility for program grants . s. 911 , as amended , is one of several bills that would give grant - making authority to the ntia . funding for the grants would come from auctioning spectrum licenses ; loans to grants programs could be substantial , based on expected auction proceeds . s. 911 , as amended , h.r . 12 would create a new not - for - profit corporation that would plan for and develop a nationwide network . these bills include the public safety spectrum and wireless innovation act ( s. 28 , rockefeller ) , the broadband for public safety act of 2011 ( s. 1040 , lieberman ) , the strengthening public - safety and enhancing communications through reform , utilization , and modernization ( spectrum ) act ( s. 911 , rockefeller , as amended ) , the public safety and wireless innovation act ( h.r . 2482 , dingell ) , the broadband for first responders act ( h.r . 607 , king ) , and the american jobs act of 2011 , title ii , subtitle h ( s. 1549 , reid and h.r . 12 , larson ) . public safety spectrum and wireless innovation act , s. 28 under this proposal , governance of a public safety broadband network would be shared by several agencies . s. 28 would require the formation of an advisory board with which the fcc would consult . annual appropriations through 2018 would be authorized for the emergency response interoperability center to carry out its responsibilities as established in the bill . the ntia would be responsible for administering the grants program for network construction , in consultation with the fcc , which would define project requirements . the fcc would administer a separate maintenance and operation reimbursement fund . it would require annual status reports from license - holders . the comptroller general would be required to perform audits of the construction fund and the maintenance and operation fund . s. 28 would empower the fcc to take "all actions necessary" to ensure the deployment of the public safety broadband network . it would determine whether spectrum licenses would be national , regional , or statewide , which would influence sharing of decision - making powers , and would authorize partnerships with commercial interest to build a state's public safety broadband network . it would set standards for , authorize , and to some extent supervise requests for proposals to build networks .