other multilateral aid . the gcf board has been tasked with determining the complementarity of the gcf with respect to other u.n. multilateral mechanisms . thus , the negotiations may produce some alteration in the landscape of the multilateral choices provided by the unfccc . development bank mechanisms such as the climate investment funds are currently being reevaluated by their governing boards in light of the final implementation of the gcf . bilateral aid . the gcf would not necessarily interfere with current or proposed bilateral climate change assistance to developing countries . the gcf would be another multilateral mechanism for climate change assistance that would exist alongside bilateral activities , much the way that the global environment facility and the climate investment funds currently do . u.s. allocations between and among bilateral and multilateral assistance channels would continue through authorized congressional appropriations . presumably , choices would remain available to donor countries . u.s. allocations among multilateral assistance channels would remain based on congressional guidance and would continue through authorized congressional appropriations . members of congress hold mixed views about the value of international financial assistance to address climate change . while some members are convinced that human - induced climate change is a high - priority risk that must be addressed through federal actions and international cooperation , others are not as convinced . some are wary , as well , of international processes that could impose costs on the united states , redirect funds from domestic budget priorities , undermine national sovereignty , or lead to competitive advantages for other countries . regardless of current views , the united states is a party to the unfccc and has certain obligations under the treaty . the executive branch continues negotiations and implementation of the unfccc obligations , while committees of congress engage in oversight ( from home and at the international meetings ) , providing input to the executive branch formally and informally , and deciding program authorities and appropriations for these activities . as congress considers potential authorization and / or appropriations for the gcf , it may raise concerns regarding the cost , purpose , direction , efficiency , and effectiveness of the unfccc and existing international financial institutions . these concerns may be weighed against the design characteristics of the gcf in an effort to assess its potential performance . congress may then be required to determine the allocation of funds between bilateral and multilateral climate change assistance as well as among the variety of multilateral mechanisms . congress may also wish to gauge and give guidance to the new fund's relationship with domestic industries and private sector investment , as well as the spillover effects of u.s. participation on technological innovation , humanitarian efforts , national security , and international leadership .