sfa ) missions . secretary gates underscored that current authorities create missed opportunities for the united states to conduct capacity building in at - risk locations , opportunities that are often filled by other nations , such as china . "all the while , other countries that do not suffer from such ( legislative ) encumbrances have been more quickly funding projects , selling weapons , and building relationships. these are referred to as direct and indirect approaches . in africa command ( africom ) , where sfa is considered essential to stability and counter - terrorism strategies , the commander testified: our ability to sustain forward progress toward our long - term goals in africa is dependent on several factors that enable our efforts . some , such as limits on authorities , present us with challenges where we seek assistance . others , such as interagency integration , present opportunities for growth and development of new or improved programs and activities that we wish to sustain . sustaining our long - term security cooperation programs and activities in africa requires flexible , multi - year authorities . existing authorities are designed to support the conduct of individual short - term activities or long - term programs , but do not support the transition from the former to the latter . they are also insufficiently responsive to changing conditions , such as when train and equip efforts initiated in response to emergent threats highlight the need for long - term capacity building . we encourage dialogue on ways to streamline or modify legislative authorities to enable sustained security engagement with our african partners , ranging from train and equip programs that respond quickly to changing conditions to long - term partner capacity - building , especially in countering violent extremism . similarly , the european command ( eucom ) commander testified: through these training efforts , eucom enabled partner nations in making contributions to the effort in afghanistan . however , we require expanded long - term authorities and funding to enhance and continue these efforts . operationally , we must continuously strive to find flexible authorities and funding mechanisms to build the capacity of those partner nations willing to fight side - by - side with us . this has become increasingly important because of the recent surge in activities in afghanistan and the need to get our allies and partners more involved . your continued support and expansion of authorities like ndaa section 1206 , particularly allowing their use for partner nation forces deploying to iraq and afghanistan , has been absolutely pivotal in enabling our strategic efforts in the european theater . the pacific command ( pacom ) commander testified: we face challenges in building partner capacity under the current patchwork of authorities and programs designed to support our security assistant efforts . unfortunately these ( security assistance ) programs have not evolved much since the end of the cold war . as reported by the qdr , these security assistance programs are constrained by a "patchwork of authorities , persistent shortfalls in the resources , unwieldy processes and a limited ability to sustain such undertakings beyond a short period of time.