many critical automotive applications are now intertwined with electronics . for example: electronic fuel injection replaced the carburetor , which mixed fuel and air prior to combustion . electronic fuel injection uses an entirely different technology that forces the fuel under high pressure through small nozzles . a microcontroller apportions just the right amount of fuel needed by the engine . airbags , which are now standard technology on all cars sold in the united states , are enabled by electronic sensors that measure the amount of sudden deceleration and inflate the air cushion . the microcontroller's job has grown more complex as airbags have been added throughout the vehicle , making deceleration calculations subject to more variables . antilock braking system ( abs ) prevents wheels from locking up ( in a skid on ice , for example ) . cars equipped with abs have a dual braking system , including not only the traditional hydraulic brake system but also front and rear brake sensors and an electronic control unit . all - wheel drive ( awd ) has been available on vehicles for decades , moving power from the engine to all four wheels and not just two , but current iterations of awd harness electronics for traction control and to shift control between the front and rear axles . global positioning systems ( gps ) are electronic navigation tools that provide drivers with driving directions to their destinations . gps can also transmit via satellite the location of a vehicle and track the direction it is moving and its speed , which can help locate the vehicle if stolen . hybrid vehicles employ electronics to manage the switch between the internal combustion engine and the electric motor . in all - electric vehicles , electronics manage the thermal controls that regulate the lithium - ion batteries' temperatures and communicate speed , battery discharge rates , and other information throughout the vehicle . in some instances , the primary electronic control system is backed up with a redundant power system for safety reasons . for example , if a car's electrical system malfunctions , there is a special capacitor which kicks in to provide the electronic controls with the energy needed to inflate the air bags . the japan disasters have affected projections of north american production and sales , with analysts forecasting that second quarter u.s. production will fall by 350,000-400,000 units . small and mid - sized cars may be especially in short supply . as the preceding section of this report demonstrates , the disasters in japan had immediate , albeit modest , impacts on most u.s. - based automakers . a number of plants were idled for a short period of time as parts from japan were interrupted and most manufacturers were sent scrambling to find new sources for other parts . the initial impact domestically was mitigated , however , by the long supply chain , which normally has a month or more of parts on their way to u.s. auto plants . michael robinet , director of global production forecasting for ihs automotive , said in a march interview that "most vehicle manufacturers will have anywhere between four to six weeks of inventory either on hand or in shipment.