appendix a . legislative history surface transportation assistance act of 1982 ( staa ;  fy1983-fy1986 ) staa ( p.l . 94-424 ) authorized a significant increase in funding for the federal - aid highway system for fy1983-fy1986 and included a provision designed to mitigate the dissatisfaction of donor states by providing that each state would receive a minimum allocation ( also known as the minimum guarantee ) from the core fhwa programs . specifically , the bill ordered the fhwa to allocate among the states sufficient funds to assure that each state's total apportionments from the core highway and safety programs ( interstate highway substitution , primary , secondary , interstate , urban , bridge replacement and rehabilitation , hazard elimination , and rail - highway crossings , and section 203 of the highway safety act of 1973 ) would not be less than 85% of the percentage of estimated tax payments each state paid into the highway account of the htf . these "equity adjustment" allocations could be obligated to the core highway programs . surface transportation and uniform relocation assistance act of 1987 ( sturaa ; fy1987-fy1991 ) sturaa ( p.l . 100-17 ) authorized the federal - aid highway program for fy1987-1991 , retaining the 85% minimum allocation , but altering the basis of its calculation . the act revised the calculation to include the allocated ( sometimes referred to as discretionary ) programs , with the exception of federal lands programs and safety programs . for fy1987 and fy1988 emergency relief funds and interstate construction discretionary funds were not included in the calculation . the act continued the minimum allocation provision established by staa . with the exception of the changes in the treatment of the minimum guarantees , the formulas for allocation of funds under staa and sturaa remained the same . minor changes were made in the criteria for awarding discretionary program grants . emergency relief and federal lands highways grants continued to be distributed on a project - by - project and needs basis , respectively . intermodal surface transportation efficiency act of 1991 ( istea ;  fy1992-fy1997 ) istea ( p.l . 102-240 ) reauthorized surface transportation programs , including federal - aid highway programs , for fy1992-fy1997 , making major changes in the overall program structure , program formulas , minimum allocation , and other provisions that could impact the state donor - donee ratios . to a great extent , the changes were an outgrowth of the fact that the remaining unfinished portions of the interstate system would be completed under istea . the act also enunciated a broader vision of the mission of federal highway programs to include air quality , alternative transportation , and historic preservation . istea retained the three formula programs that provided funding for the interstate system ( interstate construction , interstate maintenance , and interstate highway substitution ) as well as the bridge replacement and rehabilitation program . the other formula programs , such as , the primary system , secondary system , urban system , and urban transportation planning , were replaced by the national highway system program , the surface transportation program , and the congestion mitigation and air quality program .