they are in contravention of international law . they are illegal , counterproductive , and totally unacceptable. still , most observers believe official pakistan has tacitly allowed the strikes and at times provided intelligence for them . despite islamabad's persistent and sweeping rejection of drone strikes on pakistani territory , informed domestic debate exists , with some analysts welcoming the tactic as necessary and the best of several bad options . there is no shortage of accounts suggesting that , as a tactic , the drone campaign has been effective against al qaeda and its fata - based allies . as noted above , two of the most vocal government proponents of reforming the laws were assassinated earlier in 2011 . the only other high - profile national politician pursuing reform efforts , national assembly member sherry rehman , was forced to withdraw her legislative proposal after her ppp leaders announced that no reforms would be undertaken . in 2001 , congress renewed large u.s. assistance packages to pakistan . by the end of 2011 , congress had appropriated about $15.3 billion in overt assistance over ten years , including more than $8.3 billion in development and humanitarian aid , and nearly $7 billion for security - related programs ( see table 1 ) . in 2009 , both chambers of congress passed their own pakistan - specific bills authorizing increased nonmilitary aid to pakistan ( to $1.5 billion per year for five years ) and placing certain conditions on future security - related aid to that country . the enhanced partnership with pakistan act ( eppa ) of 2009 , also known as the "kerry - lugar - berman" ( klb ) bill for its main sponsors , became p.l . earlier that year , congress also established a new pakistan counterinsurgency capability fund ( pccf ) that is meant to enhance the ability of pakistani security forces to effectively combat militancy . moreover , since fy2002 congress has appropriated billions of dollars to reimburse pakistan ( and other nations ) for its operational and logistical support of u.s. - led counterterrorism operations . at nearly $9 billion paid to date , these "coalition support funds" have accounted for more than one - third of all overt u.s. financial transfers to pakistan since 2001 . in recent years , more careful oversight of such disbursements reportedly has led to a major increase in the rate of rejected claims . the administration's congressionally mandated pakistan assistance strategy report , issued in december 2009 , laid out the principal objectives of nonmilitary u.s. assistance to pakistan ( to help "in building a stable , secure , and prosperous pakistan" ) , a general description of the programs and projects designed to achieve these goals , and a plan for monitoring and evaluating the effort . for fy2010-fy2014 , it proposed to devote $3.5 billion — nearly half of the $7.5 billion of the aid authorized by the eppa — to "high - impact , high - visibility" infrastructure programs , especially in the energy and agriculture sectors . most recently , washington is considering making grants to help the pakistani government launch construction of the planned diamer basha dam in the country's far northeast .