appendix a . additional factors for the dislocated worker formula other factors for the wia dislocated worker formula were considered for analysis in this report . those factors considered but not presented in this report are listed below , along with a brief justification for their exclusion from full analysis . unemployment insurance initial claimants . this series is part of the ui program data . an "initial claim" occurs when an individual files a request to determine entitlement to or eligibility for ui or when an individual files a request to begin a subsequent period of eligibility within a benefit year or period of eligibility . this measure of labor market dislocation is timely ( reported weekly ) and is reasonably well aligned with one of the wia definitions of a dislocated worker . because one of the wia definitions of a dislocated worker includes "attachment to the labor force" as a criteria , the "first payments" series ( analyzed in the text of this report ) is slightly more aligned as it includes only those who receive a payment ( i.e. , have clear attachment to the labor market ) . in sum , because there is no tradeoff in terms of timeliness or data availability and because the category of initial claimants includes some individuals who do not have sufficient labor force attachment to qualify for ui benefits , the ui initial claimants series was not used in this report . permanent job losers . this series is part of the cps data and counts permanent job losers and persons who completed temporary jobs . from an alignment perspective , this data series would match part of the definition of a wia dislocated worker well as it captures workers who have lost jobs through no fault of their own and who may be unlikely to return to a previous occupation or industry . the main drawback to this series , however , is timeliness . due to sample size considerations , three - year averages would be required to generate reliable estimates at the state level . given the importance of aligning allocations with need , a lag of this size may not reflect current conditions . in addition , data for puerto rico are not available from this series . displaced worker survey ( dws ) . this series is a biennial supplementary survey to the cps . in the dws , displaced workers are defined as persons at least 20 years of age who lost or left their jobs because of a company move or closure , insufficient work , or abolishment of a position or shift . the survey , which is conducted in january , covers the three previous calendar years ( eg , the january 2010 dws covered the january 2007 through december 2009 period ) . the dws would align very closely with the target populations in the wia dislocated worker formula . data are not available at the state level , however , due to the sample size of the dws . appendix b. coefficient of variation analysis for current and alternative wia dislocated worker formula factor . there are both required and allowable statewide and local employment and training activities .