executive order no . 3206 superseded an executive order , dated august 10 , 1906 , that granted advisory power to the united states geographic board to review mapping projects to avoid duplication and to facilitate standardized mapping . what is the role of the private sector ? in its oversight capacity , the 112 th congress may consider these questions from the viewpoint of reducing duplication and costs to the federal government . this report discusses issues that may be of interest to congress — managing , sharing , and coordinating geospatial information — and includes examples of legislation . this report also summarizes a diverse set of recommendations and proposals from different non - governmental organizations for how to improve the coordination and management of geospatial information at the federal and state levels . a separate report , crs report r41825 , geospatial information and geographic information systems ( gis ) : an overview for congress , discusses geospatial information and gis ; provides several examples of their use ; and describes the fgdc , nsdi , and their various activities and programs . this report is limited to discussions of non - classified geospatial information . producing floodplain maps ; conducting the census ; planning ecosystem restoration ; and assessing vulnerability and responding to natural hazards such as hurricanes , earthquakes , and tsunamis are examples of how federal agencies use gis and geospatial information to meet national needs . some view federal government data as inherently geospatial . according to the department of the interior , the amount of government information that has a geospatial component — such as address or other reference to a physical location — is as much as 80% . given the ubiquity of geospatial information throughout the federal government , and despite the long history of efforts to manage and coordinate such data articulated in omb circular a - 16 and its antecedents ( see appendix for a history of circular a - 16 and its federal policy lineage ) , ongoing challenges to handling federal geospatial information can generally be divided into three overarching questions: what is the best way to organize and manage the vast array of geospatial information that is acquired at many levels and that has a variety of potential uses ? what is the best way to share data , particularly among local , state , and federal stakeholders , each of whom may have a need for the same or similar data ? what is the best way to coordinate among federal agencies , such as the administration and management by different agencies of all the federal lands in the united states ? nonfederal organizations and institutions have increasingly participated with federal agencies in communicating their concerns regarding geospatial information management , data sharing , and coordination . the national geospatial advisory committee directly advises the fgdc . the national states geographic information council and private sector geospatial organizations , such as the management association for private photogrammetric surveyors , provide views of state geospatial organizations and the private sector respectively . in early 2009 , several proposals were released calling for efforts to create a national gis , or for renewed investment in the national spatial data infrastructure , or even to create a "nsdi 2.0. .