appendix a . history of u.s. aid to pakistan appendix b . current year request appendix c. major donor bilateral development assistance to pakistan , cy2010 appendix d. principles and purposes of the enhanced partnership with pakistan act of 2009 principles: 1 . pakistan is a critical friend and ally to the united states and share goals of combating terrorism , firmly establishing democracy and rule of law , and promoting social and economic development in pakistan ; 2 . u.s. aid to pakistan is to supplement , not replace , pakistan's own efforts ; 3 . the united states requires a balanced , countrywide strategy that provides aid throughout the country ; 4 . the united states supports pakistan's struggle against extremism and recognizes its sacrifices in this regard ; 5 . the united states intends to work with the government of pakistan to build mutual trust by strengthening mutual security , stability , and prosperity of both countries ; to support the people of pakistan and democracy there , including strengthening its parliament , judicial system , and rule of law in all provinces ; to promote sustainable long - term development and infrastructure projects , including healthcare , education , water management , and energy programs ; to ensure all people of pakistan have access to public education ; to support curricula and quality of schools throughout pakistan ; to encourage public - private partnerships in pakistan top support development ; to expand people - to - people engagement between the united states and pakistan ; to encourage capacity to measure program success and increase accountability ; to help pakistan improve its counterterrorism financing and anti - money laundering ; to strengthen pakistan's counterinsurgency / counterterrorism strategy to prevent any territory of pakistan from becoming a base for terrorist attacks ; to aid in pakistan's efforts to strengthen law enforcement and national defense forces under civilian leadership ; to have full cooperation on counterproliferation of nuclear weapons ; to assist pakistan in gaining control and addressing threats in all its areas and along its border ; and to explore ways to consult with the pakistani - american community . purposes of democratic , economic , and development assistance: 1 . to support democratic institutions in pakistan to strengthen civilian rule and long - term stability ; 2. to support pakistan's efforts to expand rule of law , build capacity , transparency , and trust in government , and promote internationally recognized human rights ; 3. to support economic freedom and economic development in pakistan such as investments in water resource management systems , expansion of agricultural and rural development ( i.e. , farm - to - market roads ) , and investments in energy ; 4. to invest in people , particularly in women and children , regarding education , public health , civil society organizations , and to support refugees ; and 5. to strengthen public diplomacy to counter extremism . "ally. aware of these and other concerns , the u.s. government has provided large - scale foreign assistance to pakistan with an eye toward short - term u.s. security interests and longer - term interests in realizing a more stable , democratic , and prosperous pakistani state .