these tools are described in more detail below . as congress prepares to deliberate dairy policy in the next farm bill , policymakers might consider a number of options currently circulating in the industry to address the risk management needs of individual dairy producers . these include facilitating the use of private hedging , expanding the government's lgm - dairy margin insurance , establishing "farm savings accounts," implementing a national margin insurance program , and modifying the existing milc program that provides counter - cyclical payments to dairy producers . the section below briefly describes these approaches . private risk tools such as forward contracting and hedging are currently used by dairy producers , but additional training for producers and bankers might contribute to expanded use . some have suggested that producers and buyers of farm milk need help securing additional lines of credit for producers' margin accounts , which might increase their risk management activities . usda's changes to the lgm - dairy insurance product in fy2011 demonstrated that subsidies ( and other changes in the policy ) increased demand for the product . but it is not clear how much the subsidies actually increased total risk management activity or whether the subsidies crowded out the use of other risk tools and simply transferred money from taxpayers to farmers . proponents of the proposed farm savings accounts ( fsas ) argue that this tool would assist individual producers to manage cash flows in an industry known for large annual fluctuations in income . such a tool might address another vexing dairy policy issue — overinvestment in dairy operations — by offering producers a tax incentive to save during the boom years rather than build their herds to minimize tax liability . if not met with an increase in demand , industry expansion can lead to higher production and lower prices in future years . finally , with respect to both private and public marketing tools ( eg , hedging and government programs ) , policymakers might address whether the margin provided by the market ( and determined essentially each day that the futures market is open ) is sufficient for producers , or whether a minimum margin needs to be set through a "margin insurance" program or a milc - type program . policymakers may also consider the implications of removing "too much" risk , and the possibility that high levels of margin protection could potentially lead to excess milk production and unfavorable returns for dairy producers . ( see figure 1 . ) the experience for dairy producers in 2009 was severe because prices had been at a record high in 2007-2008 and then fell sharply at a time when feed costs were rising substantially above long - run averages . in recent years , increased demand for u.s. dairy product exports has been a factor behind the strength in milk prices . the dairy industry has made significant gains by developing export markets and positioning itself to capture future growth in the global market . the volatile nature of commodity markets presents opportunities for profits and losses when milk prices or feed costs change .