appendix a . state tables alabama in 2010 , alabama shipped close to $600 million in goods to south korea , according to the census bureau . this represented 1% of all u.s. exports to south korea , and nearly 4% of the state's total exports to the world . the top 10 products accounted for 90% of alabama's total exports to south korea . by the end of the korus fta implementation period , based on usitc's analysis ( see table , below ) : net exports ( exports minus imports ) could increase in: optical instruments ( optical fiber ) ; organic chemicals ; plastic ; machinery ( including engines , motors , and office machine parts ) ; iron and steel scrap ; ores , slag , ash ; paper and paperboard ; miscellaneous chemical products ; woodpulp ; and cereals ( corn ) . according to crs estimates detailed in appendix c , data underestimate manufacturing exports from alabama by at least 25% . alaska in 2010 , alaska shipped nearly $500 million in goods to south korea , according to the census bureau . this represented 1% of all u.s. exports to south korea , and nearly 12% of the state's total exports to the world . the top 10 products accounted for virtually 100% of alaska's total exports to south korea . by the end of the korus fta implementation period , based on usitc's analysis: net exports could increase in: fish and seafood ; ores , slag , ash ; wood ; powered aircraft ; electrical machinery ( electric motors and generators ) ; prepared fish ( fish sticks ) ; fish meal for animal feed ; fish / animal bait ; machinery ( engines and motors ) ; and optical and medical instruments . arizona in 2010 , arizona shipped nearly $250 million in goods to south korea , according to the census bureau . this represented 1% of all u.s. exports to south korea , and nearly 2% of the state's total exports to the world . the top 10 products accounted for 87% of arizona's total exports to south korea . by the end of the korus fta implementation period , based on usitc's analysis: net exports could increase in: electrical machinery ( integrated circuits ) ; ores , slag , and ash ; optical and medical instruments ; cotton ; machinery ( including semiconductor manufacturing equipment and office machine parts ) ; aircraft parts ; copper ; and woodpulp . net exports could decline in: cattle hides and skins . exports in one industry are not estimated in the usitc study: arms and ammunitions ( bombs , grenades ) . according to crs estimates detailed in appendix c , data overestimate both manufactured and agricultural exports from arizona by at least 25% . arkansas in 2010 , arkansas shipped $145 million in goods to south korea , according to the census bureau . this represented less than 0.5% of all u.s. exports to south korea , and less than 3% of the state's total exports to the world . the top 10 products accounted for 97% of arkansas' total exports to south korea .