the u.s. role in global health has been both applauded and criticized . u.s. agencies and departments also transfer funds among each other . regardless of opposing views of u.s. global health programs , there is consensus that the size of u.s. global health assistance affords the united states significant influence in how global health aid is carried out . for instance , the department of state transfers the majority of the funds it receives from congress for global hiv / aids activities to implementing agencies such as usaid and cdc . likewise , usaid may transfer funds to cdc for field research and evaluation of global health programs . u.s. agencies also receive funds to implement programs that simultaneously address development and health challenges . these efforts may include improving access to clean water , addressing the negative consequences of climate change and rapid urbanization , supporting the vulnerable in conflict or post - conflict environments , and responding to natural emergencies . in light of these different funding streams and a lack of consensus on exactly which programs and activities constitute global health assistance , estimates of u.s. global health spending by u.s agencies , think tanks , and other observers vary . a number of advocacy groups , for example , consider water and sanitation activities as part of global health assistance . similarly , the websites of some u.s. agencies and departments describe a broader view of global health aid than what is provided through congressional appropriations . for example , usaid cites its work related to health system strengthening and environmental health as global health activities . cdc also includes collaborative responses to global health emergencies , such as cholera outbreaks and pandemic influenza , with international organizations like the world health organization ( who ) and the united nations children's fund ( unicef ) among its global health work . the section below describes bilateral health activities funded by congress . this includes global health programs implemented by usaid and cdc as well as interagency presidential global health initiatives including the president's emergency plan for aids relief ( pepfar ) , the president's malaria initiative ( pmi ) , the neglected tropical disease program ( ntd program ) , and the global health initiative . while the presidential initiatives are described , activities conducted by each agency as part of these initiative are not detailed here , such as pepfar - related efforts by dod and nih . likewise , funding for multilateral organizations , like the global fund , is not discussed in detail . the bulk of u.s. global health assistance is aimed at mitigating the impact of infectious diseases , especially hiv / aids , through three presidential initiatives: pepfar , pmi , and the ntd program . the global health initiative became the first u.s. global health effort that was not aimed at a particular disease or at a set of related diseases , such as the ntd program . instead , ghi intends to coordinate activities supported by ongoing presidential global health initiatives and other bilateral health efforts through usaid and hhs . each of these initiatives has served to garner attention and resources for the targeted diseases or programs .