the commission would terminate after six years . the commission would perform its own analysis of agency real property inventories and of the recommendations submitted by the administrator and omb director . the commission would be required to hold public hearings and develop an accounting system to help evaluate the costs and returns of various recommendations . the commission would then submit a report to the president that would include its findings , conclusions , and recommendations . while the commission "shall seek to develop consensus" in its recommendations , the report may include recommendations supported by only a majority of commission members . if a joint resolution of approval were enacted , agencies would be required to begin implementation not later than two years from the date the president transmitted the recommendations to congress , and to complete implementation no later than six years from the same date , unless notice is provided to the president and to congress that "extenuating circumstances" have caused the delay . the commission would also be required to establish a website and post its recommendations on it . the sales proceeds deposited in the apsmf account could only be used to cover the costs associated with implementing the commission's recommendations . agencies have long argued that permitting them to use net proceeds for further real property activities would help them dispose of more unneeded buildings . it is not clear , however , whether there will be sufficient net proceeds generated to enable agencies to undertake potentially costly real property actions as recommended by the committee , such as consolidating agency offices or bringing vacant buildings to market . for example , the cost of preparing properties for disposition — such as repairing structural or mechanical deficiencies — can be significant , and agencies often lack the funding needed to bring those properties to salable condition . the department of veterans affairs , for example , estimated that it would need to spend about $3 billion to repair the buildings in its portfolio that it rated in "poor" or "critical" condition — 56% of which were vacant or underutilized , and therefore could be candidates for realignment . however , in fy2009 , the government sold 2,200 buildings , but only netted $50 million dollars . it is possible that the government owns higher - value properties that would generate a larger profit if sold — the market values of surplus properties are not made public — but with a soft real estate market , there may be limited potential for generating significant amounts of net proceeds in the immediate future . cpra would require executive agencies seeking to acquire leased space to do so only by working through gsa . this restriction would not apply to properties of the department of veterans affairs or to properties excluded for reasons of national security by the president . this requirement may facilitate oversight by consolidating leasing decisions with a single agency , although it is not clear whether this would restrict gsa's ability to delegate leasing authority to other agencies . if agencies were no longer able to use independent or delegated leasing authority , it could delay the acquisition of space needed to carry out their missions .