where would it go ? if buried , would it contaminate the water table ? if it were to be buried out of state , would another state accept it ? how would it be transported ? would states along the proposed route try to block transit ? it would appear more efficient to plan in advance how to dispose of this rubble rather than deciding on a rushed basis postattack . the gtri domestic materials protection program visits facilities requesting its service , examines the security situation , and installs security devices . it provides this service on a voluntary basis at no initial cost to the facilities . as of february 2011 , it had "identified more than 2,700 vulnerable buildings … with high - priority radioactive material in the united states," had completed security enhancements at 251 of the buildings , "with the remainder aiming to be completed by 2025. . other upgrades will take several years as well . alternatives include expanding this program to complete upgrades sooner , maintaining it at its current level , eliminating it , or making it mandatory . what is the cost of decontamination vs. demolition and reconstruction ? techniques to decontaminate areas struck by an rdd would help decontaminate the much larger area struck by radioactive fallout from an ind . many studies have considered how to dispose of nuclear waste . the possibility of an rdd attack adds urgency to the disposition of radioactive waste . most sealed sources have no disposition pathway . choosing a permanent disposition pathway would reduce the risk of terrorists obtaining this material . what areas might future r&d pursue ? on a larger scale , decontamination would generate chemicals , water , and radioactive material . how would this waste be handled ? if decontamination proved ineffective , an alternative would be to demolish contaminated buildings , generating much rubble . congress has given nuclear forensics strong support , so it may wish to strengthen radiological forensics capability . has the government stockpiled the needed resources or arranged to have them manufactured quickly ? since radiological forensics is typically grouped with nuclear forensics , congress could establish a panel to examine the unique aspects and requirements of the former and how its science and technology might be advanced . congress could also support the buildout of archives of samples relevant to rdds . what priority should be given to countering radiological vs. other forms of terrorism ? there are many contending arguments . ( 1 ) despite concerns about terrorist interest in rdds , no successful rdd attack has occurred . ( 2 ) of nuclear , chemical , biological , and radiological weapons , the latter would arguably kill the fewest people . ( 3 ) most planning , training , equipment , and supplies that would help respond to an rdd attack would be of use in other disasters as well , so it is difficult to determine the balance between funds to counter all hazards and those to counter rdds only .