for all years , figures represent appropriations . this report is organized along these lines . the first section ( title i ) provides information on interior agencies ; the second section ( title ii ) discusses epa ; and the third section ( title iii ) addresses other agencies , programs , and entities . a fourth section of this report discusses selected cross - cutting topics that encompass more than one agency . entries in this report are for major agencies ( eg , the national park service ) and cross - cutting issues ( eg , wildland fire management ) that receive funding in the interior , environment , and related agencies appropriations bill . for each agency or issue , we discuss some of the key funding changes that appear to be of interest to congress . we also address related policy issues that occur in the context of considering appropriations legislation . appropriations are complex , and not all issues are summarized in this report . for example , budget submissions for some agencies number several hundred pages and contain innumerable funding , programmatic , and legislative changes for congressional consideration . further , appropriations laws provide funds for numerous accounts , activities , and subactivities , and the accompanying explanatory statements provide additional directives and other important information . for information on programs funded in the bill but not directly discussed in this report , please contact the key policy staff members listed at the end of the report . in general , in this report the term appropriations represents total funds available , including regular annual and supplemental appropriations , as well as rescissions , transfers , and deferrals , but excludes mandatory spending authorities . the house committee on appropriations is the primary source of the funding figures used throughout the report . other sources of information include the senate committee on appropriations , agency budget justifications , and the congressional record . in the tables throughout this report , some columns of funding figures do not match the precise totals provided due to rounding . epa's primary responsibilities include the implementation of federal statutes regulating air quality , water quality , pesticides , toxic substances , the management and disposal of solid and hazardous wastes , and the cleanup of environmental contamination . epa also awards grants to assist states and local governments in their regulatory role and in complying with federal requirements to control pollution . the fy2012 appropriations law provided $8.46 billion for epa , $219.1 million ( 3% ) less than the fy2011 appropriation of $8.68 billion and $510.0 million ( 6% ) less than the president's fy2012 request of $8.97 billion . table 13 presents the fy2012 enacted amounts compared to the president's fy2012 budget request and the fy2011 enacted appropriations for the eight accounts that fund the agency . note that the name of the "oil spill response" account was changed to "inland oil spill program" in fy2012 , as had been proposed by the president , to more clearly reflect the agency's jurisdiction for oil spill response in the inland coastal zone .