following are some highlights . the conference report on h.r . 1540 , which cuts the administration's authorization request by a total of $26.6 billion , was adopted by the house december 14 , 2011 , by a vote of 283-136 . meanwhile , most national guard combat units would be equipped with the one - third of the tank fleet that would not have the sep improvements . as enacted , the bill adds $255.0 million to the $181.3 million requested for sep upgrades in fy2012 . citing in its report the frequency with which national guard units have been deployed in recent years , the house appropriations committee urged dod to consider the advantages of having all combat units , regular army and national guard alike , equipped with the same version of the tank . in its report on the bill , the senate committee questioned the cost of the army's plan to develop a new armored troop carrier and then purchase 1,874 of those vehicles to replace half its current fleet of bradley fighting vehicles . noting that the program currently is behind schedule and in a state of flux , the senate committee cut $644.0 million from the $884.4 million requested . the house - passed bill would have provided $768.1 million for the program . the final bill provides $435.0 million for the program , a reduction of more than 50% which the conferees justified on grounds that the army was moving too quickly to develop the new vehicle before fully taking into account a formal analysis of alternative designs . the senate committee's version of the bill would have denied the $243.9 million requested for the joint light tactical vehicle ( jltv ) , thus terminating the program which was intended to develop a replacement for some of the roughly 170,000 humvees used by the army and marine corps . the committee said that , although the new vehicle had been intended as a replacement for the entire humvee fleet , the planned purchase had been greatly cut back because of the growing cost of the program which , in part , was the result of the services' desire to buy several versions of the new vehicle . the committee added to its version of the bill $20 million for the army to use in finding a cheaper alternative to replace existing humvees . the house - passed bill would have cut $25 million from the jltv request , with the house armed services committee citing delays in the program as the reason . the house bill also would have added $25 million to the budget to develop improved armor for humvees . the final bill provides $134 million to continue jltv and $20 million for improved humvee armor . in their report on the bill , conferees praised the two services for setting less demanding specifications for the new vehicle and agreeing to buy a single version . funding for selected aircraft programs provided by the house - passed and senate committee - reported versions of h.r . 2055 as enacted is summarized in the appendix . ( see table a - 8 . ) following are some highlights .