national security . some defend international climate change assistance as a way to address and mitigate risks to national security . according to a 2008 national intelligence assessment , the impacts of global climate change may worsen problems of poverty , social tensions , environmental degradation , and weak political institutions across the developing world . some see international climate change assistance as a means to help make lower - income countries less susceptible to these threats , for the benefit of both the country and the security interests of the united states . potential for misuse . national and international institutions that dispense financial assistance have been criticized on occasion for inefficient and bloated bureaucracies ; their lack of transparency about project procurement practices and operating costs ; and the proportion of their funds misused or lost through instances of graft , corruption , and other political inefficiencies . some suggest revisiting operational guidance of these institutions before further appropriations are made . uncertain results . questions remain regarding the overall effectiveness of international financial assistance in spurring economic development and reform in lower - income countries , and , more specifically , in addressing issues of climate change and the environment . many studies have examined the effects of international assistance provided to lower - income countries , including both bilateral and multilateral mechanisms , and have returned mixed results , making it difficult to reach firm conclusions that would support or oppose continued contributions . uncertainties in climate science . prevailing scientific research on the current and future impacts of greenhouse gas emissions on the global climate exhibits varying degrees of analytical uncertainty . the lack of definitiveness in some data and in certain model projections has been offered by some as a reason to postpone and / or reconsider both domestic and international climate change assistance policies and programs . some issues that may support providing assistance include the following: commercial interests . some maintain that international climate change assistance benefits u.s. businesses , as support for low - emission economic growth may increase trade , commerce , and economic activity in the global marketplace for u.s. goods and services . increased assistance may allow some u.s. industries to make competitive inroads into rapidly expanding markets , improve the advancement and commercialization of u.s. technologies , mobilize greater investment in related domestic sectors , and enhance job creation in the united states . decreased funding may cede american influence in global markets to other economic powers still engaged with lower - income countries on environmental and natural resource issues ( eg , the european union , china ) . investment efficiencies . some argue that the costs of responding to tomorrow's climate - related catastrophes , instabilities , conflicts , and technological needs may be significantly higher than the costs of preventing them today . some economists note that lower - income countries account for nearly all of the recent growth in global emissions and represent the cheapest near - term opportunity to mitigate ghg pollution as part of a cost - effective global solution . natural disaster preparedness . some claim that international climate change assistance is a means to support natural disaster preparedness around the globe .