sharia law is islamic law . it is based on two principal sources , the koran and the teaching of mohammed . religious law binds the followers of a particular religion . although the first amendment bars the government from adopting religious law as binding legal authority , religious law nonetheless may apply in certain legal scenarios . parties to private agreements or civil transactions ( eg , contracts , arbitration agreements , domestic relations agreements or settlements ) may provide that religious law would apply to the terms of the agreement or in the case of a dispute or breach of the agreement . the answer may be fairly straightforward , particularly in criminal cases where the law of the state in which the crime occurred has jurisdiction over the case . other cases may be more complicated or may allow the individual parties to agree to which law would apply , as in contract disputes where the contractual agreement includes a provision for what law would govern the dispute in case of breach . for the purposes of this report , broader proposals that address religion generally rather than singling out particular religious views may have a greater likelihood for success under this argument . generally applicable restrictions may be less likely to appear to be advancing religion or inhibiting religion because they have addressed religion categorically . however , it is important to remember that the first amendment not only protects against laws that provide separate treatment of a particular religion compared to others , but also protects against laws that provide separate treatment of religion generally over non - religion . government actions that would make a benefit available or place a restriction on only certain religions have been construed as violations of the establishment clause . a number of secular purposes may apply in legislative efforts to restrict the role of religious law within government actions . for example , it may be argued that these proposals are removing purportedly religious elements from the process of judicial decision making . likewise , for broader proposals that ban foreign law or laws of other cultures ( which may include religious law ) , it may be argued that such proposals would ensure that american law be the exclusive authority of u.s. courts and thereby uphold the integrity of our democratic system . however , one may counterargue that such alleged purposes may be masking covert religious animus , particularly for proposals that specify certain religious laws to be banned , rather than addressing religious laws generally . the court has looked at the broader context for a particular law's enactment , not just the stated purpose for the law , and in some cases has found that the legislature's motivations implied a bias regarding religious views . regardless of whether these proposals are deemed to have a secular purpose , they must also have a neutral effect with regard to religion under a lemon analysis . the effect may be considered neutral if it does not advance or inhibit religion . some have argued that pending proposals to restrict religious laws would only establish a rubric for choice of laws .