enactment of p.l . 111-292 , the telework enhancement act of 2010 , on december 9 , 2010 , as the 111 th congress was approaching adjournment , represented the culmination of several years of legislative activity related to this issue . for example , the 108 th and 109 th congresses saw the introduction and referral to committee of two bills , but no further action occurred on the legislation . in the 110 th congress , the house passed a bill and the senate reported a bill , but neither measure saw further action . under the law , the head of each executive agency of the federal government is required to establish and implement a policy under which employees shall be authorized to telework . the policy must ensure that telework does not diminish employee performance or agency operations . the law defines telework as a work flexibility arrangement under which an employee performs the duties and responsibilities of his or her position , and other authorized activities , from an approved worksite other than the location from which the employee would otherwise work . to participate in telework , an employee must enter into a written agreement with the agency . an employee whose official duties require , on a daily basis ( every work day ) , direct handling of secure materials determined to be inappropriate for telework by the agency head , or on - site activity that cannot be handled remotely or at an alternate worksite , is not eligible to telework , except in emergency situations , as determined by the agency head . the house committee on oversight and government reform and the senate committee on homeland security and governmental affairs emphasized several underlying purposes of telework in reporting the legislation to the house of representatives and the senate , respectively: the committee has determined through its oversight efforts that there is not a consistent definition of telework across agencies.... an important consideration for agency telework programs is ensuring the security of government information... . in recent years , telework also has increasingly been viewed as an important tool for ensuring continuity of essential government services in emergencies . the goal of this legislation is to ensure that federal agencies more effectively integrate telework into their management plans and agency cultures . the recent snow emergency in the washington , d.c. , metropolitan area during the first half of february 2010 vividly underscored the importance of every agency having a telework policy in place and a culture that values and is prepared for telework... . the committee has concluded that telework is an essential tool that agencies should deploy as part of their overall strategies for human capital management and continuity of operations , and that legislation is needed to help agencies overcome resistance to telework arising from inertia and fear of the unknown .