most spending under function 500 is discretionary . the administration budget would track closely with cbo , which expects an initial drop in medicaid spending in fy2012 , due to the scheduled expiration of enhanced federal matching to states initially authorized by arra , and the effects of the economic recovery on the medicaid caseload . however , spending would then climb sharply , starting in fy2013 , under both the cbo baseline and the administration's february budget . the house budget resolution , on the other hand , envisions a decrease in spending until fy2014 , followed by a relatively flat line through fy2018 , and a slight increase for the balance of the decade . in fy2021 , the administration's february budget would result in estimated outlays only slightly ( 2% ) lower than the cbo baseline , while outlays would be 50% lower under the house budget resolution's spending targets . medicaid is the primary driver of spending in function 550 . in its request for medicaid and medicare ( discussed below ) , the administration cites the major changes to both programs already enacted in the patient protection and affordable care act of 2010 ( ppaca , p.l . 111-148 , as amended by p.l . the administration's fy2012 budget includes additional medicaid proposals intended to improve program integrity ( reduce fraud , waste , and abuse ) , limit reimbursement rates for durable medical equipment , simplify the federal - state matching formulas under medicaid and chip , and improve patient safety . the president's framework also expresses support for proposals to reform service delivery to high - cost beneficiaries , including those eligible for both medicaid and medicare ( dual eligibles ) , and calls on the national governors association to make additional recommendations for medicaid reform . the house budget committee , in its accompanying report , notes that the budget resolution assumes a "fundamental reform" of medicaid . the report lists a series of "potential approaches," including conversion of the federal share of medicaid spending into an allotment ( a block grant ) , which would be indexed for inflation and population growth . the committee advocates repealing the medicaid expansions enacted in ppaca , which are scheduled to begin in 2014 , and the ppaca provisions authorizing subsidies to help low - income individuals purchase health insurance through exchanges . the resolution also assumes elimination of the individual mandate to purchase insurance , established under ppaca . the house budget resolution further assumes savings would be achieved by repealing any unspent funds provided under arra and other associated provisions in ppaca . function 570 includes only the medicare program , which provides health insurance to individuals age 65 or older and certain persons with disabilities . nearly 99% of spending in this function is mandatory , and almost all of the mandatory spending consists of payments for medicare benefits . congress provides an annual appropriation for the costs of administering and monitoring the medicare program . figure 7 shows estimated outlays for medicare , from fy2011 through fy2021 in constant fy2011 dollars , under the cbo baseline , the administration's february budget request , and the house budget resolution .