appendix a . selected studies measuring sex trafficking of children estimates of children who are victims of sex trafficking are scarce , and there is little to no consensus on the value of existing estimates . the research literature includes studies that use varying methodology , such as differences in how the population is defined , how data are collected ( eg , estimates based on youth risk factors , interviews with stakeholders , police records , etc .

 ) , and the geographic scope ( eg , city , state , or national ) of the study . some of these studies are discussed below . as part of their research on child sex trafficking and commercial sexual exploitation , the national academy of sciences discussed these and other studies . their report concluded that the despite absence of strong evidence on the nature and extent of the problem , they should focus on how federal and other stakeholders could make progress in addressing child sex trafficking and commercial sex trafficking . the report discussed the challenges with focusing on better prevalence and incidence studies , including cost . it suggested shifting focus and resources from national - level counting to more targeted counting , such as the number of survivors from a specified region or subpopulation receiving services , charges brought forth by prosecutors , and successful convictions of exploiters and traffickers . estes - weiner study richard j. estes and neil alan weiner estimated in their 2001 study that more than 244,000 youth in the united states were at risk of becoming victims of prostitution and other forms of trafficking . importantly , the authors noted that this number did not reflect the actual number of child exploitation cases . the study noted that the majority of victims tended to be runaway or thrown - away youth who lived on the streets and became victims of prostitution . generally , these children came from homes where they had been abused or abandoned and often became involved in prostitution as a way to support themselves . estes and weiner found that approximately 55% of girls living on the streets in the united states engaged in formal prostitution , and of these girls , approximately 75% worked for a pimp / trafficker . to what extent are the needs of u.s. citizen and noncitizen victims similar and to what extent do they differ ? as mentioned , u.s. citizens and lprs are more likely to be victims of sex trafficking and noncitizens are more likely to be victims of labor trafficking . as such , should funding for victims of trafficking generally be targeted to serve specific populations based on immigration status , or should it be targeted to providing specialized services for victims of a particular form of trafficking ( sex or labor trafficking ) without regard to immigration status ? the social services field provides services to child victims of sex trafficking through a variety of strategies .