destruction of the evidence. that is , "[i]t was reasonably foreseeable that , upon hearing police announce their presence , the persons inside the apartment would proceed to destroy evidence of their crime. on the other hand , "[b]efore police announced their presence , there would have been no reason to destroy evidence of either the marijuana which the officers had smelled , or evidence of the original drug transaction. the united states supreme court granted certiorari to consider the question of "when does lawful police action impermissibly 'create' exigent circumstances which preclude warrantless entry ; and which of the five tests currently being used by the united states courts of appeals is proper to determine when impermissibly created exigent circumstances exist ? the court , in an opinion written by justice alito and joined by seven other members of the court , noted the court's regular acknowledgement that exigent circumstances , such as the threatened destruction of evidence , will excuse compliance with the warrant requirement . thus , the court reasoned , where "the police did not create the exigency by engaging or threatening to engage in conduct that violates the fourth amendment , warrantless entry to prevent the destruction of evidence is reasonable and thus allowed. it then proceeded to explain why it found unpersuasive the various lower court justifications for a restriction of the exigent circumstance exception: bad faith , reasonable foreseeability , sufficient time to secure a warrant , deviation from standard police procedures , the threat of imminent police entry , and court precedent . the court rejected the argument that the exigent circumstance exception should be unavailable when the officers created the exigency in bad faith in order to avoid the warrant requirement . it gave no credence to the suggestion that the exception should be unavailable if officers had sufficient probable cause and time to secure a warrant . in the mind of the court , there are many acceptable reasons why officers might "knock and talk" or engage in other investigative techniques rather than seeking a search warrant as soon as some minimal level of probable cause exists . "faulting the police for failing to apply for a search warrant at the earliest possible time after obtaining probable cause imposes a duty that is nowhere to be found in the constitution. king argued that "law enforcement officers impermissibly create an exigency when they engage in conduct that would cause a reasonable person to believe that entry is imminent and inevitable . in [his] view , relevant factors include the officers' tone of voice in announcing their presence and the forcefulness of their knocks. the court dismissed this with the observation that "the ability of law enforcement officers to respond to an exigency cannot turn on such subtleties. finally , the court denied its decision was controlled by johnson v. united states . the court in johnson found a violation of the fourth amendment when police entered a hotel room after hearing shuffling within the room . like king , johnson involved a warrantless arrest and search occurring after officers smelled burnt drugs , knocked , and heard movement within the premises .