among the measures , h.r . 6206 and s. 3762 had proposed to reinstate the monies that were in the fltfa account when the law expired on july 25 , 2010 . in other respects the bills are identical . they would remove the provision that terminates the fltfa account should the authority to sell and exchange lands expire . this would allow funds in the account to continue to be used for acquisitions . they also would allow for updated land management plans to be used as the basis for identifying lands for sale and exchange . specifically , they call for use of plans in effect as of the date of enactment of the measures . further , the bills would allow for acquisition of lands within or adjacent to federally designated areas regardless of when they were established . on november 26 , 2012 , s. 3525 was considered on the senate floor . however , it was returned to the senate calendar after a point of order against an amendment in the nature of a substitute was sustained and the amendment was ruled out of order . the senate majority leader sought and received unanimous consent to resume consideration of s. 3525 at a future time . s. 714 was placed on the senate calendar on september 6 , 2011 , and a house subcommittee held a hearing on h.r . 3365 on may 17 , 2012 . legislation pertaining to fltfa also was introduced in the 111 th congress , but was not enacted . both measures specified that the balance in the fltfa account as of july 24 , 2010 , was to be reinstated , and available until expended , for the purposes covered by the fltfa law . several issues concerning whether to extend or make fltfa permanent have been under debate . one issue is the extent to which there is a need for this authority in the context of other laws authorizing the sale and acquisition of federal land and other sources of funding for these purposes . a second issue is whether any extension of fltfa should be relatively short ( eg , one year ) or relatively long ( eg , 10 years or more ) . a third issue is whether to require land use plans as of july 25 , 2000 , to continue to be used as the basis of land sales . a fourth set of issues relates to the retention and use of proceeds , including the extent to which any future proceeds should be retained by the agencies , used exclusively for land sales and acquisitions , and used primarily in the state in which they were generated , and whether previously generated proceeds should be returned to the fltfa fund . the expiration of fltfa does not bar blm from selling or exchanging land identified for disposal , because blm has authority to dispose of lands under flpma and other laws . further , the expiration of fltfa does not preclude blm , fws , nps , and fs from acquiring land , because the agencies have authorities ( of varying breadth ) to acquire nonfederal lands .