geographically referenced information is also known as geospatial information . types of geospatial information include features like highway intersections , office buildings , rivers , the path of a tornado , the san andreas fault , or congressional district boundaries . information associated with a specific location is referred to in gis parlance as an attribute , such as the population of a congressional district , or amount of movement per year along the san andreas fault . other terms common to geospatial data and gis analysis are described in the box below . the power of gis is the ability to combine geospatial information in unique ways — by layers or themes — and extract something new . it is beyond the scope of this report to present the universe of geospatial data and its utility to the federal government . however , the federal government has had and continues to have a major role in the overall framework for geospatial data , including its organization , coordination , and sharing among federal agencies and with state and local entities . in addition to providing basic information on gis and geospatial information , this report describes the federal geospatial enterprise and how it is organized . given the complexity of managing , sharing , and using geospatial data from a variety of sources and across the breadth of the federal government , the 112 th congress in its oversight role may have an interest in the programs and geospatial "assets" belonging to most federal departments and agencies . crs report r41826 , issues and challenges for federal geospatial information , explores geospatial policy issues of interest to congress , including organization and management , data sharing , coordination , the role of nonfederal stakeholders , and proposals for a national gis , as well as examples of legislation . crs report r40717 , issues regarding a national land parcel database , delves into one specific federal responsibility: the coordination and management of land parcel data for all federal lands . together , these three reports introduce basic concepts and discuss more complex policy issues regarding the federal geospatial enterprise . a discussion of classified geospatial information and national security issues is beyond the scope of this report . gis is a computer data system capable of capturing , storing , analyzing , and displaying geographically referenced information — information attached to a location , such as latitude and longitude , or street location . for instance , a gis analysis might include the location of a highway intersection and the average number of vehicles that flow through the intersection throughout the day , and extract information useful for locating a business . gis might include both the location of a river and the water depth along its course by season , and enable an analysis of the effects of development on runoff within the watershed . overlaying the path of a severe thunderstorm with geospatial data on the types of structures encountered — homes , stores , schools , post offices — could inform an analysis of what types of building construction can survive high winds and hail . this report provides a primer on geospatial data and gis and provides several examples of their use .