in addition , h.r . 6042 would require agencies to establish an objective for holding executives accountable for addressing employee satisfaction . the original vision of the ses was never realized . more importantly , we find that the original vision itself is inadequate for today's needs and does not provide the blueprint to build the kind of senior government leadership required for the future… . building a consistently high - caliber , government - wide executive organization is impeded by decentralized talent development and recruitment processes , passive recruiting , an exceedingly cumbersome and lengthy hiring system , inadequate leadership training programs and a pay structure than can allow subordinates to earn more than top - level executives . the senior executive service's professional association , the senior executive association ( sea ) , has also suggested a need for reforms to the ses . carol bonosaro , president of the sea , has been a strong advocate for reforms . in testimony she gave before the house committee on homeland security's subcommittee on management , investigation and oversight in march 2009 , she proposed several reforms for the department of homeland security and government - wide . she suggested a number of changes that would help to do the following: restore career leadership , create a more fair and transparent pay and performance management system , and provide for training and continuing development of the ses . making such reforms to the ses system across the government will help all agencies , including dhs , recruit and retain the best senior executives and ensure that they have the necessary tools to effectively carry out the missions of their agencies . this section discusses some areas that advocates for changes to the ses have identified as needing reform , including pay compression , recruiting and retaining of senior executives , career development and training opportunities , mobility , diversity , and the role of opm . president obama's president's management council established a working group to identify , among other things , areas for improvement of the ses . omb and opm , the agencies that are coordinating the working group's effort , issued a joint memorandum on february 18 , 2011 , to members of the ses . in the memo , leaders from omb and opm listed proposals to ( 1 ) improve ses professional development programs ; ( 2 ) streamline burdensome administrative processes ; ( 3 ) strengthen personnel performance management ; and ( 4 ) expand and diversify executive talent pipelines . the memo suggested such reforms as encouraging more engagement between senior executives and political appointees in agencies and improving the current recruitment techniques to increase diversity and talent within the ses . on march 29 , 2011 , the senate committee on homeland security and governmental affairs' subcommittee on oversight of government management , the federal workforce , and the district of columbia held a hearing on the ses . entitled "strengthening the senior executive service: a review of challenges facing the government's leadership corps," the hearing featured three witnesses who discussed many of the issues mentioned in this report . the witnesses were representatives from opm , the partnership for public service , and the senior executives association .