both are susceptible to policy lags . some economists came to believe that political lags made fiscal policy ill - timed , while monetary policy could be enacted quickly . others became less enamored of fiscal policy because it becomes somewhat less effective in an open economy . at the same time , there are circumstances where traditional monetary policy does not work well ( at very low interest rates , for example ) or where a contraction appears to be serious enough to warrant both monetary and fiscal measures . during the 2007 – 2009 great recession there was broad bipartisan agreement that fiscal stimulus should be used , as it was in both the bush and obama administrations . the textbook consensus is that spending increases are more effective than tax cuts , because the full amount of the initial increase is actually spent , while some of a tax cut is initially saved . spending in the form of transfers could also be partially saved , although it is believed that most transfers benefit lower - income recipients who are likely to spend all or most of the transfer . this report begins with an overview of this mainstream theory . the next section of the report then examines the evidence that has been used to challenge this theory . current fiscal policy theories began with a work published during the great depression by british economist john maynard keynes . as a result , this type of policy is often referred to as keynesian , although there have been numerous refinements and developments in the theory . these developments include , among others , the standard model ( referred to as is - lm ) that includes both monetary and fiscal policy , the refinement of the tradeoff between inflation and unemployment , leading to the notion of a natural rate of unemployment ( where policies tend to affect price rather than output ) , the incorporation of expectations , and modifications for an open economy ( where goods and capital flow across borders ) . some commentators contrast keynesian economics with neoclassical economics . neoclassical economics originated in the late 19 th century and theorizes that output and prices adjust to forces of supply and demand . supply and demand are , in turn , driven by decisions made by economic agents ( consumers , workers , and producers ) who maximize their welfare . most economists have both neoclassical and keynesian - style views , one applied largely to questions of microeconomics and the other to questions of macroeconomics . since world war ii , government policy to address business cycles has generally been guided by some form of keynesian theory . the fundamental concept behind this view of macroeconomics and fiscal policy is that prices in an economy do not immediately adjust to shocks , which can lead to unemployment of resources . workers may become unemployed and capital may sit idle , due to a lack of sufficient demand . to reduce unemployment , expansionary fiscal policy ( an increase in spending or a reduction in taxes to expand aggregate demand ) can be employed . the magnitude of the effects of fiscal policy is measured by a multiplier .