each of these issues is discussed below . it may not be possible for agencies to sell some unneeded properties , particularly when the real estate market is slow . congress may therefore wish to consider whether to expand the authority of agencies to enter into enhanced use leases ( euls ) . in broad terms , euls are special authorities that permit agencies to enter into short - or long - term lease agreements with public and private entities for the use of federal property . va has an eul in new jersey , for example , that has turned an underutilized property into an industrial park , and it leases unneeded space in los angeles on a short - term basis to the film industry . because euls are typically provided to individual agencies , the scope of the authority they grant varies widely . many agencies can retain the proceeds generated by euls , for example , but others cannot . similarly , some agencies may use eul proceeds for activities unrelated to real property , while others may apply them only to real property functions . while euls may provide revenue to agencies they may not otherwise realize , some agencies find the process of drafting , negotiating , and implementing an eul agreement to be time consuming and complicated . if congress does consider expanding eul authorities , among the issues it might choose to examine are whether to require congressional approval before eul proceeds may be used by an agency , and whether to limit the use of proceeds to certain purposes ( eg , only disposal , any real property activity , any agency activity ) . agencies without independent disposal authority generally follow the process described in this section . according to gao , weaknesses in the disposition process have left the government with a large inventory of unneeded properties that cost hundreds of millions of dollars a year to operate . in fy2009 , the government held more than 10,000 excess buildings with total operating costs of $134 million . agencies have said that their efforts to dispose of unneeded properties are hindered by statutory disposal requirements , the cost of preparing properties for disposal , and conflicts with stakeholders . the federal real property and administrative services act of 1949 ( property act ) applies to real property held by most federal agencies . the property act authorizes the general services administration ( gsa ) to dispose of real property that agencies no longer need , although some agencies have been granted the authority to dispose of their own property .