the federalist , no . the qualifications required to hold the office of u.s . senator or representative to congress are established and set out within the u.s. constitution . there are only three "positive" standing qualifications for the office of u.s . senator and representative: age — a representative to congress must be at least 25 years old ; a senator must be at least 30 years old . citizenship — a representative must be a citizen of the united states for at least seven years ; a senator must be a citizen of the united states for at least nine years . inhabitancy — a person elected to the house or senate must be an "inhabitant" of the state from which chosen "when elected. although there may have been some credible minority argument concerning the ability of congress or the states individually to set additional or different qualifications for federal office from those set out in the constitution , it is now well - settled that the qualifications established in the u.s. constitution are the exclusive qualifications for federal office ( and are not merely "minimum" qualifications ) . the constitutional history and case law demonstrate that such constitutional qualifications are fixed and may not be changed , added to , or subtracted from by congress , nor by the state legislatures ( other than by an amendment to the u.s. constitution ) . the u.s. constitution , at article i , section 5 , clause 1 , expressly delegates to each house of congress the authority to judge the qualifications for office of its own members: "each house shall be the judge of the elections , returns , and qualifications of its own members.... " as noted by authorities on parliamentary democracies and the constitution , since congress is an independent , separate , and co - equal branch of government , it would not be consistent with its status or functions , nor with the separation of powers principles generally , for a different branch of the government , such as the judiciary , to determine the legislature's make - up: the propriety of each house being the judge of these matters is very obvious . no power external to the house could decide them without an intrusion upon the question of its organization , which would be fatal to its freedom and independence . the right of the house , as a body , to determine upon the right of each member to a place in that body is so obvious that it needs no comment . the power of election is vested , as we have seen , in the constituency under the laws of the states ; but whether that constituency have elected qualified persons , and whether the officers holding the election have made proper returns , is left to the house in order to prevent intrusion of persons disqualified or not duly elected upon their deliberations .