it then discusses what is and is not included in this definition of income . 36 ( b ) of irc to define household income based on magi for purposes of medicaid eligibility for certain populations and premium credits for coverage through the health insurance exchanges . specifically , gross income is total income minus certain exclusions ( eg , public assistance payments , contributions to retirement plans ) . from gross income , adjusted gross income ( agi ) is calculated to reflect a number of deductions , including trade and business deductions , losses from sale of property , and alimony payments . magi is defined as agi plus certain foreign earned income and tax - exempt interest . as originally enacted under aca , agi ( and consequently magi ) includes only sources of income that are taxable . thus , some sources ( or types ) of income that may be considered resources for determining whether a person ( or couple ) is low - income were only partially included , whereas others were not included at all . two sources of income that were partially included in the initial aca magi definition were non - taxable social security benefits and non - taxable pension and annuity income . examples of other sources of income that are not included in magi are fringe benefits , cafeteria plan benefits , gifts ( cash , property , or in - kind ) , and inheritances ( see ) . these may be considered resources for determining low - income . in addition , as discussed later , many other low - income programs include some measure of liquid assets as resources when determining eligibility . this definition of magi raised concerns , especially with respect to exclusion of non - taxable social security benefits . generally , social security beneficiaries aged 65 and older are eligible for medicare coverage for health care services . however , under the initially enacted aca definition of magi , individuals and households who choose to receive their social security benefits early at the ages of 62 through 64 could potentially qualify for medicaid if their magi was no higher than 133% of the fpl ( or 138% of fpl because of the 5% disregard ) , or for premium credits in the newly established health care exchanges if their magi was between 100% to 400% of the fpl , even if their total income was much higher . specifically , if the aca definition of magi was used , not all social security income would be included in the magi definition and , for the majority of social security beneficiaries , no social security income would be included in magi . to address this concern , the original aca definition of magi was later amended under p.l . 112-56 , which among other things , included non - taxable social security in the definition of magi . this change did not affect the treatment of non - taxable pension and annuity income , which continues to be partially excluded under the amended definition of magi .