this has been previously considered by congress . another policy option would be to express support or opposition to the creation of a commission of inquiry ( coi ) . for example , s. con . 12 contains a provision supporting "an international investigation into allegations of international crimes against civilians in burma , including ethnic minorities. before taking action to alter or adjust current u.s. policy , a number of factors may come into play . first , burma has a comparatively new government and has yet to resolve many basic patterns in its governance , including the balance of power between the union parliament and the union government , or the proper relationship between the union government and the 14 regional and state governments . second , special representative mitchell may want more time to reformulate and adjust the conduct of u.s. policy towards burma , and be given the opportunity to present to congress his proposals on what adjustments might be needed . third , the continuing conflicts between the tatmadaw and the ethnic - based militias appear to be comparatively fluid and may have a significant impact on the current situation in burma . fourth , while aung san suu kyi's first trip outside of rangoon passed without incident , it is unclear how she and the nld will be treated in the coming months and whether the political situation has significantly changed since the 2010 elections and the dissolution of the spdc . appendix a. map of burma ( including regions , states , and major cities ) appendix b . reports required under u.s. burma sanctions laws the table below provides a list of reports or information to be made available to the public required by the three laws , including information on: which agency was to provide the information ; to whom the information was to be provided ; how often the reports were to be distributed ; what deadlines were specified , and how the reports were to be provided . such a sanction has been discussed in the past . some commentators have also suggested ways by which the u.s. government could apply more pressure on other nations to adopt a policy towards burma more similar to that of the united states . among their suggestions are: make section 5 ( c ) of the jade act mandatory – section 5 ( c ) of the jade act grants the secretary of the treasury the authority , at his discretion , to "prohibit or impose conditions on the opening or maintaining in the united states of a correspondent account or payable - through account" by a bank or financial institution if the account may be used to provide financial services to a sanctioned burmese person or by a financial institution holding assets of a sanctioned burmese person . congress could pass legislation requiring that the secretary of the treasury close all such accounts . prohibit the awarding of u.s. government contracts to companies doing business in or with burma , and / or sanctioned burmese persons – a ban of this sort would have to be made consistent with existing international trade agreements , such as those associated with the world trade organization .