see p.l . 3470 ( royce ) , taiwan relations act affirmation and naval vessel transfer act of 2014 . on april 7 , 2014 , the house agreed by voice vote to the bill , which added h.res . 494 as section 101 . should there be another taiwan policy review after the last review in 1994 ? should the united states press taiwan to notify the cross - strait economic cooperation framework agreement ( ecfa ) of 2010 to the world trade organization ( wto ) and pay more attention to benefits for u.s. companies ? how can u.s. officials induce taiwan to further reduce its trade and investment barriers in order to boost bilateral commercial ties ? with resumption of talks under the 1994 u.s. - taiwan trade and investment framework agreement ( tifa ) after they were in limbo for years due largely to taiwan's restrictions on u.s. beef , what should be u.s. priorities to deepen bilateral economic ties ? why hasn't taiwan removed restrictions on u.s. pork ? should the united states seek to negotiate a free trade agreement ( fta ) or bilateral investment agreement ( bia ) , and / or support taiwan's efforts to join regional trade negotiations , such as the trans - pacific partnership ( tpp ) ? should taiwan's growing economic dependence on the prc be of concern to u.s. and taiwan policy makers , and if so , what is the best way for taiwan to further diversify its economic partners ? ties or tension across the taiwan strait affect international security ( with potential u.s. intervention ) . congressional oversight has been concerned with support for u.s. interests , particularly respect for taiwan's democracy . since their first direct talks in 1992 , taiwan and the prc have negotiated through quasi - official organizations: the strait exchange foundation ( sef ) in taipei and the association for relations across the taiwan strait ( arats ) in beijing . in discussing practical issues in initial contact , the two sides agreed to disagree on the meaning of "one china" with the verbal formulation of "one china , different interpretations. to taipei , "china" is the roc . to beijing , "china" is the prc . however , years later , the cpc and kmt shifted to contend that they reached a "1992 consensus. the dpp has disputed that there was a "consensus" and has argued that any understanding was reached between two political parties without a democratic mandate . the two sides of the taiwan strait ambiguously talk about their "cross - strait" ( rather than "domestic" or "international" ) relationship . with a population of only 23 million people , taiwan has evolved to become a highly developed , dynamic , and g lobally competitive economy . taiwan's gross domestic product ( gdp ) on a purchasing power parity ( ppp ) basis was $929 billion , making taiwan the world's 18 th - largest economy ( after australia ) . taiwan's per capita gdp on a ppp basis ( a common measurement of living standard s ) was $39,700 , larger than that of japan and south korea , and about three - quarters the size of u.s. living standards .