, by july 21 , 2013 ) . section 939e requires gao to study the feasibility and merits of creating an independent professional organization for rating analysts employed by nationally recognized statistical rating organizations . however , it is possible that these entries will result in more than 72 final rules . as was the case for upcoming proposed rules under the dodd - frank act , one of the cftc final rule entries in the unified agenda ( "position limits for derivatives' ) was rather general: the commission has been mandated by congress ( in the dodd - frank act ) to impose position limits , on an aggregate basis , on futures and swaps relating to exempt in order to ( a ) diminish , eliminate , or prevent excessive speculation ; ( b ) deter and prevent market manipulation , squeezes , and corners ; ( c ) ensure sufficient market liquidity for bona fide hedgers ; and ( d ) ensure that the price discovery function of an underlying market is not disrupted . , non - cra ) legislative procedures to disapprove agencies' rules , but such legislation may prove even more difficult to enact than a cra resolution of disapproval ( primarily because of the lack of expedited procedures in the senate ) , and if enacted may also be vetoed by the president . the purpose of the interim final rule is to alert counterparties that these swaps may be subject to reporting rules and to ensure the preservation of data relating to those swaps pending implementation of such rules . cftc published the interim final rule on december 27 , 2010 , and indicated that the nature and timing of its next step was "to be determined. as noted earlier in this report , when federal agencies issue substantive regulations , they are carrying out legislative authority delegated to them by congress . therefore , it is appropriate for congress to oversee the rules that agencies issue to ensure that they are consistent with congressional intent and the rulemaking requirements established in various statutes and executive orders . for congress to oversee the rules being issued pursuant to the dodd - frank act , it must first know that they are being issued — ideally as early as possible . the unified agenda is perhaps the best vehicle to provide that early information , describing not only what rules agencies are expected to issue , but also providing information regarding their significance and timing . congress has a range of tools available to oversee the rules that federal agencies are expected to issue to implement the dodd - frank act , including oversight hearings and confirmation hearings for the heads of regulatory agencies . individual members of congress may also participate in the rulemaking process by , among other things , meeting with agency officials and filing public comments . congress , committees , and individual members can also request that the government accountability office ( gao ) evaluate the agencies' rulemaking activities . however , the act itself contains more than 40 provisions requiring gao to conduct studies and write reports .