the provisions represent different responses to the corps' fiscal challenges . some would deemphasize certain types of corps activities ( eg , water and wastewater projects ) , while others would provide greater financing for other types of corps activities ( eg , harbors ) . the corps and its projects are part of the larger discourse about how to proceed with infrastructure investments and their role in the economy , job creation , and provision of public services . the corps is faced with more demands for building and maintaining its projects than available federal funding allows . table 8 provides a list of legislation related directly to corps fiscal issues . in addition to the provisions listed in table 8 , other corps authorization and appropriations processes relevant to corps fiscal challenges also are underway , but are beyond the scope of this report . these include more focused legislative provisions , such as those related to specific corps projects and activities ( eg , h.r . for more detailed background on corps processes , see crs report r41243 , army corps of engineers water resource projects: authorization and appropriations , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] . the frequently asked questions on corps appropriations address the corps' annual appropriations and supplemental funding , trends and categories of funding , and earmarks and emergency operations . after the appropriations faqs , table 3 provides some of the recommendations made in government and expert reports for addressing issues raised in the appropriations faqs . the faqs on the corps backlog and project delivery discuss the size and elements of the agency's construction backlog and operations and maintenance backlog , as well as the factors contributing to the expansion of the construction backlog . after the backlog faqs , table 4 provides recommendations made in an expert report for addressing the backlog . the faqs on the corps authorization and missions address the processes in place for authorization and deauthorization of corps activities , perspectives on the corps mission and role , and past efforts to refocus the agency . after the authorization and mission faqs , table 5 provides recommendations made in an expert report for addressing the backlog . where available , it also includes related recommendations from expert and government reports , as well as current legislation that may be considered in regard to these challenges ( see table 8 for examples of legislation in the 112 th congress ) . the faqs are organized into four categories: appropriations ; backlog and project delivery ; authorizations and missions ; and navigation trust funds . the below faqs on navigation expenditures and trust funds address coastal harbor and inland waterway funding , including proposals to alter trust fund collections and their use and funding challenges for operations and maintenance / low use navigation projects . at the end of this section , table 7 provides recommendations by government and expert reports for addressing navigation funding issues . there are several legislative proposals related to corps fiscal challenges before the 112 th congress . also not included in the table is information about the various actions related to earmarks and congressionally directed spending , which also affect the corps congressional fiscal context .