this influence has increased following the enactment of the lisbon treaty . even before adoption of the lisbon treaty , representatives of the council of ministers consulted the ep on cfsp issues , paying regular visits to the institution to keep members of the european parliament ( meps ) informed of cfsp and csdp decisions . this exchange continues under the lisbon treaty , including by the president of the european council and the high representative . the ep also indirectly influences member state debates on cfsp through its own discussions and activities: observers assert that the ep has become an increasingly prominent forum for debate on international issues . the ep may issue resolutions that express its view or urge a course of action on an international issue . in september 2012 , the ep issued a resolution containing an extensive overview and assessment of cfsp under the lisbon treaty . the ep has a foreign affairs committee that monitors the conduct of eu foreign policy , with two subcommittees ( human rights and security and defense ) . the ep may also set up special committees to investigate specific issues for a limited period of time , such as the 2006 special committee to examine the alleged role of eu member states in hosting reported secret cia detention facilities and aiding cia flights related to the rendition of terrorism suspects . the ep has 41 delegations ( ranging in size between 20 and 50 meps ) that maintain parliament - to - parliament contacts and relations with representatives of many countries and regions around the world . for example , the ep has interparliamentary delegations for relations with the united states and the nato parliamentary assembly , as well as with russia , iran , israel , the palestinian legislative council , china , india , and the korean peninsula . the ep won significant concessions during the debates over setting up the external action service . due to the ep's role in the oversight and approval of the eu budget , the ep's assent was required regarding the structure , staffing , and budget of the eeas . the ep won the right to scrutinize the non - military parts of the cfsp / csdp budget ( previously , the particulars of these expenses were exempt from ep oversight ) . the ep also won the right to hold u.s. senate - style confirmation hearings for some of the eu ambassadors designated to prominent postings . the ep has a central , formal role in eu "community" decision making . under the lisbon treaty , the number of issue areas in which the ep acts as a co - legislator along with the council of ministers has expanded considerably . as a result , the ep must give its consent on all external agreements negotiated by the european commission . this power includes trade deals ( such as the eu - south korea free trade agreement passed by the ep in february 2011 ) and agreements such as the u.s. - eu swift agreement on tracking terrorist financing and the u.s - eu airline security agreement on sharing passenger name record ( pnr ) information .