id . he is bound by oath to "faithfully execute the office of president of the united states," and , to the best of his "ability , preserve , protect and defend the constitution of the united states. id . , ยง1 , clause 8 . it is clear that the constitution allocates powers necessary to conduct war between the president and congress . while the ratification record of the constitution reveals little about the meaning of the specific war powers clauses , the importance of preventing all of those powers from accumulating in one branch appears to have been well understood , and vesting the powers of the sword and the purse in separate hands appears to have been part of a careful design . it is generally agreed that some aspects of the exercise of those powers are reserved to the commander in chief , and that congress could conceivably legislate beyond its authority in such a way as to intrude impermissibly into presidential power . the precise boundaries separating legislative from executive functions , however , remain elusive . there can be little doubt that congress would exceed its bounds if it were to confer exclusive power to direct military operations on an officer not subordinate to the president , or to purport to issue military orders directly to subordinate officers . at the same time , congress's power to make rules for the government and regulation of the armed forces provides it wide latitude for restricting the nature of orders the president may give . congress's power of appropriations gives it ample power to supply or withhold resources , even if the president deems them necessary to carry out planned military operations . while it is well established that congress and the president each possess authority on ending a military conflict , issues may arise if the political branches are in disagreement as to whether or how u.s. participation in an armed conflict should cease . inter - branch disagreement regarding the cessation of hostilities has been a rare occurrence , but it is not unprecedented . while congress appears to have the constitutional authority to compel the cessation of u.s. participation in hostilities via statutory command , efforts to compel the withdrawal of u.s. forces from an armed conflict over the opposition of the president have generally proven ineffective except when tied to funding restrictions . the following sections discuss congress's constitutional authority to end a military conflict via statute , the implications that the war powers resolution or the repeal of prior military authorization have upon the continued use of military force , and other considerations which may inform congressional decisions to limit the use of military force via statutory command or through funding limitations . congress has used its spending power to restrict the deployment and use of the armed forces in the past . in 1973 , for instance , after other legislative efforts failed to draw down u.s. participation in combat operations in indochina , congress effectively ended it by means of appropriations riders prohibiting use of funds . section 307 of the second supplemental appropriations act for fiscal year 1973 , p.l .