the u.s. energy sector is large and complex . multiple energy sources , including fossil , nuclear , and several renewable sources , are used to produce energy products for multiple demand sectors ( transportation , electricity , industrial , and residential / commercial ) . many policies directed at renewable energy deployment are designed to address these challenges . the potential for renewable electricity generation in the united states is very large , yet current use of renewable energy for electricity production is relatively modest , constituting only 11% of total electricity generation and 8% of total energy consumption . based on the current status of renewables in the united states , policy makers may consider some key questions about the future of renewable energy: should the united states actively seek greater use of renewable energy to supply electricity , or should the energy and electricity markets be allowed to work without further interference with the existing structure of subsidies and incentives ? if greater use of renewable energy for electricity is desired , what are the key barriers or actions that should be addressed by federal policy ? future trends in renewable electricity will depend heavily on the cost of both renewable technologies and fossil fuel costs , and on government incentives for renewable energy . in the absence of subsidies for renewable electricity technologies , and in the absence of accounting for external costs of using fossil fuel combustion to generate electricity , several renewable electricity technologies are currently not commercially viable , or only marginally so . reference case projections by eia of growth in wind and solar electricity to 2035 are predicated on the use of renewable portfolio standards , renewable fuel standards , and subsidies in the tax code . with low coal and natural gas prices , and high renewable energy technology costs , and the absence of regulation or subsidies , renewable electricity may not increase significantly . without some form of carbon pricing or other consideration of the externalities of fossil fuel combustion , the united states may remain in an era of relatively low - cost fossil fuel electricity for decades . however , policy makers may decide that growth in renewable electricity is desirable because of concerns about greenhouse gas emissions and climate change , because fossil fuel supplies are ultimately finite , and because of a desire to position the united states as a global leader for renewable energy technology and manufacturing . renewables could be made more cost competitive by means of improved renewable technologies or revised cost of carbon - based fuels , but financial or regulatory incentives may be required to make certain renewable sources more economically viable in the short term . in the event that levelized costs of renewable electricity become competitive with those of fossil fuel electricity , the additional issues of intermittency / variability , land - use and footprint , the need for additional transmission , plus other resource and environmental impacts of renewable electricity will need to be addressed by local , state , and federal officials and policy makers . cumulative u.s. renewable electricity generation capacity more than doubled from 2006 to 2010 , increasing from approximately 22 gw to nearly 55 gw .