rico . the racketeer influenced and corrupt organizations ( rico ) provisions outlaw acquiring or conducting the affairs of an enterprise , engaged in or whose activities affect interstate commerce , through loan sharking or the patterned commission of various other predicate offenses . the racketeering - conduct and conspiracy - to - engage - in - racketeering - conduct appear to be the rico offenses most often built on wire or mail fraud violations . the elements of the rico conduct offense are ( 1 ) conducting the affairs ; ( 2 ) of an enterprise ; ( 3 ) engaged in activities in or that impact interstate or foreign commerce ; ( 4 ) through a pattern ; ( 5 ) of racketeering activity . "racketeering activity" means , among other things , any act that is indictable under either the mail or wire fraud statutes . as for pattern , a rico pattern "requires at least two acts of racketeering activity . the racketeering predicates may establish a pattern if they [were] related and … amounted to , or threatened the likelihood of , continued criminal activity.' the pattern of predicate offenses must be used by someone employed by or associated with a qualified enterprise to conduct or participate in its activities . "congress did not intend to extend rico liability … beyond those who participated in the operation and management of an enterprise through a pattern of racketeering activity. nevertheless , "liability under § 1962 ( c ) is not limited to upper management … an enterprise is operated not just by upper management but also by lower rung participants. the enterprise may be either any group of individuals , any legal entity , or any group "associated in fact. "nevertheless , 'an association - in - fact enterprise must have at least three structural features: a purpose , relationships among those associated with the enterprise and longevity sufficient to permit those associates to pursue the enterprise's purpose.' moreover , qualified enterprises are only those that "engaged in , or the activities of which affect , interstate or foreign commerce. penalties : imprisonment for not more than 20 years and a fine of not more than $250,000 ( not more than $500,000 for organizations ) . money laundering . mail and wire fraud are both money laundering predicate offenses by virtue of their status as rico predicates . the most commonly prosecuted federal money laundering statute , 18 u.s.c . §1956 , outlaws , among other things , knowingly engaging in a financial transaction involving the proceeds generated by a "specified unlawful activity" ( a predicate offense ) for the purpose ( 1 ) of laundering the proceeds ( i.e. , concealing their source or ownership ) , or ( 2 ) of promoting further predicating offenses .