the two differ "only to a small degree. because the united states' rating is now aa+ , the degree of additional risk signaled by the rating change is very small . the rationale for the change appears to be qualitative — s&p's opinion about the prospects for political action to change the government's long - term debt path — rather than quantitative . s&p acknowledged that its initial calculations used an inappropriate congressional budget office measure ( an "alternate," rather than "baseline" estimate of future discretionary spending ) , resulting in a $2-trillion error , but declined to reconsider the rating change when treasury analysts noticed the mistake . on the other hand , the downgrade may be part of a gradual shift away from reliance on the united states as the center of the global financial system . according to the head of pimco , a large bond investment firm , the downgrade "will over time erode the standing of the global public goods [the united states] supplies — from the dollar as the world's reserve currency to its financial markets as the best place for other countries to deposit savings . this will weaken the effectiveness of the [united states] as the global anchor , accelerating the unsteady migration to a multipolar system. foreigners now hold trillions in treasury debt — their perceptions and actions will have significant implications for the value of treasury securities and the cost of financing that debt . reserve currency status gives the united states access to cheaper financing and the ability to borrow in its own currency ; loss of that status could raise the cost of borrowing from abroad . but the long - run position of the united states in the global economy depends more on fiscal and economic developments than rating agency decisions . thus , the downgrade does not convey any new information to the markets about the u.s. fiscal situation , beyond the pessimism of s&p's analysts themselves . in the context of unsettled global financial markets , however , the historically unprecedented downgrade may affect the confidence and perceptions of market participants and bring changes that are difficult to anticipate . specific market sectors are linked to the treasury bond market in different ways . in the long run , the status of treasury bonds depends on the success or failure in dealing with long - term budget problems . the standard & poor's downgrade is a single step in what may be a long process . in the intermediate term , two scenarios seem most plausible . first , the markets may shrug off the downgrade . does s&p have any special information about the u.s. political situation that others lack ? while the rating change comes in a period of financial uncertainty , including a sharp decline in world stock markets , the initial market response — bidding up treasury bond prices and lowering yields — suggests at the very least that the downgrade has not brought about any watershed revaluation of u.s. debt . it may be that for some time "treasuries will remain the world's least ugly safe asset. again , there is the problem of finding a substitute for treasuries as a safe - haven store of value .