pediatric assessments . when fda approves a drug for which it has deferred the required pediatric assessment , it attaches a postmarket pediatric assessment requirement to that approval . the pediatric research equity act ( prea , first authorized in p.l . 108-155 ) required that manufacturers submit a pediatric assessment with each submission of an application to market a new active ingredient , new indication , new dosage form , new dosing regimen , or new route of administration . the law specified situations in which the secretary might defer or waive the pediatric assessment requirement . for a deferral , an applicant must include a timeline for completion of studies . the secretary must review each approved deferral annually , for which the applicant must submit evidence of documentation of study progress . when otherwise required by the secretary . the fda amendments act of 2007 ( p.l . 110-85 ) added another opportunity for a postmarket requirement at the time of approval . the secretary may include in a drug's approval the requirement for specific postapproval studies or clinical trials . pediatric assessmen t. in addition to the pediatric assessment required as part of a drug's approval , prea allows the secretary , in certain circumstances , to require a pediatric assessment of a drug already on the market . based on new information available to secretary . the secretary , under specified conditions after a drug is on the market , may require a study or a clinical trial . the secretary may determine the need for such a study or trial based on newly acquired information . to require a postapproval study or trial , the secretary must determine that ( 1 ) other reports or surveillance would not be adequate and ( 2 ) the study or trial would assess a known serious risk or signals of serious risk , or identify a serious risk . the law directs the secretary regarding dispute resolution procedures . with authority under the ffdca or by its own practices , fda has long implemented various tools in its attempt to ensure that the drugs it has approved for marketing in the united states are safe and effective for their intended and approved uses . in addition to the actions the agency requires of the manufacturers of all approved drugs , it may deem additional actions appropriate for specific drugs or specific circumstances surrounding a drug's use . some of those additional actions are risk - management processes to identify and minimize risk to patients . the fda manual of policies and procedures notes that risk management attempts to "minimize [a drug's] risks while preserving its benefits. in that 2005 document , fda described its approach to risk management as "an iterative process" that includes both risk assessment and risk minimization . the fdaaa named the risk - management process risk evaluation and mitigation strategies ( rems ) and expanded the risk - management authority of fda . fda practice had long included most of the elements that a rems may include , but fdaaa gave fda , through the rems process , the authority for structured follow - through , dispute resolution , and enforcement .