in 1993 , congress passed h.r . other programs were protected though not exempt from sequestration . for example , reductions in medicare spending were limited to 4% and other special rules applied to specific programs . as with gramm - rudman - hollings , this created a situation in which the enactment of new direct spending could potentially trigger sequestration that would reduce spending for programs that might not necessarily have grown or might have already been reduced through the legislative process . further , effects of legislation to decrease revenues had the potential to trigger a sequester , and therefore make reductions to spending to effectively pay for those revenue decreases . under bea , discretionary spending caps , paygo procedures , and deficit targets were enforced by separate sequestration procedures under a new timetable ( shown below ) . as illustrated in figure 2 , bea included a revised timetable that spanned the entire year , as opposed to the three - month timeline for gramm - rudman - hollings . under the new timeline , cbo and omb were each required to prepare three different sequestration reports ( preview reports , update reports , and final reports ) , each providing estimates regarding sequestration for each category . any discrepancies between cbo and omb estimates were required to be explained in the final omb report . unlike under the 1985 act , the president was not required to issue an initial sequestration report , only a final order implementing without revision the reductions specified in the omb report . during the course of the session , omb was required to provide congress with omb's cost estimate for each budgetary measure within seven days of its enactment , to assist in monitoring compliance with discretionary spending limits . cbo , under the direction of the house and senate budget committees , was responsible for scoring individual legislation before consideration for purposes of enforcement in the congressional budget process . procedures for suspension in times of war or low economic growth were continued from the gramm - rudman - hollings act . 2264 , the omnibus reconciliation act of 1993 ( obra 1993 ; p.l . 103-66 ) , which was projected to reduce the deficit over the five - year period of fy1994-fy1998 . included in the act was an extension of discretionary spending caps and paygo procedures established in bea1990 . president clinton signed obra 1993 into law on august 10 , 1993 . to cover the period of the new budget agreement , the act extended paygo procedures though 1998 and established new discretionary spending caps for fy1996-fy1998 while retaining the existing caps for fy1994 and fy1995 . in addition , the procedures for enforcing the spending caps and the paygo procedure were extended through fy1998 . in july 1997 , congress completed action on two reconciliation bills: one dealing with direct spending and the other with revenues . the reconciliation bill dealing with direct spending , the balanced budget act of 1997 , included a separate title on budget enforcement , which is referred to as the budget enforcement act of 1997 ( bea of 1997 ; p.l . the bill was signed into law by president clinton on august 5 , 1997 .