the prototype has five sections . the first two sections itemize the various expenses associated with closing . key modifications are discussed below . as required by the dodd - frank act , the cfpb has proposed various prototypes of a standardized loan estimate form to combine the tila disclosure statement and hud's gfe into a single document . the dodd - frank act directed the cfpb to issue a proposed rule of the new loan estimate form within one year of its july 21 , 2011 transfer date . the cfpb stated its plans to perform five rounds of testing in six different cities before the final rule is proposed . in addition to consumer testing , the cfpb convened a small business review panel to solicit feedback on its prototype . the current prototype , tupelo , is the most recent form available on the cfpb website and has been developed after at least five rounds of testing . tupelo has three pages with the first page containing three sections . the first section presents the loan amount ; the interest rate and whether it can change ; the monthly loan payment ; and whether a prepayment penalty or a balloon payment exists . the second section discloses the projected monthly payments over various time periods of the loan . estimates of the borrower's monthly payment also includes estimated property taxes , insurance , and assessments . this section also shows whether an escrow account exists and how much the borrower should expect to pay each month . the last section on page one provides the estimated amount needed to close . the second page of the tupelo prototype uses the example of a loan for $211,000 with $6,151 in closing costs for the sake of illustrating a completed form . the third section calculates the cash needed to close by summing the settlement fees , settlement costs , down payment , and other costs . next , a table provides the potential borrower with information on the monthly payments , such as whether there are any interest - only payments and what the maximum payment could be . finally , a second table describes whether the mortgage interest rate is adjustable and how it could potentially change . the third page of the tupelo prototype contains three additional sections . the first section allows borrowers to compare the terms of other loans offered by other loan originators . the section lists the amount that a borrower will have paid in total over the first five years of the loan and how much would go to paying down principal . it also lists the apr as well as the total amount of interest paid over the loan term as a percentage of the loan . the next section provides brief information about other aspects ( eg , appraisal , homeowner's insurance , late payments , and servicing ) . should the borrower decide to proceed with the mortgage origination process , the final section provides a space for the applicant to sign to confirm that the form was received . the cfpb has also developed a prototype settlement disclosure , which consolidates the hud - 1 settlement statement and the final tila disclosure .