these beneficiaries had been previously excluded . table a - 1 in appendix a shows a side - by - side comparison of the key components of the ticket to work program that were subject to the july 2008 regulatory changes and new provisions that were implemented . 106-170 contained several other provisions to enhance the work opportunities for individuals with disabilities . it lessened work disincentives under the social security statute , established ssa demonstrations , and created an advisory panel . the legislation also established two grant programs for the purpose of disseminating accurate information to beneficiaries with disabilities on work incentive programs . according to publicly available data on the ssa website , 13.6 million active tickets have been issued to eligible beneficiaries as of december 31 , 2013 ( see table 1 ) . at the inception of the program , tickets were issued to beneficiaries as the ticket to work program rolled out in phases . since the initial roll out , a letter and paper ticket explaining the program are automatically mailed to eligible beneficiaries . of the 13.6 million tickets issued , 319,972 ( approximately 2.4% ) have been activated ( i.e. , the ticket has been assigned to an en or state vr agency ) . of all tickets that are in use , nearly 9 out of 10 have been assigned to state vr agencies rather than ens . assignment of tickets does not necessarily mean that the client is actively receiving services from an en or state vr agency , only that the beneficiary has notified the pm that an agency or en has been designated to provide services to them . in addition , there are currently 666 ens under contract to provide employment support services to ticket recipients as of december 31 , 2013 . of the ens under contract , 594 ( 89.2% ) have had tickets assigned to them and 181 ( 27.2% ) have received some type of payment from ssa for achieving a designated payment milestone for months that a ticket - holder was working while assigned to the en . president clinton signed h.r . 1180 into law on december 17 , 1999 , which became p.l . specifically , the legislation authorized ( 1 ) "tickets" or vouchers to beneficiaries to give them increased choice of rehabilitation providers and access to services needed to obtain and retain employment , ( 2 ) payments to employment service providers based on ticket holder achieving certain employment "milestones" or outcomes , ( 3 ) ssa demonstrations to test different approaches to removing barriers to employment for title ii ( ssdi ) beneficiaries , and ( 4 ) options for states to adopt a medicaid "buy - in" program to allow beneficiaries to maintain health coverage after returning to work and a continuation of medicare coverage to certain beneficiaries who are working . on december 13 , 1999 , the congressional budget office ( cbo ) produced final scoring on the budgetary effects of h.r . 1180 as passed by the house and senate . cbo estimated modest gains in social security beneficiaries' future participation in the proposed expanded network of employment support services , beyond the services that were primarily offered by state vr agencies .