the house - reported h.r . 2017 proposed appropriating $132 million for uscis , $237 million less than the administration requested and $14 million less than provided in fy2011 . the house - passed bill provided $539 million . for research , development , and innovation , it provided $106 million , or 84% less than the administration's request . in laboratory facilities , it provided $75 million for nbaf construction . the committee report described the amount requested for nbaf as "not a useable construction segment" and directed s&t to provide an updated cost schedule for the project . it rejected the proposed transfer from dndo . the committee report stated that "s&t must demonstrate how its r&d efforts are timely , with results relatively well - defined , and above all , make investment decisions based on clear and sensible priorities. it stated the committee's expectation that "the proposed funding levels will force s&t to make more focused , high - return investment decisions. the administration requested $1,176 million . this was 42% more than the fy2011 appropriation of $829 billion . the request included $150 million to support the beginning of construction at nbaf and about $109 million for nuclear and radiological activities currently conducted in dndo . in late 2010 , the s&t directorate announced a reorganization and released a new strategic plan . the reorganization reduced the number of direct reports to the under secretary and was accompanied by a change in budget structure , with most of the previous budget lines combined into two new categories: research , development , and innovation and acquisition and operations support . according to dhs , the new strategy and organization will result in more robust partnerships with other dhs components , a smaller number of larger projects , and more emphasis on transitioning technology into the field rather than long - term research . the house and senate committee reports both objected to the new budget structure . the house report described the research , development , and innovation budget category as "all - encompassing ... too large and vague. the senate report stated that the new structure "reduces transparency and accountability. the conference report stated that the new rdi category "will enable s&t to more quickly shift resources ... between research activities" and "should ... partially offset the impact of an overall funding reduction," but it directed s&t to submit a quarterly "detailed breakout" of rdi projects "for accountability and visibility. this represents an increase of $5 million or nearly 2% over the final fy2011 enacted amount of $271 million . the directorate of science and technology ( s&t ) is the primary dhs organization for research and development ( r&d ) . headed by the under secretary for science and technology , it performs r&d in several laboratories of its own and funds r&d performed by the department of energy national laboratories , industry , universities , and others . the final appropriation for the s&t directorate was $668 million , which was 43% less than the administration had requested . the total included $266 million for research , development , and innovation .