appendix a . data limitations in order to understand the limitations of the data presented in this report , it is helpful to understand their sources . the va identifies ptsd and substance use disorders by searching va administrative data for diagnosis codes associated with specific conditions ( eg , 309.81 for ptsd ) . these codes are entered into veterans' electronic medical records by clinicians , in the normal course of evaluation and treatment . the data provided by the va should be interpreted in light of at least three limitations , each of which is discussed below . first , some conditions may be overstated , because veterans with diagnosis codes for a condition might not have the condition , as a result of provisional diagnoses or noncurrent diagnoses . a provisional diagnosis code may be entered into a veteran's electronic medical record when further evaluation is required to confirm the diagnosis . a diagnosis may be noncurrent when a veteran who had a condition in the past no longer has it . in either case , the code remains in the veteran's electronic medical record . second , some conditions may be understated , because veterans who have a condition might not be diagnosed ( and therefore might not have the diagnosis code in their records ) , if they choose not to disclose their symptoms . veterans might not want to disclose information that would lead to a diagnosis of mental illness . veterans have reported not wanting to disclose trauma for fear that that they will not be believed , that others will think less of them , that they will be institutionalized or stigmatized , or that their careers will be jeopardized , among other reasons . also , veterans using va health care services may receive additional services outside the va , without the knowledge of the department . third , the numbers provided by the va should not be extrapolated to all oef / oif veterans , or to the broader veteran population , because oef / oif veterans using va health care are not representative of all oef / oif veterans or the broader veteran population . veterans who use va health care may differ from those who do not , in ways that are not known . potential differences include ( among other characteristics ) disability status , employment status , and distance from a va medical facility . appendix b . selected evaluations of va services table b - 1 lists selected reports published since 2008 that evaluate the va's efforts to address veterans' mental health . symptoms must persist for at least one month and must result in clinically significant distress or impairment in functioning . substance use disorders include dependence on and abuse of drugs , alcohol , or other substances ( eg , nicotine ) . a diagnosis of dependence requires at least three symptoms ( eg , tolerance or withdrawal ) ; substance use that does not meet criteria for dependence , but leads to clinically significant distress or impairment , is called abuse .