clemens pottery . at the very least , a court will likely have to evaluate all of the circumstances of an employee's case to determine whether his pda or smartphone use is compensable . as pda and smartphone use by employees increases and the expectations of supervisors , co - workers , and clients evolve , it seems likely that courts will be confronted with numerous cases involving overtime compensation based on the work - related use of these devices . at least one case involving the retail sales consultants and assistant store managers of at&t mobility is currently being litigated . the non - exempt plaintiffs in zivali v. at&t mobility are seeking overtime compensation for their work outside of their regular work hours . finally , is the use of a pda or smartphone necessarily and primarily for the benefit of the employer and his business ? while the facts of each case will ultimately determine whether the tennessee coal factors are satisfied , it seems possible that at least some pda or smartphone use could be viewed as compensable work under the flsa . even with the court's reconsideration in armour of the need for physical or mental exertion to constitute work , it appears reasonable to conclude that at least some pda or smartphone use will require mental exertion . second , is the use of a pda or smarthphone controlled or required by the employer ? an employee responding to work email or reviewing or editing documents is arguably engaged in mental exertion . further , providing pdas and smartphones to non - exempt employees without any statement or policy about not using the devices outside of regular work hours may lead to the conclusion that their use is controlled or required by the employer , particularly if supervisors or senior employees send messages or documents with the expectation that they will be immediately read or reviewed . finally , because employers could benefit from an employee's response to email or his review of a document after regular work hours , it could be argued that the employee's pda or smartphone use is necessarily or primarily for the benefit of the employer and his business . the absence , however , of any significant case law involving the flsa and pda or smartphone use makes it difficult to know exactly how courts will evaluate related claims for overtime compensation . some believe that cases involving on - call time could be instructive , particularly because they present an analogous situation in which an employee is kept in constant contact with the employer . in skidmore v. swift & co . , one of the court's early cases involving on - call time and the payment of overtime compensation , the court indicated that the law does not preclude "waiting time from also being working time. the court maintained , however , that the availability of overtime pay involves an examination of the agreement between the parties , consideration of the nature of the service provided and its relation to the waiting time , and all of the surrounding circumstances .