this incentive distorts the allocation of capital . targeted tax incentives may be inefficient , as they can drive capital away from its most productive use , reducing overall economic output . such efficiency concerns are central to economic arguments in support of a broader tax base , with lower tax rates . repeal of the section 199 production activities deduction has been included in recent tax reform proposals . in 2010 , both the fiscal commission and the debt reduction task force recommended eliminating section 199 , along with most other corporate tax expenditures , in exchange for a reduced corporate tax rate . the tax reform act of 2014 ( h.r . 1 ) introduced in the 113 th congress also proposed eliminating various corporate tax expenditures as part of corporate tax reform that would result in lower tax rates . the house republican "better way" blueprint released in june 2016 during the 114 th congress proposed eliminating section 199 and most other tax expenditures while lowering the corporate tax rate to 20% . as congress looks at options for reducing the corporate tax rate , possibly such that the reduction is revenue - neutral , eliminating the production activities deduction might be considered . eliminating the deduction would allow for approximately a 1.4 percentage point reduction in the corporate tax rate . a targeted repeal or reform of the section 199 deduction has also been considered . one common theme is to evaluate the eligibility of certain types of activities , notably those related to oil and gas . already , the deduction for oil and gas is limited . since 2007 , congress has voted numerous times on measures that would limit or repeal the section 199 deduction for oil - and gas - related activities . however , in 2015 , congress passed legislation expanding the section 199 deduction for certain domestic oil refineries . currently , section 199 allows a deduction equal to 9% of taxable income derived from qualified production activities . qualified production activities are defined to include manufacturing , mining , electricity and water production , film production , and domestic construction . for oil - and gas - related activities , the deduction is permanently limited to 6% . across all sectors , the deduction cannot exceed 50% of w - 2 wages paid by the taxpayer for qualifying activities . this report provides a legislative history of the section 199 deduction , details on how the deduction works in practice , an economic evaluation of the deduction , and analysis of the various economic sectors benefitting from the provision . a number of policy options related to the section 199 deduction conclude this report . the section 199 domestic production activities deduction was added to the internal revenue code ( irc ) as part of the american jobs creation act of 2004 ( ajca ; p.l . the section 199 deduction was designed , in part , to replace an incentive that had been found to be a prohibited export subsidy by the wto .