yes . you must file form 5405 with your tax return . on it , you will enter the date on which the damage or destruction occurred and indicate that your house was damaged or destroyed ( rather than sold , converted to business or rental use , or abandoned ) . you will also need to indicate whether you currently intend to replace your property within two years . •    if you do not replace your house within the two - year replacement period , you generally would need to repay the outstanding balance on your credit ( $6,000 if originally $7,500 ) , showing it on your 2013 tax return . do i have to do anything special when i file my 2011 tax return ? if i say that i am not going to replace my house , does it mean that i will owe a lot more in taxes for 2011 ? you are indicating that you currently do not intend to replace the property . if you do not replace the property , the accelerated repayment of the tax credit will not be reported on your tax return until 2013 . if you change your mind and do replace the property within two years , there would be no accelerated repayment requirement . i purchased my house in 2008 and it was destroyed in 2011 . i started repaying the credit on my 2010 tax return . what do i need to repay in 2011 and subsequent years ? •    you will need to continue paying your scheduled repayment amount ( $500 if the credit was $7,500 ) in 2011 and 2012 . •    if you replace your home within two years after its destruction , your repayment will not be accelerated . you will continue repaying your scheduled repayment amount each year . however , that repayment may be reduced or eliminated depending on whether there was a gain from the involuntary conversion . •    if there was no gain , you would not have to repay any more of the credit . •    if the gain was less than the outstanding balance on the credit , your repayment would be the amount of the gain . •    for purposes of calculating this gain , you would be required to reduce your cost basis in the house by the original amount of the credit . do i have to repay the outstanding balance of my homebuyer credit with my 2011 tax return ? the destruction of your home is an involuntary conversion . the homebuyer tax credit provisions include an exception to the repayment acceleration requirements when the property is destroyed . •    if , within two years of the date your property was destroyed , you replace your principal residence with another that would have qualified you for the credit if acquired in 2008 , repayment of your credit will not be accelerated . •    if you do not replace the residence within this two - year period , your credit will be accelerated , but will be reported on the tax return for the tax year in which the two - year period expires .