a few examples of these bills are listed below . 899 , the unfunded mandates information and transparency act of 2014 , would amend the current analysis requirements in umra by making those requirements more broad ( i.e. , by requiring them to be completed for a greater number of rules ) and by requiring a more detailed level of analysis . 2122 , the regulatory accountability act of 2013 , would make several changes to the rulemaking process by amending the administrative procedure act ( apa ) . among those changes would be a requirement for agencies to conduct cost - benefit analysis when issuing rules , which is not currently required under the apa . 2542 , the regulatory flexibility improvements act of 2013 , would amend and expand current analysis requirements under the rfa . 3863 and s. 2099 , the sound regulation act of 2014 , would amend the apa to require that agencies conduct cost - benefit analysis when issuing rules . 5184 and s. 2153 , the national regulatory budget act of 2014 , would establish an office of regulatory analysis as an independent establishment in the executive branch that would be required to conduct its own cost - benefit analysis . s. 1173 , the independent agency regulatory analysis act of 2014 , would authorize the president to subject independent regulatory agencies to cost - benefit analysis requirements that exist in executive order ( discussed above ) and do not currently apply to independent regulatory agencies . as the preceding discussion indicates , many federal agencies are already required to conduct cost - benefit and other types of analysis before they issue certain proposed or final rules . these requirements have been added incrementally by various statutes and executive orders during the past 40 to 50 years , and sometimes require agencies to perform the same general types of analyses . for example , virtually all of the elements of the written statements that agencies are required to prepare pursuant to umra were already required by executive order 12866 ( eg , quantitative and qualitative estimates of costs and benefits , effects on the national economy , consideration of a range of alternatives , selection of the alternative that is least costly , most cost - effective , or least burdensome , or an explanation of why that alternative was not selected ) . the drafters of umra appear to have recognized the overlap , stating in section 202 ( c ) of the statute ( 2 u.s.c . ยง1534 ) that an agency may prepare the written statement "in conjunction with or as part of any other statement or analysis. section 605 ( a ) of the rfa ( 5 u.s.c . ยง605 ( a ) ) contains the same type of statement . also , many of the current requirements have substantial exclusions and exceptions , or give federal agencies substantial discretion to decide whether an analysis is required . for example , the rfa's analytical requirements do not apply to rules that are issued without a prior notice of proposed rulemaking , and agencies can avoid regulatory flexibility analyses if they certify that their rules do not have a "significant" economic impact on a "substantial" number of small entities .