appendix a . basic export control characteristics appendix b. dual - use export licensing process appendix c. list of acronyms aeca — arms export control act aes — automated export system bis — bureau of industry and security , department of commerce cbp — customs and border protection , department of homeland security ccl — commerce control list cml — commerce munitions list cpi — counter - proliferation investigations dcis — defense criminal investigation service ddtc — directorate of defense trade controls , department of state dhs — department of homeland security doj — department of justice dtsa — defense technology security administration eaa — export administration act ear — export administration regulations eccn — export control classification number eecc — export enforcement coordination center eeb — economic , energy , and business bureau , department of state fp — foreign policy controls gao — governmental accountability office ieepa — international emergency economic powers act ice — immigration and customs enforcement agency , department of homeland security isn — international security and nonproliferation bureau , department of state ita — international trade administration , department of commerce itar — international traffic in arms regulations mtcr — missile technology control regime nrc — nuclear regulatory commission ns — national security controls nsg — nuclear suppliers group oee — office of export enforcement odtc — office of defense trade compliance , ddtc ofac — office of foreign assets control , department of the treasury si — significant items controls sl — surreptitious listening controls ss — short supply controls sta — strategic trade authorization usml — u.s . munitions lis . changes in agency structure would require legislation . previously , the oee at bis was the only entity that could screen dual - use licenses , whereas ice could screen licenses from ddtc and ofac . absent such coordination , the center "is limited in its ability to realize its full potential to facilitate enhanced coordination and intelligence sharing. the unit will also establish government - wide statistical tracking capabilities for criminal and administrative enforcement activities . also in march 2012 , an information triage unit was established in the department of commerce to serve as an information gathering and screening unit among law enforcement agencies , the intelligence community , and the export licensing agencies . the unit is designed to serve as a central point to disseminate relevant information for each license application prior to decisionmaking . there may be weaknesses in the eecc's mission execution . "[p]rocedures for coordination between the investigative export control enforcement agencies and the intelligence community have not been finalized," according to a march 2019 gao report , which adds that the center's "lack of formal coordination" limits its effectiveness and has stalled "its efforts to develop standard operating procedures. the eecc is not to be confused with the national export control coordinator , housed in the justice department , which is "responsible for ensuring full coordination between the justice department and the many other us law enforcement , licensing , and intelligence agencies that play a role in export enforcement. the role of the coordinator has been described as the chief prosecutor of export control enforcement with the authority to determine which cases to bring for criminal prosecution .