other reportables . every other reportable trader not placed into one of three categories above is put into the "other reportables" category . these may include floor traders and exchange members who trade for their own accounts . nonreportable positions include all traders whose holdings are below the 350-contract reporting threshold . to use the terminology of a classic study on hedging and speculation , are money managers driving the price of oil , or are they hitchhikers along for the ride ? interpretations on either side of the question are plausible . the potential of money managers' trades to move prices does not necessarily raise any policy issue . if some commodity trading advisors or hedge funds are better or faster than others at trading on new information , the effect should be to make pricing more efficient . if too much "copycat" trading occurs , the market price may overshoot , but it is not clear why any such overshooting would not soon correct itself . one study found that open interest positions are highly correlated with macroeconomic activity . this might suggest that traders with better information on macroeconomic trends , which strongly influence energy demand , take more aggressive positions , which would then influence oil prices . this interpretation suggests that speculative traders may have better information about market fundamentals , such as expectations of future economic growth , and thus help channel the effects of changes in current and future energy demand into market prices . some argue that money managers who are not involved in the physical oil business trade on information that is not fundamental and that this distorts prices . this effect would be exacerbated by copycat trading . specifying which information is fundamental and which is irrelevant noise , however , is difficult . experts may express opinions about what the fundamental price should be , given current supply and demand conditions , but a basic axiom of classical economics is that free markets do a better job of weighing information and determining prices than any group of experts . on the other hand , asset markets can be susceptible to price bubbles , in which rising prices convince some traders that future prospects are rosier than previously thought . some have contended that identifying asset bubbles before a readjustment to fundamental levels ( i.e. , a crash ) may be difficult . even if some traders understood that asset values exceeded fundamental values , it might be impossible given financing constraints to exploit that information to a degree sufficient to prevent the formation of bubbles . policy tools to address speculation that is viewed as excessive or destabilizing are generally blunt instruments . it is possible to prohibit trading in derivative instruments based on oil ( or other energy commodities ) . with the onion futures act ( p.l . 85-39 ) , congress enacted a ban on onion futures , which remains in force , although it is not clear that onion prices have become more stable as a result . other policy options ( included in s. 1200 ) are steps to reduce the size of speculative positions , either by raising the costs of speculative trading or by limiting the number of contracts that speculators can hold .