the two are not the same . al - kidd argued that the convenience of the statute cannot be used to avoid the limitations of the fourth amendment . the ninth circuit again agreed: "all seizures of criminal suspects require probable cause of criminal activity . to use a material witness statute pretextually , in order to investigate or preemptively detain suspects without probable cause is to violate the fourth amendment. nevertheless , when suit is based on an alleged fourth amendment violation , an officer's motives ordinarily play no role in the determination of whether a violation has occurred . the ninth circuit , however , accepted al - kidd's contention that the ordinary rules did not apply because use of the material witness statute did not deal with the ordinary type of probable cause upon which the supreme court's cases were predicated: probable cause to believe a crime had been committed . to support the view that official motives matter in some fourth amendment cases , the ninth circuit pointed to two supreme court traffic - stop cases — edmond and lidster — which the court had distinguished on the basis of the purpose for the stop . the existence of a constitutional violation notwithstanding , qualified immunity cannot be lost unless the constitutional right is "clearly established. "for a constitutional right to be clearly established , its contours 'must be sufficiently clear that a reasonable official would understand that what he is doing violates that right . this is not to say that an official action is protected by qualified immunity unless the very action in question has previously been held unlawful ... but it is to say that in the light of pre - existing law the unlawfulness must be apparent. the ninth circuit conceded that '[n]o federal appellate court had yet squarely held that the federal material witness statute satisfied the requirements of the fourth amendment. yet , the definition of probable cause in a criminal case was clearly established . edmonds had demonstrated the perils of a law enforcement motivated seizure without probable cause . al - kidd's situation was akin to those that lead to the adoption of the fourth amendment . moreover , shortly before al - kidd's arrest , a federal court had questioned the legitimacy of pretextual material witness arrests in remarks that mentioned the attorney general by name . from this , the ninth circuit concluded that "al - kidd's right not to be arrested as a material witness in order to investigated or preemptively detained was clearly established" at the time of his arrest . thus , the ninth circuit concluded ashcroft was entitled to neither absolute nor qualified immunity and declined to reconsider en banc . the supreme court granted the petition of the united states for certiorari , and reversed . justice scalia wrote the opinion for the court , from which there were no dissenting opinions . justice kennedy concurred . justices ginsburg , breyer , and sotomayor concurred in the result . justice kagan did not participate in the case .