they are discussed below . the court's decision in bryant is a stepping - stone in the developing rule of testimonial versus nontestimonial hearsay and the admissibility of out - of - court statements in a criminal prosecution . bryant considered a statement made by a dying man to the police identifying his killer . and it would force the court to explain how the justices' preference comports with the meaning of the confrontation clause that the people adopted — or to confess that only the justices' preference really matters . in summary , the bryant majority held that the primary purpose of covington's interrogation by police was to address an ongoing emergency . consequently , the statements of the dying man were not testimonial for confrontation clause purposes . the court employed a highly context - specific analysis and considered factors such as the nature of the crime , its duration , the weapon employed , the medical condition of the declarant , and the intent of the interrogators and the declarant , as significant factors . arguably , the court's confrontation clause standard for the use of forensic laboratory reports is less complicated . when the investigation of a crime requires laboratory testing — for example , matching a suspect's dna with dna found at the crime scene , or analyzing a substance that might be an illegal drug — the results of that testing are presented at trial in a report prepared by laboratory technicians . since crawford , the supreme court has twice addressed the question of whether such reports are "testimonial. in both cases , the court has held that because reports are testimonial , the confrontation clause requires the actual laboratory analyst who performed the tests to appear at trial and confront the defendant in person . in 2009 , the supreme court applied the confrontation clause to forensic analysis reports in melendez - diaz v. massachusetts . the defendant was charged with distribution of cocaine , and was in possession of a white powder at the time of his arrest . at trial , the results of a laboratory analysis of the white powder were presented via "certificates of analysis. the certificates had been sworn by the analysts before a notary public , and "reported the weight of the seized bags and stated that the bags 'have been examined with the following results: the substance was found to contain: cocaine.' the supreme court held that the certificates were "quite plainly affidavits," and crawford had specifically said that affidavits are testimonial . the court rejected arguments from four dissenting justices that this holding would needlessly overburden state crime labs by requiring technicians to testify in person at trial . in bullcoming v. new mexico , the court affirmed its melendez - diaz rationale and clarified its position with respect to the defendant's right to confront those who prepare a forensic laboratory report . in 2005 , defendant donald bullcoming rear - ended a pickup truck . the police administered field sobriety tests , which bullcoming failed . because he refused to submit to a breathalyzer test , he was taken by the police to a nearby hospital , where a sample of his blood was drawn .