this is because of interaction effects . credits can be nonrefundable or refundable . nonrefundable credits cannot exceed taxes owed , and therefore can only reduce an individual's tax liability to zero . refundable credits can exceed taxes owed , meaning a taxpayer with no tax liability may receive all or part of the credit amount as a refund check . education tax credits include the lifetime learning credit , which is nonrefundable , and the american opportunity tax credit , which is refundable , although the maximum amount that can be received as a refund is limited to 40% of the total credit .tax deductions reduce the amount of a taxpayer's income that is subject to taxation by the amount of the deduction . as a result , deductions reduce a taxpayer's tax liability , but only in proportion to the taxpayer's highest marginal tax bracket . hence , deductions are generally less valuable than a given dollar amount in tax credits . generally , the amount that may be deducted is equal to a portion of some expense incurred . deductions can either be "above - the - line" or "itemized. above - the - line deductions are typically more advantageous than itemized deductions and may be claimed by most taxpayers . itemized deductions may only be claimed by those taxpayers who itemize all their deductions on their tax returns . the alternative to itemizing is claiming the standard deduction . education tax deductions include the business deduction for work - related expenses ( an itemized deduction ) , the deduction for tuition and fees , and the student loan interest deduction ( both above - the - line deductions ) .tax exemptions reduce the amount of a taxpayer's income which is subject to taxation , by a fixed dollar amount per exemption claimed . generally , every taxpayer is allowed to claim one exemption for themselves , one exemption for a spouse , and one for each dependent . exemptions function similarly to deductions in that they reduce the income that is subject to taxation , but they are based on a fixed amount per person instead of actual expenses . an exemption's value to a taxpayer is also similar to the value of a deduction in terms of being proportional to a taxpayer's highest marginal tax bracket . parents of students between the ages of 19 and 23 are eligible for a personal tax exemption for their children . these modifications were scheduled to expire at the end of 2010 . in addition , the law extended the exclusion for employer - provided educational assistance through the end of 2010 . egtrra also enacted a new temporary above - the - line deduction for higher education expenses ( often referred to as the "tuition and fees" deduction ) . the tuition and fees deduction was scheduled to expire at the end of 2005 . ( several laws subsequently extended the deduction through the end of 2017. ) the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 ( arra ; p.l . 111-5 ) modified a variety of parameters of the hope credit , increasing the amount of the credit and expanding eligibility for the credit .