corporate culture . it was alleged at the time of bankruptcy that old gm's corporate executives had been too bureaucratic and out of touch with u.s. car buyers' preferences . the auto task force at the treasury department , which oversaw restructuring of old gm ( and old chrysler ) , repeatedly said that changing gm's senior executive corps and the internal corporate culture would be one of the most important steps in old gm's transformation to a more competitive company . the obama administration's firing of old gm's then - chairman and ceo , rick wagoner , in 2009 , and its appointment of new board members and a new chairman and ceo , were intended , in part , to emphasize to all stakeholders the importance of changing the business model . higher gasoline prices . in 2008 , gasoline prices rose to over $4 a gallon in many parts of the united states , adversely affecting demand for large vehicles with low fuel efficiency . these vehicles , such as pickup trucks and sport utility vehicles , had been critical to old gm's profitability . the initial u.s. government loans to assist the u.s. motor vehicle and motor vehicle financing industries were made by the george w. bush administration in december 2008 and january 2009 . at that time , $24.8 billion in assistance was provided to four companies , the first of what would eventually total nearly $80 billion in assistance through the troubled asset relief program . tarp was authorized by the emergency economic stabilization act ( eesa ) , enacted in the fall of 2008 to address the ongoing financial crisis . this statute specifically authorized the secretary of the treasury to purchase troubled assets from "financial firms," the definition of which did not mention manufacturing companies . according to the treasury , the overriding objective of eesa was to restore liquidity and stability to the financial system of the united states in a manner which maximizes overall returns to the taxpayers . consistent with the statutory requirement , treasury's four portfolio management guiding principles for the tarp are: ( i ) protect taxpayer investments and maximize overall investment returns within competing constraints ; ( ii ) promote stability for and prevent disruption of financial markets and the economy ; ( iii ) bolster market confidence to increase private capital investment ; and ( iv ) dispose of investments as soon as practicable , in a timely and orderly manner that minimizes financial market and economic impact . the authorities within tarp were very broad . when congress did not pass specific auto industry loan legislation , the bush administration turned to tarp for funding , arguing that failure to provide assistance to the auto industry would make the recession much worse and would impose other costs on federal taxpayers , such as providing unemployment benefits for displaced workers . after it took office , in 2009 , the obama administration built on this precedent , and both chrysler and gm received additional tarp loans . gmac / ally financial received additional capital infusions , enabling the company to survive the downturn in the auto market as well as large losses on its mortgage operations .