the future of dao , in particular , is uncertain . although many u.n. member states , including the united states , appear to support the initiative , it is unclear whether it will continue beyond the current pilot phase . the unds is funded by donor contributions to individual u.n. entities . congress authorizes these funds in foreign relations authorization acts and appropriates the money in department of state , foreign operations , and related programs appropriations legislation . the top five government donors were the united states ( $1.3 billion ) ; japan ( $804.6 million ) ; the netherlands ( $796.9 million ) ; the united kingdom ( $743.9 ) ; and norway ( $695.2 million ) . funding mechanisms for unds entities vary depending on their governance and structure . assessed contributions provide entities with a regular source of income for staffing and implementation of authorized programs . u.n. specialized agencies , such as ilo , who , wfp , and fao , however , rely on assessed contributions to their regular budgets . payment of such contributions is one of the legal obligations accepted by a country when it joins an organization . many contend that this leads to a lack of coordination and duplication within the unds . moreover , it makes it more difficult for donors , recipient governments , and the u.n. system to identify gaps and areas for improvement . competition among and within u.n. system entities — many in the development community debate the impact of competition among u.n. entities on overall unds efforts . generally , experts agree that competition can benefit u.n. development activities by encouraging organizations to improve the quality of their services . when discussing u.n. system development activities in u.n. forums , administration officials have consistently raised the importance of: achieving overall coherence at the country level , which includes enhancing and recognizing the important role of the u.n. resident coordinator , strengthening the individual capacities and coordination of u.n. entities , and supporting the concept of country ownership in the development process ; improving transparency and accountability through enhanced oversight , such as results - based budgeting and greater access to audit information to ensure that expenditures are accounted for and that programs demonstrate effective results ; and improving evaluation mechanisms to better demonstrate the effectiveness of unds activities to donors and host countries , and to provide mechanisms for organizations to measure their effectiveness . the administration has also emphasized that u.n. entities need to continually update management practices to keep up with emerging development institutions that are "more nimble , transparent , and accountable. the regular assessed budgets of u.n. system organizations , including many in the unds , are included in the contributions to international organizations ( cio ) account . u.s. voluntary contributions to unds entities are financed through the foreign assistance authorization and foreign operations appropriations legislation , primarily through the international organizations and programs ( io&p ) account . io&p does not include voluntary contributions to the u.n. high commissioner for refugees ( unhcr ) , which has a different authorization and is funded through the migration and refugee assistance account .