what does that mean for chrysler ? at 10 percent market share , it translates to a loss of 650,000 vehicles , or roughly $16 billion in lost revenue opportunity . with such a huge hit to our sales and revenue base , chrysler requires the loan to continue the restructuring and fund our product renaissance . the federal government provided $10.9 billion in financial support for chrysler in 2008 and 2009 , as detailed in table 3 . tarp assistance for chrysler , like most of the tarp assistance , was initially provided through financial instruments that were expected to be repaid or repurchased by the recipients . in the bankruptcy process , however , some of the loans to old chrysler remained with the bankrupt company and the loan to new chrysler included common equity in the new company in return . common equity is not expected to be repaid by the company , but represents an ownership stake in the company . similar conversions of tarp assistance into common equity were also undertaken for a small number of other tarp recipients , including gm , gmac / ally financial , aig , and citigroup . in general , government holding of common equity means that whether the government recoups its assistance depends on the price it receives when the government sells this equity . if the government's common equity stake ends up being sold for less than the amount of the government's assistance , the company involved has no legal responsibility to compensate the government for the difference . if the value of the government's equity stake is sufficiently high , however , the government may end up making a greater gain on the assistance than if the company directly repaid the assistance . as specified by the tarp statute , any proceeds from equity sales "shall be paid into the general fund of the treasury for reduction of the public debt. in the case of new chrysler , the agreement for sale to fiat of the u.s. government's remaining interests in the company resulted in a $560 million payment to the treasury , compared to $1.8 billion in tarp assistance outstanding . even including other gains , such as $1.1 billion in interest payments received , the government recouped less money from the tarp assistance for chrysler than the loans given to chrysler . exactly how large a loss might be attributed to the chrysler assistance , however , depends on what accounting method is used . one straightforward way to calculate gains or losses for tarp assistance is to simply compare the amount of assistance provided by the government to the funds returned to the government in nominal amounts . in the case of chrysler , tarp provided $10.9 billion in loans to support the company . in return for this $10.9 billion , the government is received a total of approximately $9.6 billion: $5.5 billion in loan repayments ; $1.9 billion in recoupment from the bankruptcy process of old chrysler ; $1.66 billion in interest and other fees ; and $560 million paid by fiat for the u.s. government's new chrysler common equity and rights .