is notable . in that decision , the court retained current legal standards by holding that patents must be proved invalid by "clear and convincing evidence. the court explicitly rejected the argument that the "preponderance of the evidence" s tandard , which would have made patents more vulnerable to challenge , applied in this situation . this report reviews the microsoft v. i4i decision and its implications for innovation policy in the united states . the patent act of 1952 authorizes the u.s. patent and trademark office ( uspto ) to review patent applications and to approve them where "the applicant is entitled to a patent under the law. congress has established a number of patentability requirements — including novelty and nonobviousness — that uspto examiners must evaluate in determining whether a patent should issue . to be considered novel , the invention must not be wholly anticipated by the so - called "prior art," or public domain materials such as publications and other patents . the nonobviousness requirement is met if the invention is beyond the ordinary abilities of a person of ordinary skill in the art in the appropriate field . to assess whether a particular invention meets these requirements , examiners will conduct a search of the prior art to look for relevant treatises , journal articles , and other patents . once a patent issues , its owner gains the right to exclude others from using the claimed invention . this right can be enforced by bring a civil action for infringement in federal court . congress provided the accused infringer with several defenses . among them is that the patent is invalid ; in other words , the uspto should not have allowed the patent to issue at all . the patent statute provides that a "patent shall be presumed valid" and that the "burden of establishing invalidity ... rest[s] on the party asserting such invalidity. however , the patent statute does not specify how persuasive the evidence of invalidity must be in order for the judge , jury , or other finder of fact to rule in favor of the accused infringer . under case law developed by the courts , the accused infringer must overcome the presumption of validity by persuading the factfinder of the patent's invalidity by "clear and convincing evidence. the standard of clear and convincing evidence is satisfied if the factfinder believes that a particular proposition is substantially more likely to be true than not . stated differently , the trier of fact must have a firm belief in the factuality of that proposition . most civil litigation proceeds under the more readily satisfied "preponderance of the evidence" standard . under the preponderance of the evidence standard , the factfinder must only be persuaded that the something is more likely so than not so . patent holder i4i filed an infringement suit against microsoft in 2007 . according to i4i , microsoft word infringed its patent to an improved method of editing computer documents . microsoft denied infringement and counterclaimed for a declaration of invalidity and unenforceability . with regard to its invalidity defense , microsoft contended that i4i's sales of software known as "s4" rendered the asserted patent invalid for lack of novelty .