no further action has been taken . similarly , in the 112 th congress , representative john yarmuth introduced h.j.res . 97 , a proposed constitutional amendment that would set a "legal public holiday for the purposes of voting in regularly scheduled general elections for federal office. the joint resolution was referred to the house judiciary committee and no further action has been taken . in addition to introducing legislation to create new federal holidays , legislation has been introduced to add to existing holidays . eleven have thus far become law . although these patriotic celebrations are frequently referred to as "national holidays," legally they are only applicable to federal employees and the district of columbia . neither congress nor the president has asserted the authority to declare a "national holiday" that would be binding on the 50 states , as each state individually determines its legal holidays . creating a holiday for federal employees does , however , affect each state in a variety of ways , including the delivery of mail and conduct of business with federal agencies . federal holidays have been created for a number of reasons . in several instances , congress created federal holidays after a sizeable number of states created state holidays . in other instances , congress took the lead . additionally , each holiday was designed to emphasize a particular aspect of american heritage or to celebrate an event in american history . in 1870 , when congress passed the first federal holiday law , the federal government employed approximately 5,300 workers in washington , dc , and another approximately 50,600 around the country . the distinction between federal employees working in the district of columbia and those elsewhere proved important because the initial holiday act only applied to the federal workforce in washington , dc . federal employees in other parts of the country did not receive holiday benefits until at least 1885 , as federal holidays were initially interpreted as only applying to federal workers in the district of columbia . for more information on applicability of federal holidays to federal employees , see " federal holidays and employee pay " below . although there is no indication in the authorizing statutes ( or accompanying floor debate ) for either the 1870 and 1879 acts that any federal employees were to be paid for such holidays , an analysis of holiday legislation subsequently signed by president rutherford b. hayes in april 1880 seems to support such a conclusion . the 1880 legislation was prompted by a grievance filed by a group of employees who had been denied holiday pay for the previous new year's day while other federal workers had been paid . the house committee which favorably reported the bill that would become the law signed by president hayes , stressed that while there were no existing laws requiring such payment , this group of employees , "in the committee's opinion , should be placed upon an equality in this regard" with those of other government departments . the committee went on to point out that , on the "question of legal holidays," the revised statutes of the united states were silent , but those relating to the district of columbia were very precise on the issue .