coverage rates vary considerably across states . if the government position is covered by social security and medicare under a section 218 agreement , then any employee ( current or future ) filling that position is subject to social security and medicare payroll taxes . coverage is extended to groups of employee positions known as "coverage groups ; " coverage may not be extended on an individual basis . various laws and regulations govern how coverage may be extended via employee referendums . all states are authorized to use a majority vote referendum process , and 23 states also are authorized to use a divided vote referendum process created in 1956 ( see below ) . most often , state governments allow their subdivisions ( eg , a school board ) to decide whether to hold a referendum on coverage . in 1950 , congress added section 218 to the social security act to allow all 50 states , puerto rico , and the virgin islands to elect social security coverage for certain state and local government employees . in 1954 , congress extended voluntary coverage to employees who were already covered by pension plans , effective starting in 1955 , if a majority of employees who were members of a pension system voted in favor of social security coverage . further amendments in 1956 permitted certain states to split state or local retirement systems into "divided retirement systems" based on groups of employees that voted for social security coverage and groups of employees that voted against social security coverage . currently , 23 states are authorized to operate a divided retirement system . until april 1983 , public employers could opt in and out of the social security program . in 1983 , legislation prohibited public employees from withdrawing from the social security program once they are in it . the state of california challenged the 1983 law , however the supreme court rejected california's arguments . in 1984 , congress extended social security coverage to many groups that had not been covered previously , including many state and local government employees , members of congress , and federal civilian employees hired on or after january 1 , 1984 . until 1984 , federal employees were not covered by social security , but instead participated in the civil service retirement system . in 1990 , congress made social security coverage mandatory , starting in july 1991 , for most state and local government employees who are not covered by an alternative public pension plan . across the united states , about 27.5% of state and local government employees ( about 6.6 million persons ) work in positions that are not covered by social security . coverage rates vary considerably across the states , as shown in table 1 . in 26 states , 90% or more of state and local government employees work in positions that are covered by social security . in three states , more than 95% of state and local government employees are covered by social security: arizona ( 95.3% ) , new york ( 96.7% ) , and vermont ( 97.9% ) .