some disabled children are eligible for medicare . statistical techniques adjust the data to represent all households in the nation . the march supplement to the cps is one of several widely used sources used to estimate the levels of uninsurance in the united states . the key variable in this report is whether each child was uninsured in 2009 . more specifically , the uninsurance variable measures whether the child lacked health insurance for at least some part of 2009 . this report , therefore , uses the term "uninsured" to mean uninsured at a point in 2009 , not necessarily uninsured over the entire year . this section covers the relationships between health insurance and a child's and / or parent's demographic and employment characteristics . this section demonstrates that , in evaluating groups of uninsured children , it is important to decide on an appropriate comparison group . although family status for children living with at least one parent is used as an example , the issues covered in this section are applicable to other traits as well . the conclusion is that different representations of the same data can lead to different conclusions if care is not taken when evaluating the data . figure 1 looks at the total number of uninsured children and displays the percentage of uninsured children living with at least one parent by family structure . from this picture alone , one could conclude that uninsurance was highest among two - parent families . this is because almost 60% of the total pool of uninsured children live with two parents , while about 31% of the total pool of uninsured children live with a single mother , with the remaining 11% living with a single father . in this example , it is important to remember that all comparisons are relative to the total number of uninsured children . different conclusions , however , might be drawn if the analysis compares the percentage of uninsured children within each group's family structure . these comparisons are illustrated in figure 2 for two - parent families , single - father families , and single - mother families , respectively . even though figure 1 shows that those living in two - parent households are the largest group of uninsured children , figure 2 demonstrate that children living in two - parent families are less likely to be uninsured than children living with only one parent . this apparent paradox — that the group least likely to be uninsured makes up the largest portion of the uninsured — also exists when looking at other characteristics . it comes about because the group representing the largest share of the relevant population ( i.e. , children living in two - parent families ) can have the largest number of uninsured children even if they have the lowest uninsurance rate . these differences raise important issues for policy makers considering policy options to reduce the number of uninsured . for example , proposals that may affect the greatest number of children in two - parent families ( which comprise almost 59% of the uninsured children ) may not affect the greatest number of children living in single - father families ( of whom 16% are uninsured ) .