appendix a . the conceptual nuclear fuel cycle for a detailed discussion , see crs report rl34234 , managing the nuclear fuel cycle: policy implications of expanding global access to nuclear power , coordinated by [author name scrubbed] . §2153 et seq. ) ( hereinafter "123 agreements" ) . during the past decade , members of congress have become increasingly concerned that , with an increased global interest in nuclear power , additional countries may obtain domestic enrichment or reprocessing technology , the most sensitive components of the nuclear fuel cycle . uranium enrichment can produce low - enriched uranium for use as fuel in nuclear reactors , but can also produce highly enriched uranium , which can be used as both reactor fuel and as fissile material in nuclear weapons . by reprocessing spent nuclear reactor fuel , a state can produce plutonium , which it might use as fuel in certain types of nuclear reactors and also as fissile material in nuclear weapons . obtaining fissile material is widely regarded as the most difficult task in building nuclear weapons . ( for an illustration of the nuclear fuel cycle , see appendix a . ) these proliferation concerns have generated increased congressional interest in laws governing bilateral nuclear cooperation agreements . recent congressional debates over 123 agreements with india , russia , the united arab emirates ( uae ) , south korea , and vietnam highlighted concerns about the need to balance nonproliferation , commercial , and strategic goals . additional agreements are expected to come before congress for consideration in the next few years . sixteen countries are planning to build their first nuclear power plants by 2030 , according to the world nuclear association . iaea estimates that world nuclear power generation by 2030 will grow 46% - 142% from 2012 , led by the far east and eastern europe ( along with possible reductions in western europe ) . concerns about the safety of nuclear power and its economic competitiveness are the major near - term inhibitors of nuclear growth , according to iaea . but the agency predicted , "in the longer run , the underlying fundamentals of population growth and demand for electricity in the developing world , as well as climate change concerns , security of energy supply and price volatility for other fuels , continue to point to nuclear generating capacity playing an important role in the energy mix. world nuclear power generation has dropped since 2006 , particularly after japan's reactors shut down following the 2011 fukushima disaster . nuclear power critics contend that construction delays , cost overruns , and competition from renewable energy will strongly inhibit the future of nuclear power . they point out that three countries — china , india , and russia — account for two - thirds of the reactors currently under construction worldwide . in the countries considering their first nuclear reactors , such projects are at various stages of planning ( see appendix b ) . ten countries that are currently building or formally planning reactor projects — bangladesh , belarus , egypt , indonesia , jordan , kazakhstan , poland , turkey , the uae , and vietnam — have never operated nuclear power plants .