likewise , their operational turf is unconstrained by these lines . the second reality is broadly related to the first . some larger criminal groups even establish their own operational "borders" by defining and defending the "turf" or territories they control . these boundaries are not formally recognized by law enforcement authorities , but they have strong influence in the criminal underworld . in fact , much of the violence in mexico along the u.s. southwest border revolves around rival dtos clashing over territorial control . the outlines of turf can cross borders at the national , state , and local levels , thus complicating policing efforts . the third reality involves a largely borderless , virtual environment where criminals carry out illicit business . criminals operate in the cyber world partly to circumvent more conventional , established constructs such as international borders . in the virtual realm , criminals can rely on relative anonymity and a rather seamless environment to conduct business . for instance , some criminals use electronic banking systems to quickly smuggle cash out of one nation and into another . finally , u.s. law enforcement often remains constrained by geographic and legal boundaries or even its own notions of "turf" — partly defined in terms of competing agency - level priorities and jurisdictions . u.s. officials have suggested that as criminals have evolved their operations , they have relied less on turf to conduct business ; the same evolution is unclear regarding u.s. law enforcement . law enforcement agencies , even while collaborating through means such as interagency agreements , task forces , and fusion centers , retain investigational jurisdiction over certain categories of crime . and recent reports have suggested that interagency disagreements over organizational boundaries may remain . in addition to challenges presented by each of these four operational realities individually , law enforcement faces hurdles presented by the overlap of any or all of the realities . complicating this , policy changes in one reality — both administratively and legislatively — can impact criminal activity and law enforcement countermeasures in other realities . policy makers have expressed interest in ensuring that law enforcement is keeping pace with 21 st century criminals who threaten american society . given that criminal investigations unfold in an environment of geographic borders , criminal turf , borderless cyberspace , and law enforcement jurisdictions , policy makers may question how to direct policy to best enable u.s. law enforcement to target contemporary criminals . for instance , congress may choose to examine whether law enforcement agencies are effectively coordinating their investigations through the use of interagency agreements , task forces , and fusion centers . policy makers may also debate whether law enforcement has the existing legal authorities , technology , and resources — both financial and manpower — to counter 21 st century criminals . one of the principal debates for policy makers may be whether , or how , to design policies that cut across multiple operational realities . this report examines the four operational realities within which law enforcement and crime operate . it analyzes the challenges for u.s. law enforcement in each of these realities individually and in selected cases where they overlap .