, the reference entity ) . for "cash - settlement" cds contracts , the buyer would receive a cash payment equal to the difference between the fair market value of the specified asset and its par value if a "credit event" occurs . many believe that risks were underestimated before the 2007-2008 financial crisis . some macroeconomists spoke of a "great moderation," reflected in reduced volatility of real economic output , which was seen to have resulted from improved monetary policy , more flexible labor markets , resurgent economic growth , and greater sophistication of financial markets . some , however , have contended that cds markets could also destabilize asset markets or financial institutions in some situations . in hindsight , many financial risks appear to have been underappreciated . more recent analysis and commentary has put greater emphasis on managing and understanding risks . for example , one prominent macroeconomist noted that "there is no such thing as an absolutely safe sovereign. a former chief economist of the international monetary fund ( imf ) and a coauthor note that from a broad historical perspective , sovereign defaults have not been uncommon . financial analysts use many indicators to evaluate various risks associated with holding government securities . some risks , such as interest rate risks , are generated by wider market trends . a credit default swap is a financial contract in which one party promises to pay another party if a third party defaults . the third party , in this case , is known as the "reference entity. in the case of a cds on u.s. sovereign debt , the u.s. government is the reference entity . a typical cds contract on sovereign debt specifies that a buyer , in exchange for an annual fee set by the market and paid quarterly , obtains from a seller specified protection against default and broadly similar events affecting securities issued by a country ( i.e. other cds contracts , known as physical settlement cdss , require the buyer to surrender the asset in return for a payment equal to its par value if a credit event occurs . par , or face value , is the value of a bond at maturity . for widely held cdss , recovery values are typically determined through an auction - based procedure specified by the international swaps and derivatives association ( isda ) . cdss are part of a larger class of financial instruments known as credit derivatives , which allow investors to hedge against or speculate that risks that a company or country will fail to meet its financial obligations may rise or fall . the market for credit derivatives has grown enormously since the mid - 1990s . in legal terms , a cds is a bilateral derivative contract traded in the over - the - counter ( otc ) derivatives market . it transfers from one party to another the risk that a specified reference entity will experience a "credit event. the cds protection buyer typically pays a periodic fee to a protection seller in return for compensation if a reference entity experiences a credit event .