appendix a . 3144 ( text ) if it appears from an affidavit filed by a party that the testimony of a person is material in a criminal proceeding , and if it is shown that it may become impracticable to secure the presence of the person by subpoena , a judicial officer may order the arrest of the person and treat the person in accordance with the provisions of section 3142 of this title . this allowed the government to . avoid the constitutional protections guaranteed to suspects , including probable cause to believe the individual committed a crime and time - limited detention . witnesses were typically held round the clock in solitary confinement , subjected to the harsh and degrading high security conditions typically reserved for the most dangerous inmates accused or convicted of the most serious crimes . they were interrogated without counsel about their own alleged wrongdoing . [a] large number of witnesses were never brought before a grand jury or court to testify . more tellingly , in repeated cases the government has now apologized for arresting and incarcerating the "wrong guy. the material witnesses were victims of the federal investigators and attorneys who were to[o] quick to jump to the wrong conclusions , relying on false , unreliable and irrelevant information . by evading the probable cause requirement for arrests of suspects , the government made numerous mistakes . other courts seem to agree . the "failure of justice" limitation comes into play when release of the witness following the taking of his deposition would ultimately deny a defendant the benefit of favorable material testimony in derogation of his right to compulsory process . it does not include the fact that a judicial officer will not be present at the taking of the deposition or that the witness is an illegal alien subject to prosecution . unlike the request of a detained witness , a government or defendant's request that a witness' deposition be taken must show "exceptional circumstances" and that granting the request is "in the interest of justice," f.r.crim.p . 107-56 , 115 stat . section 12 would have amended section 1001 to impose additional responsibilities upon the inspector general's designee , i.e . , ( 1 ) to "review detentions of persons under section 3144 of title 18 , united states code , including their length , conditions of access to counsel , frequency of access to counsel , offense at issue , and frequency of appearances before a grand jury," ( 2 ) to advertise his availability to receive information concerning such activity , and ( 3 ) to report twice a year on implementation to the judiciary committees on implementation of this requirement . perhaps due to administration opposition , the provision was dropped from h.r . 3199 prior to house passage . no similar provision could be found in h.r . 3199 ( s. 1389 ) as approved in the senate , in the conference bill , h.rept . 109-333 ( 2005 ) , or the legislation ultimately enacted . s. 1739 , introduced by senator leahy , would have rewritten section 3144 .