appendix a . the bca does not contain any specific restrictions on the policy content of the joint committee bill . in order to comply with the constitutional requirement that all bills affecting revenue originate in the house of representatives , section 402 ( e ) ( 2 ) of the bca ensures that the bill sent to the president for his signature will be the "h.r. version of the joint committee bill , not the "s." version . what happens if the joint committee bill does not become law ? importantly , some programs , including both social security and medicaid , are exempt from sequestration , and any sequestration of medicare spending is capped at 2% . if the automatic spending reduction process occurs because a joint committee bill does not become law , how much will spending be cut ? the amounts of spending reductions required each year cannot yet be known . it depends in part on the extent , if any , by which the reductions in the joint committee bill fall short of the $1.2 trillion goal and in part on spending estimates to be calculated in the future by the office of management and budget ( omb ) . furthermore , beginning in fy2014 , part of the spending reductions will be achieved through a downward adjustment of the statutory limits on discretionary spending , not by automatic across - the - board spending cuts . for discretionary spending , it will therefore be congress and the president who later determine the manner in which reductions are made to each account through the annual appropriations process each year . what programs and activities are exempt from the sequestration process that will occur if a joint committee bill does not become law ? yes . if a joint committee bill reducing the deficit by at least $1.2 trillion over the period covering fy2012-fy2021 is not enacted by january 15 , 2012 , an automatic process to reduce spending will begin january 2 , 2013 . the spending reductions are achieved for direct spending through sequestration each year ( fy2013 to fy2021 ) . for discretionary spending , the reductions are achieved through sequestration the first year ( fy2013 ) . for the other fiscal years ( fy2014-fy2021 ) , the discretionary spending reductions are achieved through a downward adjustment of statutory limits on discretionary spending divided into two new categories that reflect defense and nondefense spending . the list of exempt programs and activities can be found in section 255 of the balanced budget and emergency deficit control act , as amended ( 2 u.s.c . the bca authorized an increase of the debt ceiling up to at least $2.1 trillion . if congress does not take any other action , the increase up to $2.1 trillion will occur . raising the debt ceiling to a higher level , up to a maximum of $2.4 trillion , is contingent on other action , namely the enactment of a joint committee bill that reduces the deficit by more than $1.2 trillion or the passage in both chambers of a balanced budget constitutional amendment .