congress can also use regular ( i.e. the rules that agencies issue pursuant to ppaca are expected to have a major impact on how the legislation is implemented . for a variety of reasons , however , the cra has been used to disapprove only one rule in the 14 years since it was enacted . perhaps most notably , it is likely that a president would veto a resolution of disapproval to protect rules developed under his own administration , and it may be difficult for congress to muster the two - thirds vote in both houses needed to overturn the veto . , non - cra ) legislative procedures to disapprove agencies' rules , but such legislation may prove even more difficult to enact than a cra resolution of disapproval ( primarily because of the lack of expedited procedures in the senate ) , and if enacted may also be vetoed by the president . the patient protection and affordable care act ( ppaca ; p.l . 111-148 , as amended ) is a particularly noteworthy example of congressional delegation of rulemaking authority to federal agencies . ppaca is a comprehensive overhaul of the health care system that includes such provisions as the expansion of eligibility for medicaid , amendments to medicare that are intended to reduce its growth , an individual mandate for the purchase of health insurance , and the establishment of insurance exchanges through which individuals and families can receive federal subsidies to help them purchase insurance . a previous crs report identified more than 40 provisions in ppaca that require or permit the issuance of rules to implement the legislation . for example , in an article entitled "the war isn't over" that was posted on the new england journal of medicine's health care reform center shortly after ppaca was signed into law , henry j. aaron and robert d. reischauer wrote: making the legislation a success requires not only that it survive but also that it be effectively implemented . although the bill runs to more than 2000 pages , much remains to be decided . the legislation tasks federal or state officials with writing regulations , making appointments , and giving precise meaning to many terms . in comparison with the proposed and final rules previously discussed , it is much less clear when the ppaca - related long - term actions are expected to occur ; in 17 of the 27 cases , the agencies said that the dates for the actions were "to be determined. of the remaining ten long - term actions , six were expected in june 2012 , one in august 2012 , one in calendar year 2013 , and two in calendar year 2014 . as noted earlier in this report , when federal agencies issue substantive regulations , they are carrying out legislative authority delegated to them by congress . therefore , it is appropriate for congress to oversee the rules that agencies issue to ensure that they are consistent with congressional intent and the rulemaking requirements established in various statutes and executive orders . for congress to oversee the rules being issued pursuant to ppaca , it must first know that they are being issued — ideally as early as possible .