appendix a . text of 10 u.s.c . 2306b the text of 10 u.s.c . ( d ) participation by subcontractors , vendors , and suppliers. multiyear contracts: acquisition of property ( a ) in general. - to the extent that funds are otherwise available for obligation , the head of an agency may enter into multiyear contracts for the purchase of property whenever the head of that agency finds each of the following: ( 1 ) that the use of such a contract will result in significant savings of the total anticipated costs of carrying out the program through annual contracts . ( 2 ) that the minimum need for the property to be purchased is expected to remain substantially unchanged during the contemplated contract period in terms of production rate , procurement rate , and total quantities . ( 3 ) that there is a reasonable expectation that throughout the contemplated contract period the head of the agency will request funding for the contract at the level required to avoid contract cancellation . ( 4 ) that there is a stable design for the property to be acquired and that the technical risks associated with such property are not excessive . ( 5 ) that the estimates of both the cost of the contract and the anticipated cost avoidance through the use of a multiyear contract are realistic . 2306b as of april 29 , 2019 , is as follows: ยง2306b . ( 6 ) in the case of a purchase by the department of defense , that the use of such a contract will promote the national security of the united states . ( 7 ) in the case of a contract in an amount equal to or greater than $500,000,000 , that the conditions required by subparagraphs ( c ) through ( f ) of subsection ( i ) ( 3 ) will be met , in accordance with the secretary's certification and determination under such subsection , by such contract . ( b ) regulations. - ( 1 ) each official named in paragraph ( 2 ) shall prescribe acquisition regulations for the agency or agencies under the jurisdiction of such official to promote the use of multiyear contracting as authorized by subsection ( a ) in a manner that will allow the most efficient use of multiyear contracting . ( 2 ) ( a ) the secretary of defense shall prescribe the regulations applicable to the department of defense . ( b ) the secretary of homeland security shall prescribe the regulations applicable to the coast guard , except that the regulations prescribed by the secretary of defense shall apply to the coast guard when it is operating as a service in the navy . ( c ) the administrator of the national aeronautics and space administration shall prescribe the regulations applicable to the national aeronautics and space administration . ( c ) contract cancellations. - the regulations may provide for cancellation provisions in multiyear contracts to the extent that such provisions are necessary and in the best interests of the united states . the cancellation provisions may include consideration of both recurring and nonrecurring costs of the contractor associated with the production of the items to be delivered under the contract .