however , h.r . the defendant infringed the copyright willfully . the defendant committed the infringement for purposes of commercial advantage or private financial gain . the defendant infringed by publicly performing the work by electronic means , in excess of the following thresholds: 10 or more public performances by electronic means , during any 180-day period , of 1 or more copyrighted works . 3261 would amend 17 u.s.c . section 506 ( a ) ( 1 ) ( c ) to establish criminal liability for someone who willfully publicly performs a pre - release commercial copyrighted work by making it available on a computer network . this amendment is similar to that of section 1 ( b ) of s. 978 , described above . section 201 ( b ) ( 1 ) of h.r . 3261 would amend 18 u.s.c . section 2319 ( b ) ( 1 ) , the criminal code provision that specifies the penalties for the offense of willfully infringing a copyright for purposes of commercial advantage or private financial gain ( 17 u.s.c . the changes made by this subsection would authorize a maximum of five years imprisonment and / or a criminal fine of up to $250,000 for an individual perpetrator ( or $500,000 in the case of an organization that commits the offense ) , who commits the following offense: 10 or more public performances by digital transmission , during any 180-day period , of one or more copyrighted works which have a total retail value of more than $2,500 . this amendment is similar to the comparable provision in s. 978 ( section 1 ( a ) ) , although the senate bill provides an alternate financial threshold for the offense: the total fair market value of licenses to offer performances of the copyrighted works would exceed $5,000 . 3261 does permit the use of evidence of the total fair market value of licenses to prove total retail value , although there is no requirement that such market value of the licenses exceed $5,000 . in an amendment that is unique to the house bill , section 201 ( a ) of h.r . 3261 would amend 17 u.s.c . courts have generally interpreted the term "willfully" ( in the context of criminal copyright infringement ) to mean a "voluntary , intentional violation of a known legal duty. section 201 ( c ) of h.r . 3261 contains a "rule of construction" ( that does not appear in s. 978 ) regarding a finding of willfulness to establish liability for criminal streaming: any person acting with a good faith reasonable basis in law to believe that the person's conduct is lawful shall not be considered to have acted willfully for purposes of the amendments made by this section . such person includes , but is not limited to , a person engaged in conduct forming the basis of a bona fide commercial dispute over the scope of existence of a contract or license governing such conduct where such person has a reasonable basis in law to believe that such conduct is noninfringing . nothing in this subsection shall affect the application or interpretation of the willfulness requirement in any other provision of civil or criminal law .