appendix a . world bank group classifications wbg institutions base their lending on levels of economic development . appendix b . world bank group energy portfolio , fy2003-fy2010 appendix c. u.s. department of the treasury guidance to the multilateral development banks on coal in december 2009 , the u.s. treasury department transmitted to the senior management of the multilateral development banks ( mdbs ) guidance for engaging with developing countries on coal - fired power generation . the guidance is intended to be adapted by individual mdbs and incorporated into their respective operational policies , country and sector strategies , and other procedures that are related to the public or private project cycle for coal - powered generation operations . it covers a range of issues including alternatives analysis , power sector policy reform , and capacity building . it is intended to supplement rather than supersede other mdb operational policies ( eg , environmental impact assessment , other environmental and social safeguards , procurement ) and to be used to help determine u.s. interactions with the mdbs as they update relevant sector strategies and operational policies . provisions in the guidance include the following , among others: having the mdbs incorporate procedures to ensure full consideration of no or low carbon options before appraising a proposed new or retrofit coal - fired power generation project ; identifying "no or low carbon options" as including ( 1 ) more carbon efficient fossil fuel generation , ( 2 ) renewable resources , ( 3 ) supply side efficiency improvements in other plants , and ( 4 ) demand side management ; supporting the use of best internationally available technology for reducing ghg emissions if proceeding with appraisal of a new or retrofit coal generation project ; for projects in ibrd and blend countries , incorporating offsetting actions ( i.e. , a package of significant and measurable actions elsewhere in the power sector that , in the aggregate , are intended to reduce emissions by an amount equivalent to the emissions to be added by the proposed project ) ; and , for projects in ida - only countries , proceeding with appraisal of a coal project that does not meet the above best available technology criteria , if the project ( 1 ) addresses critical national energy security needs , ( 2 ) responds to national short - term emergencies , or ( 3 ) overcomes binding constraints on national economic development when no viable alternatives exist . a final section outlines issues for congress . first , legislative mandates direct how the u.s. representatives at the wbg can vote on various policies and projects . second , legislative mandates direct the u.s. representatives at the wbg to advocate for specific policies . third , congress may require the secretary of the treasury to submit reports on wbg activities . the core mission of the world bank group , as stated in its literature and outreach , is poverty alleviation and environmentally sustainable development . research shows an estimated 1.4 billion people worldwide ( i.e. , 20% of the world population ) are without access to electricity or modern energy resources , and many more face recurrent supply disruptions .