summaries of the fsc and sfi measures are presented . upon certification , there are maintenance and re - certification requirements . the national forests have been the focus of controversy for many years . reduced timber harvests , increased wildfire risks , degraded forest health , and disagreements among users and other stakeholders have led to congressional disputes over appropriate management . some interests have suggested third - party certification of sustainable management of the national forests as a possible solution to many of these difficulties . sustainable forest certification programs were created in the 1990s as a nongovernmental approach to promote sustainable forest management practices . while certification was initially seen as a means to gain market advantages , those expectations have rarely been realized in the domestic u.s. market . in addition , the certification process and maintenance requirements could have the unintended , opposite effect of becoming another layer of administrative complexity for the forest service to navigate . there are no standard metrics to evaluate the benefits and costs of the state certification programs . while the sfi program has stated that it is ready to certify the national forests , the fsc program is likely several years away from having procedures that would address a national forest certification process . prior to certification , the fsc program would need to determine if the national forests meet the three threshold requirements set forth in its federal lands policy . then , if the national forests meet the threshold requirements , the fsc would have to develop and approve a standard specific for the national forests . it is not clear how certification would affect the management of the national forests . however , certification could evaluate the extent to which the forest management plans align with the standards of each certification program , and then evaluate the extent to which those forest plans are being implemented . the results of these third - party evaluations of the forest plans and their implementation could potentially alleviate — or escalate — stakeholder and congressional disputes over the appropriate management of the national forests . direct costs include the initial fee to pay for the audit process , and then whatever annual or semi - annual costs are required to maintain certification . indirect costs include changes that may be required to earn or maintain certification , such as implementing new monitoring and reporting systems or adjusting harvest levels . these costs may or may not be recovered in improved management , or even in higher stumpage prices for the certified products leaving the national forests . this report outlines the history and development of forest certification as a voluntary , market - based mechanism to promote sustainable forest practices . it then describes , compares , and contrasts the two major certification programs used in the united states based on a broad range of sustainable forest management issues pertinent to the national forest system . both the fsc and the sfi programs have two parts: landowner certification to ensure the sustainable management of the land , and chain - of - custody certification to trace the life cycle of wood products originating in a certified forest .