dot has no authority over the implementation of those laws . further , the laws applicable to a project , and the corresponding state , tribal , or federal agencies charged with implementing those laws , will vary from project to project . the ability of dot to establish binding deadlines on a potentially wide ranging group of agencies would be challenging . considering these limits to dot's authority , a potential option in reauthorization would be to continue the process established under safetea that allows dot to approve state dot requests to provide federal - aid highway or federal transit funds to state , tribal , or federal , agencies that support activities that contribute to expediting and improving the planning and delivery of transportation projects in that state . safetea did not provide any additional funding for this purpose . consequently , a state proposing to use this authority must take the funds out of its normal allocation of federal transportation funds . safetea required greater consideration of environmental issues in the statewide and metropolitan planning processes . moreover , some states have integrated transportation planning to a much greater extent with other planning efforts such as land use and natural resource preservation . despite these changes , however , some believe they have not made much difference in speeding project delivery because of the uncertainty of applying these efforts in the nepa process . one option in reauthorization for overcoming this problem is to create an integrated planning pilot project , under the special experiment program authority that currently exists for fhwa . perhaps beyond this is the idea for pursuing a programmatic approach to oversight , rather than one based on project by project review . in addition to the efforts to streamline environmental review , there have been other past legislative changes and administrative actions dealing with the delays of the highway project delivery process . these include the encouragement by dot of environmental - planning linkages ( epl ) and the creation of its "every day counts" ( edc ) initiative , as well as the encouragement of innovative methods in contracting . the edc initiative aims to identify areas of concern in project delivery and to disseminate innovations and best practices that already exist to states and others to overcome them . epl is one of the ten ways to shorten project delivery times as part of the edc initiative . ยง4321 et seq. ) and other federal environmental laws and regulations are major causes of delay in moving highway and transit projects from conception to completion . to more fully understand sources of delay in major highway and transit projects , this report examines the process from beginning to end , including environmental review , and looks at the available evidence on timelines in project delivery . unfortunately , the evidence is scant and anecdotal , relying for the most part on the memories and opinions of transportation professionals involved in planning , designing , and constructing highway and transit facilities .