taa was offered as a more constructive alternative . it would provide for positive adjustment rather than negative reaction to tariff reduction , with expectations that costs would be temporary for an adjustment period , and much less harmful than protectionist measures . taa skeptics challenged the logic of these claims . the senate , however , did not take up a taa bill and program authorizations expired on december 31 , 2007 . in not reauthorizing taa , the 110 th congress instead provided short - term funding through consolidated appropriation bills to keep the taa programs running ( see appendix for legislative chronology ) . in the 111 th congress , consideration of taa reauthorization coincided with the u.s. economy falling into a deep recession following an unprecedented financial crisis . congress responded with passage of the american recovery and reinvestment act ( arra ) of 2009 . this act became the legislative and budgetary vehicle to move taa revisions that had been developed over the previous years . basic disagreements over the substance of the taa bill remained , but congress reauthorized the trade and globalization adjustment assistance act ( tgaaa ) of 2009 as part of the larger arra bill . it extended the programs through december 31 , 2010 , and revamped them using a revised version of the framework developed in the 110 th congress . this framework included eligibility for service workers and firms , a new communities program , an increased health coverage tax credit for dislocated workers , and additional funding for all programs , among other changes . at the close of 2010 , as taa programs were about to expire again , congress extended them through february 12 , 2012 , as part of the omnibus trade act of 2010 . higher authorization levels and expanded provisions of the arra , however , were only extended through february 12 , 2011 , although taa programs continued to operate at their pre - arra levels until early february 2012 . when the arra provisions expired , a basic controversy reopened , largely along partisan lines . supporters of the expanded taa saw the tgaaa - passed reforms as long - sought permanent changes needed to modernize taa for the 21 st century . taa detractors viewed the lapsed expansion of taa reforms as the appropriate outcome of a limited - life stimulus bill . the debate took on new life early in the next congress . at the beginning of the 112 th congress , taa program authorizations were set to expire on february 13 , 2012 . basic disagreements over taa remained entrenched in congress , with a strong democratic base arguing for continued revision and expansion , and many republican members voicing either strong opposition to the concept and programs , or support for a different set of reforms . taa proponents reiterated the need to assist those hurt by "trade and globalization," while opponents increased their critique of taa for its lack of effectiveness and high costs . budgetary considerations loomed in the background of all these discussions , as did intensifying debate over passage of implementing legislation for free trade agreements ( ftas ) with colombia , panama , and south korea ( korus ) .