sources of information on disaster assistance programs . how citizens and local governments can receive disaster assistance: http: / / www.disasterassistance.gov / . background on all federal assistance programs: https: / / beta.sam.gov / . sources of scientific information on the magnitude and location of natural hazards . relating to hurricanes: http: / / www.nhc.noaa.gov / . relating to earthquakes: http: / / earthquake.usgs.gov / earthquakes / . the corps has an emergency response authority ( 33 u.s.c . ยง701n ) under which it performs flood - fighting , and other emergency response ( eg , emergency water supplies ) and disaster assistance focused on actions to save lives and protect improved property . the corps also has limited authorities to assist with select activities during drought . many federal departments and agencies have standing authorities to assist tribal , state , and local governments in a variety of ways . for example , the centers for disease control and prevention ( cdc ) may provide a range of technical assistance on issues relating to public health concerns following a disaster . further , other federal agencies may be able to waive certain regulations and requirements in times of disaster to aid the response and recovery effort . for example , the environmental protection agency ( epa ) , working with the department of energy ( doe ) , can issue emergency waivers of certain fuel standards in affected areas . under a stafford act major disaster declaration , the president , the fema administrator , and the fema regional administrator may direct any federal agency , with or without reimbursement , to utilize its authorities and the resources granted to it under federal law ( including personnel , equipment , supplies , facilities , and managerial , technical , and advisory services ) in support of state and local assistance response and recovery efforts , including precautionary evacuations . if another federal agency is called upon to assist during a disaster using this authority , typically they receive a mission assignment from fema and are reimbursed through the disaster relief fund . federal government agencies also have numerous authorized deployable federal assets that can support the immediate response to disaster . the federal government may also provide assistance without a request in more limited circumstances . for example , a request does not need to be made by a state or tribal government when the primary responsibility for the response rests with the federal government . this most frequently occurs because the incident involves an issue or hazard for which , under the constitution or a federal law , the president or other federal authority has exclusive or preeminent responsibility and authority . likewise , there are situations when the federal government or a federal asset will provide immediate assistance , primarily to prevent the direct loss of life or significant property damage , without the request rising through the "normal" request procedures . for instance , the department of defense ( dod ) , through its defense support of civil authorities ( dsca ) regulations and policies , authorizes local dod officials to provide immediate assistance without a formal request rising through the state and lead federal officials .