the state's motion was denied . in february 2010 , the proceedings on remand led the director to petition the supreme court again for review of the case . the court invited the solicitor general to express views on the lawsuit , and the solicitor recommended that the court decline to take the case . nevertheless , the court granted certiorari on one of the two issues presented to the court — whether medicaid recipients and providers can bring an action under the supremacy clause to enforce the equal access provision by asserting that the federal provision preempts a state law reducing reimbursement rates . accordingly , the court will likely address the ability of private parties to bring an action under the supremacy clause to determine whether the california law is preempted by the medicaid act . with respect to the issue before the court , the respondents ( i.e. the director moved to vacate the ninth circuit's decision on the grounds that it became moot because of a change in law . , the medicaid providers and beneficiaries ) argued in briefs to the supreme court that based on court precedent , a statutory cause of action is unnecessary in order to bring a preemption claim under the supremacy clause . they also asserted that in order to prevent injury , the court has permitted private parties to obtain relief from state laws that are preempted by federal law . on the other hand , the director of california's department of health care services claimed that the ninth circuit improperly allowed use of the supremacy clause , as the decisions in question essentially allow medi - cal beneficiaries and providers to invoke the supremacy clause to enforce a federal statute ( i.e. , equal access provision ) despite the fact that the statute does not expressly create any privately enforceable rights . the director's petition urges the supreme court to find that "[d]ressing the lawsuit up as a preemption challenge should not change the conclusion that the [equal access provision] is not privately enforceable. further , the director argued that given that congress did not provide for a private right of action under the equal access provision , allowing a private party's preemption claims to proceed based on an alleged conflict with a federal statute frustrates congressional intent and would negate the principle that "'private rights of action to enforce federal law must be created by congress.' the court will hear oral arguments in the douglas cases during its october 2011 term . some commentators have noted that the court's decision in douglas may be important , as the case could determine whether the supremacy clause provides a basis for court review of various issues related to a state's medicaid program — issues that may have been immune from review because , for example , there appeared to be no private right of action . more specifically , a holding for the medicaid providers and beneficiaries could permit medicaid litigation that gonzaga had obstructed , by giving standing to individuals under the supremacy clause who did not have a private right of action under section 1983 .