china's were about 11% . all the "developing" countries at the time contributed about one - third . as will be reflected later in this report , the degree to which national goals and measures will be achieved remains an important question . controlling local and regional pollutants like oxides of sulfur and nitrogen , particulates , and mercury has been difficult because of the difference in priorities of local and central government officials , as well as insufficient monitoring data and enforcement of national requirements . controlling ghg emissions in china is even harder . for conventional pollutants ( eg , particulate matter or water contamination ) , both mitigation costs and impacts are local or regional ; averaged nationally , polluting nations will largely pay the costs of that pollution either financially or in lower well - being . but with ghg emissions , mitigation costs may be local , while climate impacts are global . without shared international action , this can lead to a "tragedy of the commons" phenomenon where the shared resource is not adequately stewarded , or where some people take responsibility while others , who do not control their emissions , become "free riders" on the efforts of those who do . over the past three years , china's leadership has demonstrated an increasing realization that it has ownership in the outcomes of a warming world . increasingly , it recognizes that it too would bear potential climate change costs — of increasing storm intensity , rising sea levels , shifting water availability , challenged agricultural productivity , changing disease patterns , as well as other anticipated impacts . china's recently announced 12 th 5-year plan , covering 2011-2015 , says the nation should act to balance economic growth with environmental protection . how china reconciles domestic politics with international relations , and "fairness" arguments with pledges of actions to suppress its ghg emissions ( to be discussed later ) , remains to be seen . china's ghg emissions are the highest in the world because of its very large economy , the high share of the economy generated by energy - intensive ( and ghg emitting ) industry , and the high share of coal in china's energy mix . china has increasingly strengthened its policies and programs to curtail ghg emissions , culminating in a pledge under the 2009 copenhagen accord to achieve a 40 to 45% reduction in its carbon intensity by 2020 . the government has sought to enforce and incentivize many programs to improve energy efficiency and expand the shares of non - emitting sources of energy . in addition , it has promoted policies in agriculture and other sectors to abate ghg emissions . still , some critics are skeptical of china's ability to achieve its targets , while others believe that china's efforts are little more than "business - as - usual. one recent analysis concluded that achieving the carbon intensity target is feasible , but would require strengthening of existing policies to stimulate energy efficiency in multiple sectors and to increase shares of renewable and nuclear electricity generation . under existing policies , most analysts expect china's ghg emissions to slow their rate of growth but to continue to increase until around 2030 .