several questions remain following global - tech . the court did not decide whether a defendant's "willful blindness" may extend to the induced acts that constitute infringement ( as opposed to being willfully blind to the existence of the patent ) , as the question was not at issue in the case because "pentalpha was indisputably aware that its customers were selling its products" in the united states . another unresolved matter is whether "knowledge of the patent" means knowledge of a specific patent , or knowledge of the high probability that a patent exists . these questions remain left to be resolved by future litigation or by congress . two decisions from different panels of the u.s. court of appeals for the federal circuit caused this confusion . in hewlett - packard co. v. bausch & lomb , inc. , a panel of the federal circuit held that a defendant could be liable if the plaintiff could prove that the defendant actually intended to cause the acts that ultimately turned out to be patent infringement . a different panel of the federal circuit held in manville sales corp. v. paramount systems , inc. that "[i]t must be established that the defendant possessed specific intent to encourage another's infringement and not merely that the defendant had knowledge of the acts alleged to constitute inducement . the plaintiff has the burden of showing that the alleged infringer's actions induced infringing acts and that he knew or should have known his actions would induce actual infringements. an en banc federal circuit attempted to resolve this conflict of authority in its 2006 decision , dsu medical corp. v. jms co. , ltd. , which held that to be held liable under section 271 ( b ) ,"the inducer must have an affirmative intent to cause direct infringement. the en banc court explained that , the plaintiff has the burden of showing that the alleged infringer's actions induced infringing acts and that he knew or should have known his actions would induce actual infringements . the requirement that the alleged infringer knew or should have known his actions would induce actual infringement necessarily includes the requirement that he or she knew of the patent . however , prior to its decision in global - tech appliances , inc. v. seb s.a. , the u.s. supreme court had never before addressed the scope of the knowledge requirement ( or even determined whether there is a requisite intent ) for inducement liability under section 271 ( b ) of the patent act . the supreme court in global - tech held that section 271 ( b ) requires specific intent to induce acts that constitute patent infringement . however , the alleged inducer's actual knowledge of the patent is not necessarily required , as the knowledge requirement may be satisfied by the "willful blindness" doctrine . this standard is stricter than the federal circuit's "deliberate indifference" standard for establishing inducement of infringement that would have allowed a finding of knowledge when there is only a "known risk" that the induced acts infringe a patent . thus , the court has raised the bar for proving that a defendant is liable for actively inducing infringement of a patent under section 271 ( b ) .