these phases are discussed in detail below . the nrda process has been successful in the past , but it has never been tested on such a large scale as the 2010 deepwater horizon oil spill . in this case , more oil was spilled ; a greater geographic area is involved ; and more trustees are involved than in past spills . the trustees may have difficulty agreeing on the assessment of damages , baseline conditions , the value of the damaged resources , and the proper method of restoring them . if a unified restoration plan is sought , the trustees must make unanimous decisions on these issues , and then bp has the option not to accept the final restoration plan . if bp rejects the trustees' plan , the trustees may sue bp under nrda to resolve these issues , extending the final conclusion , which could delay restoration of the natural resources . several federal district courts have held that opa preempts other general maritime remedies . the national oceanic and atmospheric administration ( noaa ) of the department of commerce oversees the nrda process under opa . currently , noaa is involved in 13 other nrda oil spill cases in the gulf in addition to the bp spill . although trustees are not obligated to follow noaa's nrda regulations , trustees have an incentive to comply with the regulations because of the rebuttable presumption accorded such determinations . under the opa regulations , the trustees may take emergency restoration action before completing the nrda process , provided that ( 1 ) the action is needed to avoid irreversible loss of natural resources ; ( 2 ) the action will not be undertaken by the lead response agency ; ( 3 ) the action is feasible and likely to succeed ; ( 4 ) delay would result in increased damages ; and ( 5 ) the costs of the action are not unreasonable . the regulations also provide that settlement for natural resource damages may occur at any time , if the terms of the settlement are adequate to satisfy the goal of opa and are "fair , reasonable , and in the public interest. under the opa regulations , the trustees are required to invite the responsible parties to participate in the nrda process "as soon as practicable" but not later than the delivery of a notice of intent to conduct restoration planning . the regulations further state that the trustees and responsible parties should consider entering into binding agreements to facilitate their interactions and resolve any disputes . once the responsible parties accept an invitation to participate , the trustees determine the scope of their participation in accordance with the regulations . furthermore , the regulations allow trustees to take other actions to expedite the restoration of injured natural resources , including pre - incident planning and the development of regional restoration plans . the trustees' work occurs in three steps: a preassessment phase , the restoration planning phase , and the restoration implementation phase .