and it wound up being even easier. another former staffer stated , "i think the notion of sequester has lost its frightening characteristics . sequestration was originally put in to push the nonsequester outcome . and if we've now gone through a few budget years where it's ho - hum , then there is no deterrence. on the other hand , situations also occurred in which , before the point arrived at which a sequestration would occur , the president and congress successfully reached an agreement that cold be attributed to the desire to avoid sequestration . for example , in september of 1990 , president george h.w . bush and congress reached a significant deficit reduction agreement that was subsequently implemented through annual appropriations bills and the omnibus budget reconciliation act of 1990 ( p.l . it could be argued that the willingness of president bush to accept some revenue increases as part of this agreement , after having pledged in his campaign to reject tax increases , represented a response to the alternative of a sequester that would have reduced spending for non - exempt defense programs by 34.7% and non - exempt non - defense programs by 31.6% . nonetheless , these observations suggest that in some cases , congress and the president may find it easier to allow an automatic budget enforcement mechanism to take effect rather than to negotiate an agreement . for one thing , congress may find legislative inaction easier than action . in some cases , as well , allowing an automatic reduction may be politically easier than negotiating an agreement . in these respects , much may depend on how an automatic reduction is designed to work and which programs , if any , would be exempt . if proponents hope to promote a negotiated solution , they might wish to design the enforcement mechanism to be as unattractive as possible , so as to constitute a more severe threat . yet it might be difficult to gather support for a proposal with a highly unattractive enforcement mechanism , because lawmakers , appreciating the difficulty of reaching a negotiated agreement , may fear that the enforcement mechanism will be used despite their best intention to reach such an agreement . it can be argued that even if the threat of an automatic reduction does not force negotiation that reduces current spending , it may discourage spending on new programs . some have said that the chief impact of gramm - rudman - hollings was that it "acted as a brake on new initiatives," blocking , delaying , or reducing spending for new programs . another assumption that may be made by proponents of statutory spending limits may be that compliance with statutory spending limits , either through legislative action or an automatic enforcement mechanism , will in fact result in spending reductions . experience , however , shows that at least under some conditions , it may be possible to comply with the statutory requirements while still not achieving the intended reductions in actual spending . if the statutory scheme provides exemptions from its requirements for "emergency spending," or for other specified programs , significant spending can occur that is not subject to the limits .