the child tax credit is refundable . taxpayers with very low income ( i.e. , less than $10,000 ) do not benefit from the child tax credit ( or receive a very small credit , less than $1,000 per child ) for two reasons . some experts believe that the different eligibility rules for different child - related tax benefits make it increasingly difficult for taxpayers to claim these benefits . this complexity results in direct financial costs for taxpayers , who may choose to use paid preparers instead of preparing their returns themselves . this is referred to as the "earned income" refundability formula . phase - out: the credit is phased out for higher - income taxpayers . specifically , the credit is reduced by $50 for every $1,000 a family's modified adjusted gross income ( agi ) exceeds specific income thresholds . the monetary parameters of the credit ( credit amount , refundability threshold , and phase - out threshold ) are not indexed for inflation . the child tax credit can also offset a taxpayer's alternative minimum tax ( amt ) liability . the current structure of the child tax credit benefits taxpayers over a wide range of income , as illustrated by table 1 . roughly half ( 52.4% ) of the child tax credit benefits go to taxpayers with cash incomes under $40,000 , whereas the other half go to those making more than $40,000 . roughly the same proportion of the child tax credit goes to taxpayers with agi between $10,000 and $20,000 ( $18.0% ) as goes to those with agi between $50,000 and $75,000 ( 16.9% ) , underscoring the fact that this tax credit provides significant benefits to both low - income and middle - income families . most taxpayers with incomes above $200,000 will be ineligible for the credit due to the phase - out thresholds . egtrra and arra , which first made the credit partially refundable and then expanded refundability respectively , expanded the credit's availability to lower - income americans , especially those with incomes between $10,000 and $20,000 . prior to this expansion , the credit was largely available only to middle - and upper - middle - income taxpayers . as previously noted , the egtrra provisions were made permanent by atra , while the arra changes were made permanent by the path act . although the current credit is generally available to low - income taxpayers , it provides little benefit to extremely poor taxpayers . taxpayers with incomes under $10,000 receive 3.6% of the child tax credit , even though they make up 16.8% of tax units . this suggests that this provision may not benefit the very poor in proportion to their population . first , taxpayers with very low income do not have any income tax liability and so cannot claim the nonrefundable portion of the child tax credit . even if the taxpayer had one qualifying child — and so would be able to reduce their tax liability by $1,000 — if they do not owe any federal income taxes , they cannot reduce their taxes by the credit amount . this is one rationale for making tax credits refundable ( i.e.