under article vi , cl . for example , minnesota has enacted an outright prohibition on new nuclear power plants . many states , like california , have enacted laws that condition the construction of new nuclear power plants upon certain findings of a state regulatory body . the required finding is often associated with the existence of a viable means for the disposal of nuclear waste . recently , however , vermont has enacted a series of statutes that provide the general assembly with the authority to decide whether vermont yankee , which has been operating for almost 40 years , operates beyond march 21 , 2012 . although preemption is a constitutional principle arising from the supremacy clause , the extent to which state laws are preempted is a matter of congressional intent . therefore , congress retains the authority to define the preemptive scope of a statute . if congress is unhappy with a court's interpretation of a given statute , congress is free to amend the statute to make the statute's preemptive effects clear . likewise , if congress disagrees with the degree to which a state is regulating in an area , congress is free to either restrict or enlarge that freedom . it is "up to congress to determine whether a state has misused the authority left in its hands. courts have struggled to define the precise borders of the preemptive field emanating from the nrc's exclusive authority over radiological safety aspects of the construction and operation of nuclear power plants . given the uncertainties associated with field preemption generally , it is not surprising that the aea has been subject to a number of conflicting interpretations , which have , in turn , given rise to conflicting case law . congress , however , is free to adjust or clarify those preemptive boundaries by amending the aea . the supreme court expressly invited congress to adjust the separation of authority between the states and the federal government if it felt state laws like the california moratorium infringed on federal authority to encourage the development of nuclear power . in pacific gas , the court noted that "it is for congress to rethink the division of regulatory authority in light of its possible exercise by the states to undercut a federal objective . the courts should not assume the role which our system assigns to congress. if congress believes that courts have interpreted the aea in a way that provides states with too much freedom in slowing or preventing the development of nuclear power ; or , conversely , that courts have interpreted the aea in a way that excessively restricts a state's ability to regulate nuclear power within its borders ; or if congress simply seeks to mitigate the uncertainty associated with defining the scope of field preemption under the aea , then congress is free to expressly adjust the preemptive field of the aea accordingly . preemption is , at its core , controlled by congress . they do not attempt to assert ultimate control over existing plants . significant controversy has surrounded vermont's attempt to prevent the continued operation of the state's only nuclear power plant — vermont yankee , located in vernon .