interconnection authority ) . the cost of interconnection , that is , building new transmission lines , is a separate matter . the 2005 energy policy act ( epact ) directed a study to determine the economic and engineering feasibility of combining wind generated energy with hydropower and a demonstration project that uses wind energy generated by indian tribes . the western area power authority has the authority to supply federal agencies in its service territory ( facilitated through contracting assistance by femp ) . the roles that other pmas may have in supplying federal agencies are not so clearly delineated . a detailed discussion of the pmas' legislated authority is outside the scope of this report . however , their capabilities are briefly discussed below . although the tennessee valley authority was privatized , it has been added to this discussion for historical background purposes . electricity consumption in fy2007 cost the federal government $4.4 billion , or more than 0.5% of the $843 billion federal discretionary budget . congress has enacted various laws , since the 1970s , to reduce federal agencies' energy consumption by mandating improved energy efficiency . the 2005 energy policy act ( epact ) included provisions to reduce energy and water use in congressional buildings , install advanced meters to reduce electricity use in federal buildings , enact performance standards to improve federal buildings , and allow for the creation of renewable energy offsets to reduce the federal government's electric energy consumption . 254 ( c ) . dod has similar authority to acquire property using multi - year contracts under 10 u.s.c . the lease may not exceed five years unless a longer lease period would promote national defense or the public interest . the lease payment must be based on fair market value ( in cash or in - kind ) . the lease terms cannot provide for a leaseback in excess of $500,000 annually . in - kind consideration offered by the private developer may include: facility / real property maintenance , repair , improvement , or restoration ( including environmental restoration ) ; new facilities construction ; providing or paying for utility services ; or providing other services that may be appropriate . under these terms , military installations have undertaken major energy projects that directly benefit them by offsetting the cost of their energy use , as illustrated in the following examples . the public utility regulatory policies act of 1978 ( purpa , p.l . 95-617 ) established electric utility service practices and ratemaking standards for state regulatory authorities and non - regulated utilities . purpa defined a new class of generating facilities that would receive special rate and regulatory treatment . qualifying facilities ( qfs ) under the definition included "small power" production facilities that generate less than 80 megawatts using solar , wind , geothermal , biomass , or waste . purpa also required utilities to buy power from qfs within their service territory ( with some exceptions ) at the utility's "avoided cost" of power production via a state authorized "power purchase" contract — more commonly referred to as a "power purchase agreement. avoided cost is the regulatory - determined incremental cost a utility would have to pay if the utility purchased or generated the electricity itself .