all other regions have deficits . sorghum , barley , and oats: declining importance as feed grains sorghum , barley , and oats are the three remaining major feed grains although they pale in significance when compared with corn . grain sorghum and barley have about 95% of the feed value of corn , while oats has about 90% of corn's feed value . in the past decade sorghum has accounted for about 3% of feed grain use compared with 1% shares for both oats and barley . the tremendous growth in corn yields ( and significant improvements in its genetic adaptation to varying agro - climatic settings ) relative to other field crops has allowed corn to expand into non - traditional areas at the expense of minor feed grains , wheat , and oilseed crops . as a result , corn's planted acreage and output has been steadily increasing since the early 1980s , while sorghum , barley , and oats have been on the decline ( figure 11 ) . sorghum is a drought - and heat - resistant crop grown primarily in the central and southern plains regions where the climate is often impractical for non - irrigated corn ( figure a - 2 ) . most sorghum is consumed as a feed grain in southwestern cattle feedlots . sorghum also rivals corn as a potential ethanol feedstock and is used to produce biofuels in a few ethanol plants located close to sorghum growing regions . the united states is the world's leading sorghum exporter , shipping about 46% of annual production ( or about 188 million bushels ) , primarily to japan and mexico . barley production is concentrated in the northern plains ( figure a - 2 ) . its most valued use is as a source of malt for the brewing industry . however , poor barley quality ( usually related to growing conditions or excessive harvest - time moisture ) and relative feed grain price differentials can lead to substantial barley feeding to cattle and sheep . oats production ( and its use for feed ) in the united states has declined steadily since the 1950s for a variety of reasons including its lower feed value and price relative to other feed grains . since the mid - 1980s the united states has become the world's largest importer of oats , primarily for use as horse feed . during the past decade , the united states has imported nearly 48% ( or about 98 million bushels ) of its annual oats consumption . feed wheat: varies with quality and market conditions wheat is generally grown as a food crop , but may also be used as a livestock feed since its feed value is comparable to that of corn . wheat's traditionally higher price relative to corn is a major factor in determining the extent to which wheat is used as a livestock feed . however , weather - related damage to wheat , particularly excessive moisture at harvest time , can render the grain unsuitable for milling uses and leave feeding as the only option . during the past decade , about 7% of the annual u.s. wheat crop has been fed to livestock .