in particular , both h.r . 1249 and s. 23 propose that the uspto be given the authority to "set or adjust by rule any fee established or charged by the office. any fees set must , in the aggregate , cover the estimated costs of the agency's services . an example illustrates the working of this procedure . suppose that a german inventor filed an application at the european patent office on december 1 , 2011 . on december 1 , 2012 , the inventor then files the same application at the uspto . under the three - track initiative , the uspto would not consider the application until the european patent office had conducted a search of the literature , communicated its initial review of the european application to the applicant , and received a reply from the applicant . applicants have reportedly used this procedure infrequently . as noted , the uspto is contemplating a three - track initiative that would provide additional mechanisms for governing the review of patent applications . under this system , the uspto would place all applications into one of three distinct separate queues: an accelerated track one ; traditional examination in track two ; and a deferral of examination in track three . the maximum period of deferral is 36 months . entering track one would require a prioritized examination fee of $4,000 . the application would then be placed within a docket designed to provide a final disposition of the application within twelve months of the prioritized status grant . a track one application must have no more than four independent claims and thirty claims total . prioritized status is forfeited if the applicant ever requests an extension of time to respond to a uspto communication . in contrast , if an inventor requests that a particular application be deferred , it is placed in track three . the inventor must request that the application be examined within 30 months from the filing date . upon receipt of such a request , the uspto will place the application into queue for review by an examiner . the remaining option , track two , includes applications that have been neither prioritized nor deferred . track two applications would be docketed immediately and will be reviewed by an examiner in the order in which they are received . the three - track initiative would also significantly change uspto procedures with respect to applications that were first filed outside the united states — for example , at the european patent office or the japanese patent office . the uspto currently does not consider the national origin of the application when it is placed into queue for examination . under the proposal , an application will only be placed into one of the three tracks if it was originally filed in the united states . applications that were originally filed abroad would not be docketed for examination at all . the uspto would take no action on a foreign - origin application until it received copies of ( 1 ) the prior art search conducted by the foreign office , ( 2 ) the initial communication of the foreign office to the uspto , and ( 3 ) the applicant's reply to that communication .