effectively for their development and growth . imperfect competition exists within the international market in which there are only a few producers , due to high barriers to entry , and hence firms which are able to gain early market entry will be able to obtain higher than normal returns ( rents ) . firms within this market have the ability to affect prices , and are influenced strongly by the actions of their competitors . as a result , government assistance ( export promotion ) to domestic firms will induce foreign firms to exit the market ( due to a realization that they would be unable to compete against firms which have government backing ) or will cause them to minimize their level of production and market share . other foreign governments will not attempt to provide similar assistance to their firms or will not retaliate against such policies . the returns to the economy realized by such a policy will be greater than their costs . this assumes that imperfect competition exists due to economies of scale and steep learning curves that enable firms to continue to lower costs as production increases . government subsidies to domestic firms lower their costs and allow them to expand production and gain a larger market share at the expense of foreign competitors . a critique of export promotion policies and programs opponents of government export promotion programs argue that market distortions caused by imperfect information are minimal and do not warrant government intervention . they contend that u.s. firms generally are producing for export the level of goods and services demanded in the international market as determined by supply and demand conditions , access to world markets , and macroeconomic forces ( principally exchange rates ) . as a result , they argue that export promotion programs will have little effect on the ability of firms to sell products overseas . critics of trade promotion programs further argue that the availability and prices of export services ( including financing ) simply reflect supply and demand for such services in the market , and thus contend that there is no "shortage" of export financing or services . if prices charged by firms providing export services were "unusually high" or offered returns that were greater than other types of services in the economy , then other firms would attempt to enter the export services market , driving down prices . in fact , opponents argue , the existence of some government export promotion programs impedes greater involvement by private - sector firms in the provision of export services . according to this view , the provision of government assistance to exporters at little or no charge lowers the demand ( and prices ) of export promotion services in the private sector , and hence discourages greater private - sector involvement . while opponents of strategic trade and industrial policies agree that the government , under certain circumstances , may be able to influence the growth and development of individual industries , they question whether the benefits of such policies to targeted firms will exceed their costs to society . many also question the ability of the state , rather than market forces , to provide the most efficient allocation and use of scarce economic resources .