appendix a . state partnerships: table and world map appendix a . appendix b . title 10 and national defense authorization act authorities that may be used by the spp appendix c. state partnerships and title 22 authorities according to ngb representatives , the spp currently operates only under title 10 , title 32 and national defense authorization act authorities . under this definition , therefore , spp events do not occur under title 22 authorities at the present time . however , there are circumstances in which a state national guard might operate under title 22 authorities in support of their partner nation . for example , a nation that is approved to receive peacekeeping training under the global peace operations initiative ( gpoi ) may request that the state national guard it is partnered with provide some of the trainers . if such a request were approved by the appropriate dos and dod officials , then gpoi funds would be used to fund some of the expenses associated with the state national guard training of its partner nation's forces . while these are not considered to be "spp events" by ngb , the distinction may not be apparent to many of those participating in the training . individuals interviewed for this report referred to three title 22 authorities that have been used in the past to fund training by a state national guard with its partner nation . they are listed below . determining the frequency of such title 22 events was outside the scope of this report , but they appear to have been relatively infrequent in comparison to the frequency of title 10 spp events . appropriations for these three title 22 programs are provided under the state department's security assistance ( previously the military assistance ) account . global peace operations initiative . through gpoi the u.s. government provides foreign military forces from developing countries with training in peacekeeping skills and helps develop associated peacekeeping capacity . gpoi was built on the earlier african contingency operations training and assistance ( acota ) program and its africa component often is still referred to by that acronym . the state department is primarily responsible for the program , but works closely with dod to plan and implement programs through dod's defense security cooperation agency ( dsca ) and the geographic combatant commands . authorization is provided by section 551 of the foreign assistance act of 1961 ( faa , p.l . 2348 ) , as amended . international military education and training program . the imet program provides foreign military personnel with the opportunity to attend a variety of u.s. military educational institutions and training courses . the expanded - imet ( e - imet ) component provides foreign civilian and military leaders and mangers of foreign military establishments with opportunities to enhance their skills in managing and administering military establishments and budgets , creating and maintaining effective military judicial systems and military codes of conduct ( including observance of international recognized human rights ) , and fostering respect for the principle of civilian control of the military . the state department , with input from dod , decides which foreign countries will be permitted to participate and their respective funding levels . dod's dsca implements the program .