appendix a . comparison of deficit projected in presidential budget submissions and actual amounts , fy1965-fy2010 appendix b . legislative history of the balanced budget provision in 31 u.s.c . 1103 ( formerly 31 u.s.c . 27 ) "byrd amendment" ( named after its sponsor senator harry f. byrd , jr. ( d - va ) ) passed senate 58-28 ( vote no . would it be necessary to statutorily increase presidential rescission or deferral powers ? more significantly , would an amendment assigning responsibility to the president , either solely or jointly with congress , to "ensure that outlays not exceed receipts" imply enhanced impoundment authority ? this possibility suggests that any workable constitutional prohibition on deficit spending take into account the workings of the federal budget process and expenditure practices , as well as the division of responsibility between the executive and legislative branches . most measures requiring a balanced budget also include a requirement that the president submit a proposed budget with total outlays not in excess of total receipts . in addition to the requirement that his budget proposal balance estimated outlays and receipts , such a provision would also effectively make the president's role in the budget process a part of the constitution . the president's formal involvement in the budget process currently has a statutory , rather than constitutional , basis . it stems from the budget and accounting act of 1921 ( codified at 31 u.s.c . historically , the budget - making process has been the constitutional preserve of congress , requiring only the president's concurrence or passage over his veto . although such presidential requirements are generally included in proposals as a way to preserve symmetry between the executive and legislative branches , this is not precisely the same requirement that congress would have to adhere to . because of the timing of the president's budget submission , the estimates of receipts and outlays used in this proposal would not necessarily be the same as those used by congress . this could mean that the president would be able to use a unilateral estimate to fashion his proposal , while congress might have to base its spending actions on an estimate more agreeable to both branches . also , the president's proposal would have to balance estimated outlays against estimated receipts , while under most proposed amendments congress would ultimately have to balance actual outlays against actual receipts . this distinction is likely to revive a problem highlighted during the reagan administration and especially under the balanced budget and emergency deficit reduction act . differing estimates and projections of the economy and the budget by congress and the president could make it difficult to achieve budgetary goals . a concern addressed in many proposals is the issue of coverage . lengthy debates on which activities or agencies ( if any ) should be exempted from the effects of sequestration under the balanced budget and emergency deficit control act have amply demonstrated the difficulty in reaching agreement on the issue , as well as the problems associated with exempting certain activities . it is not clear whether the term "off - budget" would continue to have any meaning if a balanced budget proposal were added to the constitution .