justice kagan has recused herself from golan . her recusal means that only eight justices will consider the case ; thus , it raises the possibility of a 4-4 tie vote , in which event the tenth circuit's three rulings regarding the constitutionality of § 514 would stand — ( 1 ) § 514 of the uraa did not exceed congress's power under the copyright clause , ( 2 ) § 514 "alters the traditional contours of copyright protection" to require first amendment scrutiny , and ( 3 ) § 514 does not violate the first amendment because it advances an important governmental interest in securing greater protections for american authors abroad . the petitioners ( the plaintiffs in the case ) argue that "[f]or two hundred years , copyright legislation was consistent with a simple command: what enters the public domain remains in the public domain," and that congress , in enacting the berne convention implementation act , followed this tradition . however , when congress enacted the uraa , it "marked a startling and dramatic departure from the traditions of u.s. copyright law. according to the petitioners , by removing works from the public domain , the uraa has violated the "limited times" restriction of the copyright clause "by turning a fixed and predictable period into one that can be reset or resurrected at any time , even after it expires. does section 514 of the uraa violate the first amendment of the united states constitution ? similar to the plaintiffs in eldred , the plaintiffs in golan v. holder are orchestra conductors , educators , performers , publishers , film archivists , and motion picture distributors who rely on the free availability of artistic works in the public domain for their livelihoods . one of the plaintiffs , lawrence golan , performs and teaches works by foreign composers including dmitri shostakovich and igor stravinsky . prior to the enactment of the uraa , the plaintiffs used or performed works by foreign artists in the public domain such as sergei prokofiev's "peter and the wolf. because § 514 of the uraa restored copyright protection to these foreign works and many others that had previously been in the public domain , the "plaintiffs are either prevented from using these works or are required to pay licensing fees to the copyright holders — fees that are often cost - prohibitive for plaintiffs. in 2001 , the plaintiffs filed a lawsuit challenging the constitutionality of § 514 of the uraa as well as the copyright term extension act , arguing that both exceed congress's powers under the copyright clause and that both violate the first amendment . in march 2004 , the u.s. district court for the district of colorado granted the government's motion to dismiss the plaintiffs' challenge to the ctea as it had been subsequently foreclosed by the supreme court's opinion in eldred v. ashcroft . the district court also granted summary judgment to the government on the plaintiffs' two uraa claims , ruling that congress had the power to enact § 514 of the uraa under the copyright clause and that the plaintiffs "had no protected interest in the now - copyrighted works.