appendix a . regulatory actions affecting mountaintop removal mining epa and other federal agencies ( the office of surface mining and reclamation , in the department of the interior ; and the u.s. army corps of engineers ) are developing a series of actions and regulatory proposals to reduce the harmful environmental and health impacts of surface coal mining , including a practice called mountaintop removal mining , in appalachia . these actions would not affect electric power plants directly , and thus were not covered by eei nor nerc in their studies . thus , crs did not include these regulations in the discussion of the "train wreck" issues in the body of this report . nevertheless , numerous critics of epa have included epa , corps of engineers , and interior department actions in what they term a "war on coal. the actions , announced in a june 2009 interagency memorandum of understanding , are intended to tighten regulation and strengthen environmental reviews of permit requirements under the cwa and the surface mining control and reclamation act ( smcra ) . also in june 2009 , epa and the army corps signed a specific agreement detailing criteria that will be used to coordinate and expedite review of pending cwa permit applications for surface coal mining operations in appalachia . the agencies are conducting detailed reviews of 79 permit applications to evaluate the permits in order to limit environmental impacts of the proposed activities . this review is proceeding slowly . in june 2010 , the army corps suspended the use of a particular cwa general permit for surface coal mining activities in appalachia and proposed a rule to prohibit its use entirely ; a finalized rule , expected in 2012 , would apply more stringent cwa rules to these coal mining operations . in april 2010 epa released an interim guidance memorandum that seeks to clarify the agency's tightened requirements for surface coal mining in appalachia . the guidance will be applied as a framework for epa's approval of all pending and future reviews of permits to dispose of coal mining waste and other types of appalachian surface coal mining discharges that are authorized by the cwa . among other items , the interim guidance sets strict numeric limits on conductivity levels in waters affected by mining activities . conductivity is a measure of the level of salinity in water associated with discharges of selenium and total dissolved solids that are associated with coal mining wastes . based on recent scientific literature , epa has concluded that conductivity above certain levels in appalachian streams presents a reasonable potential to harm stream biota . conductivity , and its use in assessing coal mining impacts on water quality , has become a focus of debate . according to epa , the 2010 interim guidance is not intended to bring a complete halt to surface coal mining in appalachia , but to force the industry to adopt practices that will minimize harmful impacts . environmental groups support the guidance document and epa's use of conductivity to assess water quality impacts , but industry groups have been highly critical , asserting that the science linking conductivity to water quality impairment is uncertain and that acceptable numeric levels are arbitrary .