justice kagan recused herself . the supreme court's decision in whiting apparently opens the door to the enactment of additional state and local measures restricting the employment of unauthorized aliens . however , several lower court decisions subsequent to whiting suggest that any state and local e - verify measures , in particular , may need to parallel federal law to avoid being found to be preempted . for example , a state court in louisiana struck down a state statute that required employers to use e - verify to verify the work authorization of all employees after finding that it was preempted by federal rules and regulations , which generally provide that e - verify may only be used to verify the employment eligibility of new hires , not current employees . in another case , a federal district court in missouri found that a municipal ordinance which would have fined employers who did not use e - verify was preempted because it imposed sanctions that were not contemplated by federal law . under federal law , use of e - verify is generally voluntary , although those who do use e - verify are generally entitled to a presumption that they have not employed an unauthorized alien . there do not appear to be any similar , post - whiting decisions finding state or local licensing measures to be preempted because they differ significantly from the provisions of federal law . however , the controlling opinion in whiting repeatedly emphasized how closely lawa "tracks irca's provisions in all material respects," and reviewing courts could potentially find that state and local measures that "track" irca less closely are preempted , as they have with state e - verify measures . there have been calls for congress to preempt state and local e - verify requirements , in particular , because of the burdens that complying with various state and local requirements could impose on employers . legislation has been introduced in recent congresses that would do this . legislation has also been introduced in recent congresses that would expressly preempt state and local measures that prohibit employers from verifying new hires or current employees through e - verify , as well as amend the employer sanctions provisions of the ina to establish that neither they nor any other federal law preempt state or local measures imposing civil or criminal sanctions upon those who employ unauthorized aliens . along with the supreme court's decision in whiting , the enactment of such legislation could also potentially shape the extent and nature of state and local restrictions on employing unauthorized aliens . employers who violate irca's prohibitions on the unlawful employment of aliens may be subject to civil and / or criminal penalties under federal law . however , irca provides that , "[t]he provisions of this section preempt any state or local law imposing civil or criminal sanctions ( other than through licensing and similar laws ) upon those who employ , or recruit or refer for a fee for employment , unauthorized aliens. the language within the parentheses is commonly referred to as the "savings clause" because it potentially saves state and local "licensing and similar laws" from preemption .