unlike h.r . 1540 , the senate bill would not also require the secretary of defense to certify that the receiving foreign entity agreed to permit u.s. authorities to have access to the transferred individual . coalition partners. most of the persons detained under the authority of the aumf are combatants picked up during military operations in afghanistan or arrested elsewhere abroad . many of these individuals were transported to the u.s . naval station at guantanamo bay , cuba for detention in military custody , although a few "high value" guantanamo detainees were initially held at other locations by the cia for interrogation . a u.s. - operated facility in parwan , afghanistan , holds an even larger number of detainees , most of whom were captured in afghanistan . neither of these two detention facilities , however , appears to be considered a viable option for future captures that take place outside of afghanistan ; the current practice in such cases seems to be ad hoc . in almost all instances , persons arrested in the united states who have been suspected of terrorist activity on behalf of al qaeda or affiliated groups have not been placed in military detention pursuant to the aumf , but instead have been prosecuted in federal court for criminal activity . there were two instances in which the bush administration transferred persons arrested in the united states into military custody and designated them as "enemy combatants" — one a u.s. citizen initially arrested by law enforcement authorities upon his return from afghanistan , where he had allegedly been part of taliban forces , and the other a legal permanent resident alien who had never been to the afghanistan zone of combat , but was alleged to have been an al qaeda "sleeper agent" who was planning to engage in terrorist activities on behalf of the organization within the united states . however , in both cases , the detainees were ultimately transferred back to the custody of civil authorities and tried in federal court when it appeared that the supreme court would hear their habeas petitions , leaving the legal validity of their prior military detention uncertain . over the years , there has been considerable controversy over the appropriate mechanism for dealing with suspected belligerents and terrorists who come into u.s. custody . some have argued that all suspected terrorists ( or at least those believed to be affiliated with al qaeda ) should be held in military custody and be tried for any crimes they have committed before a military commission . others have argued that such persons should be transferred to civilian law enforcement authorities and be tried for any criminal offenses before an article iii court . still others argue that neither a military nor traditional law enforcement model should serve as the exclusive method for handling suspected terrorists and belligerents who come into u.s. custody . they urge that such decisions are best left to executive discretion for a decision based on the distinct facts of each case . disagreement over the appropriate model to employ has become a regular occurrence in high - profile cases involving suspected terrorists .