a ces has been enacted in indiana . tax incentives and consumer rebates can reduce the price to purchasers of certain technologies . the energy policy act of 2005 ( p.l . 109-58 ) , for example , extended numerous tax credits to individuals and businesses to make investments in energy efficiency or renewable energy generation that meet certain criteria , in order to accelerate technology deployment . supply - push : other policy tools primarily act on the supply of technologies — increasing incentives for technology suppliers to conduct research and development ( r&d ) and to commercialize more advanced technologies: subsidies to research and develop new or improved technologies are a common tool of federal policy , including current approaches to mitigating climate change . federal appropriations of billions of dollars have been enacted in recent years to stimulate more efficient energy technologies ; renewable , nuclear , and "clean coal" technologies ; and approaches like alternatives to gasoline or diesel fuel for vehicles . these subsidies can take the form of tax credits for r&d , cost - sharing grants or contracts , direct investments , loan guarantees , and others . technology awards or prizes are sometimes offered to innovators that develop advanced technologies that meet specified criteria . government procurement policies can drive technological development forward , by setting challenging standards for performance and guaranteeing purchase of that technology at a particular ( attractive ) price , or by purchasing a less - emitting technology even if it is not the lowest cost alternative . both types of procurement policies have been used by the federal government to advance technologies that emit fewer ghgs than more conventional technologies . "manhattan project" - like federal research has been proposed by some experts , who argue that a focused cadre of researchers , with sufficient resources and allowed to pursue high - risk , high - payoff projects could facilitate technological "breakthroughs" that could facilitate radical change in energy systems . some policy tools that may affect the advance of technologies could be indirect . for example , incentives to ensure a sufficient supply from universities of well - trained scientists and engineers in ghg mitigation - related fields could be a component of promoting technological advance . supply - demand interface : some policy instruments focus on lubricating the connections between suppliers and users of technologies ; sometimes these are called market facilitation . they may reduce the "transaction costs" of deploying new technologies in commercial markets . programs to improve the interface between suppliers and users ( eg , the "energy star" programs of the environmental protection agency and the department of energy ) became a new emphasis since the late 1980s and early 1990s . the energy star website claims savings in the utility bills of consumers assisted by the program of nearly $18 billion in 2010 . such programs may improve the information available on technologies and markets , make it more accessible , give it independent "third party" evaluations , improving technical capacity to choose and install technologies , and many others . more specific examples include trade conferences and missions , internet - based technology databases , publication of research including reviews of applications , "stamps of approval," etc .