the use of social media is an evolving phenomenon . social media has made tremendous inroads into emergency management for a variety of reasons . for one , social media can provide accurate , reliable , and timely information . this information is vital for public safety before , during , and after an incident . in addition , disaster response efforts — particularly during large scale disasters — have been plagued by communication challenges . social media has proven to be a useful method for communicating when traditional forms of communication are ineffective or inoperable . in addition , there are strong indications that the use of social media for emergencies and disasters will increase as people continue to embrace new technologies . this increase will lead to a greater expectation that government will meet their information needs during crisis situations through social media . accordingly , many emergency managers and agencies have already adopted the use of social media to meet this expectation . emergency management organizations have also started using social media because they recognize its usefulness beyond providing public safety information . as mentioned at the outset of this report , social media applications in emergency management can be conceptualized in two broad categories of usage: output and input . by and large , the federal government uses social media as an output to disseminate information . while useful , the emphasis on outputs could prevent the federal government from fully realizing social media's potential as an effective emergency management tool . a different approach would be to reorient the focus with an emphasis on inputs . the reorientation , however , could be a complicated matter . some might argue that the federal role in social media efforts should be limited because the decentralized nature of social media makes the medium too unwieldy for large , centralized organizations to control in a manner similar to smaller organizations or emergent groups . they may further argue that federal involvement might lead to standardization and rigid usage guidelines which might hinder the nimbleness of social media to be applied in new and novel ways . they may therefore conclude that state and locals should take the lead with social media with the support of the federal government . some starting points would include pilot programs and public private partnerships . congress could also require fema to develop and deploy 3g and 4g mobile networks in presidentially declared disasters , and provide grants to state and local governments to help them develop their social media capabilities . congress could also investigate the use of social media at the federal level to help inform decisionmaking and policymaking . this could include determining hardware and software costs , personnel costs , surge capacity during large - scale disasters , and the federal government's ability to keep pace with advances in and the social media and changing patterns of public usage . congress could also explore ways to address and overcome some of the other challenges described in this report including using social media to request assistance , inaccurate or malicious crisis information , information overload , and technical limitations . selected examples of federal social media selected examples of federal social media use for hurricane sand .