appendix a . speculative trading and price table a - 1 shows the results of a linear regression analysis conducted using the software program stata . the results show a statistically significant positive correlation between the net weekly change in managed money positions ( i.e. , the net long or short positions ) , and the weekly change in oil prices . what explains oil price volatility ? there are two possible kinds of explanations . the first looks to the fundamentals of oil production and energy consumption . rapid global economic growth has led to rising demand for oil , and supply could not keep up at previous oil prices . but oil supply and demand are inelastic to price changes , at least in the near - term , which some would argue means that relatively small shifts in supply or demand can be expected to trigger significant price movements . in theory , this contributes to prices rising until some consumers no longer buy oil and producers provide more supply , putting the market in balance again . others consider price movements such as those of 2008 and early 2011 to be more extreme than warranted by the fundamentals of supply and demand . the second explanation for unstable commodity prices focuses on financial markets for derivatives contracts that are linked to the price of oil — futures , options , and swaps . many market participants are pure financial speculators , who never deal in physical oil , but seek to profit from correctly forecasting price trends . these identical bills would impose a margin requirement of 12% for swaps and futures traded on crude oil , gasoline , diesel fuel , jet fuel , and heating oil . such margin requirements would not apply , however , to "bona fide hedging" transactions , including those that represent a substitute for a position to be taken at a later time in a physical marketing channel , and those used to hedge a potential change in value of assets held or produced . 2328 also mandate that the cftc impose speculative position limits on swaps and futures in crude oil , gasoline , diesel fuel , jet fuel , or heating oil that are equal to the position accountability levels or position limits established by the new york mercantile exchange ( nymex ) . the bills include a sunset provision by which they would be terminated once the cftc imposes position limits as required by title vii of the dodd - frank act . 2003 , the taxing speculators out of the oil market act , would impose a tax on oil futures , swaps , and options transactions , except for those hedging commercial risk . the tax would be levied at 0.01% of the value of a futures contract ; 0.01% of the premium paid on an option ; or , for a swap , 0.01% of the value of the underlying assets for each year until the swap matures . supply and demand issues — market fundamentals — played a central role in the increase of oil prices in recent years .