how did it accomplish this ? relative to the cbo baseline , it recommended a level of spending that was $5.8 trillion lower in the first 10 years . the discretionary spending reductions were large ( $2.8 trillion ) , especially for nondefense , compared with other proposals . for nondefense spending , reductions by 2021 were 34% of the cbo baseline , which projected a level that was already historically low . the second - largest major change within the first 10 years , $1.4 trillion , was to repeal parts of the health care legislation that imposed costs ( while retaining other cost - reducing provisions ) . the plan converted medicaid payments to the states into a block grant that would reduce spending by $0.8 billion over 10 years , or 35% in 2022 according to cbo . the remainder included $0.7 trillion from other spending , which includes , as shown in table 19 , a block grant for food support ( snap ) as well as other mandatory spending changes . interest payments also were to fall . for medicaid , the plan stipulated that either the programs' benefits would have to decline or the states would have to shoulder a larger share of the financial burden . significant changes would have been made after 2021 , primarily by converting medicare to a voucher system ( required for those under the age of 55 in 2011 ) , which would then grow at the inflation rate . in addition , discretionary spending would continue to grow with inflation , so that it would continually decline as a percentage of output ( the cbo long - run standard baseline assumes this spending will grow with output after fy2021 ) . essentially , this plan converted major entitlements into fixed payments that are constrained to grow with inflation to control the deficit and debt without raising taxes . although this plan and its approach are illustrative , they are also suggestive of what would likely be necessary to hold the size of government and tax revenues fixed at 2007 levels: major changes to government programs for health care and other entitlements . to examine the other side of this coin , consider what would be required to protect entitlements . protecting entitlements reflects a view that government should maintain its social safety net for lower - income persons and programs for the elderly , including provisions for health care , because they are important components of maintaining a reasonable standard of living . with respect to social security , sizeable surplus revenues have already been paid to support the payment of future benefits . medicare hi also has accumulated surpluses that will maintain benefits for some years to come . nevertheless , neither of these plans is sustainable in its current formulation , and the shortfall in revenues relative to payments contributes to the overall deficit . most of the proposals already envisioned some increase in taxes ( see table 20 for details ) along with cuts in benefits , but they also cut back on entitlements . tax increases would likely be required to maintain the current level of entitlement programs .