111-148 , as amended ) . both higher and lower cost estimates have been found in other studies . among u.s. adults suffering from a behavioral health disorder severe enough to interfere with major life activities in 2009 , 40% received no treatment . despite spending on behavioral health care , adults with unmet need report numerous barriers to access , including factors such as cost , lack of time , and not knowing where to go for treatment , among others . the federal government has a role in both the financing and the delivery of behavioral health care services , as a payer , regulator , and provider . it pays for behavioral health care services through the medicare and medicaid programs and , in its role as regulator , has required the establishment and coverage of a minimum set of benefits , including behavioral health care services , for many private health plans , as well as the medicaid program . it supports the delivery of safety net services as a direct provider ( eg , indian health service ) and through the development and training of safety net health care providers ( eg , the national health service corps ) . the federal government supports both clinical training for the behavioral health workforce as well as programs to alleviate provider shortages . given the investment in these programs , among others , the financing and the delivery of behavioral health care services are likely to be of interest to congress . congressional interest in behavioral health care is reflected in the recently enacted health reform law ( patient protection and affordable care act [ppaca] , p.l . although transforming the behavioral health care delivery system was not an explicit focus of the law , it includes sections that are expected to increase access to behavioral health services through changes to the financing and the delivery of health care services . changes to financing affect both financing arrangements ( eg , public programs like medicare and medicaid , as well as private health insurance ) and coverage of specific services ( i.e. , covered benefits ) under those arrangements . changes to the delivery system affect ( among other things ) the delivery of safety net services and the development of the health workforce . ppaca includes sections that are specific to behavioral health , as well as broad reforms to health care financing and delivery that will affect behavioral health . this report provides an overview of sections in ppaca identified as having relevance to behavioral health . it first discusses these sections broadly in the context of both financing and delivery of behavioral health care services . it then presents relevant sections from the law , and selected information about each section , in a series of eight tables ( see tables 1 through 8 ) . access to health care services is determined by multiple factors , including ( among other things ) financing arrangements and covered benefits . addressing both components concomitantly may increase access to care more efficiently than addressing each component independently . for example , if existing financing arrangements are augmented or new arrangements are created , access will increase only to those services that are covered .