the program now provided oasi . during the decades that followed , changes to the social security program were mainly ones of expansion . coverage of workers became nearly universal ( the largest groups remaining outside the system are state and local government employees who have not chosen to join the system and federal employees who were hired before 1984 ) . in 1956 , congress established the disability insurance ( di ) program . over the years , there were increases in the payroll tax rate , which increased from 2.0% of pay ( 1.0% each for employees and employers ) in the 1937-1949 period to its current level of 12.4% . in addition , there were increases in the amount of wages subject to the payroll tax ( the taxable wage base ) , which increased from $3,000 in the 1937-1950 period to $132,900 in 2019 . the types of individuals eligible for benefits were expanded over the years , and benefit levels were increased periodically . in 1972 , legislation provided for automatic cost - of - living adjustments , starting in 1975 , indexed to the change in consumer prices as measured by the consumer price index for urban wage earners and clerical workers ( cpi - w ) published by the department of labor's bureau of labor statistics . beginning in the late 1970s , legislative action regarding social security became more concentrated on solving persistent financing problems . legislation enacted in 1977 raised taxes and curtailed future benefit growth in an effort to shore up the system's finances . still , in 1982 , the oasi trust fund needed to borrow assets from the di trust fund and the medicare hospital insurance ( hi ) trust fund ( borrowed amounts were fully repaid by 1986 ) . in 1983 , congress passed additional major legislation that was projected to restore solvency to the social security system on average over the 75-year projection period at that time . current projections by the social security board of trustees show that the social security system has a long - range funding shortfall , and that the system will operate with annual cash - flow deficits each year through the end of the 75-year projection period ( 2093 ) . these projections , and other factors , have focused attention on potential social security program changes . the traditional approach would maintain the current structure of the program ( i.e. , a defined benefit system funded on a pay - as - you - go basis ) by making relatively modest changes , such as an increase in the retirement age or an increase in the taxable wage base . in general , the goal of this approach is to preserve the social insurance nature of the program . in contrast , the personal savings and investment approach would redesign the 1930s - era program to create a prefunded system in which benefits would be based partially or entirely on personal savings and investments .