these provisions are discussed in the following sections . title iii , subtitle c of the american jobs act would authorize the pathways back to work act of 2011 ( pathways act ) , which would provide funds for three grant programs to promote the employment of unemployed low - income adults and youth . overall , the pathways act would provide $5 billion for these initiatives through a combination of formula and competitive grants . funds provided under the pathways act would remain available for obligation by the department of labor ( dol ) until december 31 , 2012 , and would remain available for expenditure by grantees until september 30 , 2013 . for all three pathways act initiatives , the secretary of labor would be allowed to reserve up to 1% of the allocated funding for each initiative to provide technical assistance , evaluations , and administration . the three grant programs are described in the following sections . the american jobs act would authorize two new grant programs for the modernization , renovation , and repair of education facilities . part i of title ii , subtitle d would authorize a new elementary and secondary education school facilities grant program . part ii of title ii , subtitle d would authorize a new grant program of federal assistance for eligible postsecondary education facilities . currently , the majority of federal support for education facilities is attributable to interest exemptions and tax credits on bonds . the federal government also provides grant and loan support for facilities serving certain populations , facilities with specific needs , and facilities serving particular purposes . under the proposed two programs , funds could be used for the modernization , renovation , and repair of eligible facilities . funds could not be used for routine maintenance costs or for stadiums or other facilities primarily used for athletic contests or exhibitions or other events for which admission is charged to the general public . elementary and secondary education facilities funds could not be used for new construction . postsecondary education facilities funds could not be used on facilities used for sectarian instruction , religious worship , or a school or department of divinity ; or in which a substantial portion of the functions of the facilities are subsumed in a religious mission . modernization , renovation , and repair would include activities such as facilities assessments , roofing , installation of heating systems , code compliance , and reducing or eliminating hazards . the use of funds under both programs would also be required to adhere to the wage rates in the davis - bacon act , as amended . in addition , funds used on elementary , secondary , or postsecondary facilities would have to use american iron , steel , and manufactured goods , unless waived . funds for each program would be used to supplement , not supplant ( sns ) , other federal , state , and local funds that would otherwise be used for the modernization , renovation , and repair of eligible facilities . provisions that are substantially similar to title ii - d of the american jobs act have been included in the fast act of 2011 ( s. 1597 and h.r .