under order no . 679 , ferc reviews incentives requested to ensure that there is a nexus between the incentive and the risks of the project . ferc may grant , deny , or modify incentives requested by applicants under sect . however , it is not clear if , under these regulations , ferc may be able to further modify transmission incentive applications to impose specific incentives not originally proposed by applicants . energy policy act of 2005 sec . how should the commission consider changes in cost estimates ? expectations have been raised as to the large dollar investment possible over the next few decades in generation , transmission and distribution systems , given public policies , system requirements , and the aging of the electric power infrastructure in the united states . a 2008 study commissioned by the edison foundation estimates that $298 billion in transmission investment will be required over the next 20 years to meet future electricity demand , even considering improvements in energy efficiency and demand response programs in the period . in addition , a 2011 report from the electric power research institute estimates that smart grid investments alone may require $82 billion to $90 billion in transmission and substation improvements over the next two decades . according to the report "employment and economic benefits of transmission infrastructure investment in the u.s. and canada," transmission investment by investor - owned utilities ( ious ) has "quadrupled from approximately $2 billion per year in the 1990s to between $8 billion to $9 billion per year during 2008 and 2009 ( in nominal dollars ) . the report lists reliability needs and generator interconnection as the major historical drivers of transmission investment , and expects reliability needs , economic needs ( i.e. , congestion relief ) , and renewable generation integration as future drivers . the report estimates that almost 50% of the projected construction of 22,669 circuit miles transmission lines from 2011-2015 will be to address reliability needs . another 40% of this projected construction will be to address transmission congestion , or to integrate renewable energy generation . the report projects that transmission construction may result in an annual investment of between $12 billion and $16 billion per year ( in 2011 dollars ) over the period from 2011 to 2015 , assuming "current barriers to planning , permitting , and cost recovery of regional transmission projects can be overcome. notably , ferc's transmission incentives are not listed as a driver of transmission investment in the report . while acknowledging that the recent trend towards increased investment in transmission is largely driven by reliability and generator interconnection needs , eei reports that increased transmission investment is also partly due to federal and state policies affecting transmission infrastructure such as epact , state renewable portfolio standards , and federal transmission policies such as ferc transmission pricing incentives . figure 2 illustrates a trend of recent increases in transmission investment by eei's member companies . in comments filed for the noi , eei states its belief that "the current incentive rate policy is effectively supporting the development of needed transmission in many regions where public utilities have sought incentives for their projects .