leadership. specific references to russia call for increasing "dialogue and military - to - military relations with russia , building on our successful efforts in strategic arms reduction . we seek to cooperate with russia on counter - terrorism , counter - proliferation , space , and ballistic missile defense , and welcome it playing a more active role in preserving security and stability in asia. in his 2011 threat assessment , director of national intelligence james clapper testified to congress on february 10 , 2011 , that serdyukov's defense reforms pose "both risks and opportunities for the united states and the west. he warned that "russian military programs are driven largely by moscow's perception that the united states and nato are russia's principal strategic challenges and greatest potential threat. in an apparent assessment of russia's performance during the august 2008 russia - georgia conflict , he stated that the increase in russia's conventional military capabilities and "a strategy of asymmetric and rapid response raise the specter of a more aggressive russian reaction to crises perceived to impinge on moscow's vital interests. at the same time , he raised the possibility that "as the russian military continues its post - soviet recovery and moscow feels more comfortable asserting itself internationally , russian leaders may be more inclined to participate in international peacekeeping operations," an apparent opportunity for u.s. engagement with russia . he appeared to de - emphasize russia's conventional military threat to europe when he stated that the country's "still - significant conventional military capabilities , oriented toward eastern europe , the caucasus , central asia , and the far east , are intended to defend russia's influence in these regions and serve as a 'safety belt' from where russian forces can stage a defense of russian territory. at the hearing , director clapper also stated that "russia's nuclear forces support deterrence and enhance moscow's geopolitical clout. he specified that russia still possesses "a very formidable nuclear arsenal [which] does pose ... potentially a mortal threat to us . i don't think they have the intent to do that. he also stated that china's nuclear forces pose such a potentially mortal threat . upon questioning about which country might have more of a potential intention to harm u.s. interests , he stated that since the united states has concluded new start with russia , "i would rank them a little lower [as a potential threat] because of that , and we don't have such a treaty with the chinese. however , he stressed that while the two countries "may potentially have the capability to strike a mortal blow to us .. . i don't think either country today has the intent to mortally attack us. as part of the obama administration's "reset" in u.s. - russia relations , at the july 2009 u.s. - russia summit , the two sides agreed to the resumption of defense and military cooperation , which largely had been suspended since the august 2008 russia - georgia conflict . admiral mullen and general makarov signed in moscow a military framework document for cooperation between the countries' armed forces in july 2009 .