eer data are for all exiting workers . taa classifies a program participant as an exiter once 90 days have passed since the worker received services or case management . dol does not disaggregate its outcome data by which provisions of taa an exiter received benefits under . as such , it is not possible to compare the employment outcomes of beneficiaries under different provisions ( eg , 2002 provisions vs. 2011 provisions ) . when interpreting outcome data , it may be useful to consider the broader labor market . for example , the increase in eer between fy2010 and fy2012 may have been influenced by broader labor market trends ( eg , reduction in employment rate ) as well as factors related to the taa program and program participants . while outcome data can offer some insights on participants' post - participation activities , such data offer a limited perspective on the impact of taa benefits and services . for example , while the data in the previous section shows that 71% of program exiters in fy2013 met the "entered employment" criteria , we do not know how many of the same workers would have entered employment if taa were not available and the workers either ( 1 ) simply sought reemployment with no government intervention or ( 2 ) utilized other employment and training programs that are available to all unemployed workers . as such , it is not possible to use outcome data to easily estimate the impact of or value added by taa participation . to estimate the impact of taa , dol commissioned a series of studies to estimate the short and medium - term impact of the taa for workers program . these studies were released throughout 2012 and considered a cohort of taa - eligible workers who were laid off between november 1 , 2005 , and october 31 , 2006 . since taa is an entitlement program for certified workers , the studies were not able to use a random assignment methodology in which some taa - eligible workers received services while others did not . instead , the studies compared taa participants to a comparison group of ui claimants with similar observable characteristics such as age , race , education , employment history , and prior earnings . the study compared the employment status and earnings of taa participants and the comparison group for 16 quarters ( 48 months ) after initial job loss . it found that early in the reference period , taa participants were more likely to participate in training , less likely to be employed , and had lower earnings than the comparison group . this is an expected finding since taa generally emphasizes training over immediate reemployment . in the 16 th quarter , the study found that taa participants' employment rate and earnings were both statistically significantly lower than the constructed comparison group . the study offered a number of caveats with regard to these findings and their generalizability .