he is the listening post of economic movement . he in large measure makes or tempers its psychology . during the depression , franklin roosevelt took sides against the financial sector , which was widely blamed as a cause of hard times: [w]e have been shocked by many notorious examples of injuries done our citizens by persons or groups who have been living off their neighbors by the use of methods either unethical or criminal... [including] high officials of banks or corporations who have grown rich at the expense of their stockholders or the public , [and] those reckless speculators with their own or other people's money whose operations have injured the values of the farmers' crops and the savings of the poor . he counted "business and financial monopoly , speculation , reckless banking , [and] class antagonism" among the "old enemies of peace. after world war ii , financial markets and the economy enjoyed half a century of more - or - less unbroken prosperity , and attacks on wall street like the above became rare . with the crisis of 2007-2009 , the ensuing recession , and the weak recovery , however , old questions of economic fairness and the social utility of some of the financial sector's output have re - emerged . congressional oversight of financial markets and institutions normally focuses on particular issues , rather than normative evaluations of the whole industry , but history suggests that questions about the value of certain financial activities to those who do not profit from them directly are not far below the surface . the textbook view is that financial intermediation is crucial to the creation of wealth . the consensus is that as financial systems and markets become larger and more sophisticated , the cost of borrowing comes down and firms seeking to raise capital benefit from more choices and increased flexibility . the notion that there may be diminishing social returns to scale in financial services appears infrequently in the literature . in light of the recent financial crisis , however , some in the economics field have started to rethink the dominant views about the relationship between the financial system and economic growth . this section gives examples of this research , but a comprehensive survey of the literature is beyond the scope of this report . since the financial crisis of 2007-2009 , innumerable popular books and articles have castigated wall street bankers and traders for their greed , ignorance , short - sightedness , arrogance , recklessness , and folly: all the devils are here is a representative title . the critiques in the presidential statements excerpted in this report are entirely in keeping with much of this post - crisis literature . for example , john bogle , of the vanguard mutual funds , echoes thomas jefferson's fear that financial "gambling" will cause citizens to withdraw from more worthwhile pursuits: the financial sector itself has been building for many decades into the largest single element of the american economy .