there are many expenses involved . that same underwriter could very easily be writing four or five bonds for $10 million for contractors that everyone knows can perform . and it becomes a matter of how much time and resources can the surety industry devote to this type of business . another reason may have been the outbreak of the israeli - egyptian war in 1973 , which was followed by a tripling of oil prices and double - digit inflation . this led to the failure of many smaller contracting companies . in response to the economic downturn , many surety companies enhanced their underwriting standards to protect themselves from rising defaults . as a result , many of the larger surety companies became increasingly reluctant to participate in a program in which the profit margins were relatively small given the required paperwork and the program's limitation on the bond amount , and when the risk of defaults was at a historically high level . as standard sureties left the program , "specialty" surety companies filled the void . initially , specialty sureties devoted almost all their business exclusively to sba - guaranteed surety bonds . these companies later expanded their business into offering other high - risk bonds not normally handled by standard sureties . specialty sureties typically required the contractor to provide collateral for the projects they bonded , and , in most cases , charged higher premiums than standard sureties . in 1982 , the sba invited officials from the surety association of america , representing the standard surety companies , to recommend ways to encourage their participation in the program . as mentioned previously , at that time , some specialty surety companies had been accused of associating with organized crime and gao and the sba's inspector general had reported fraud and mismanagement in the program . this may help to explain why the sba was interested in encouraging the larger , more established surety companies to return to the program . the sba also hoped that greater participation by the larger sureties would lead to lower premiums for small business contractors . during this outreach period , standard surety companies indicated a willingness to increase their participation in the program if the sba would create a second special program , similar to the sba's 7 ( a ) loan guarantee program's preferred lenders program . under the proposal , a surety meeting specified qualification standards would be designed as a "preferred surety" and would be allowed to issue sba - guaranteed surety bonds prior to receiving the sba's approval . to participate in the preferred program , the surety's underwriting and administrative standards and procedures would be pre - approved by the sba , and the surety's decisions would be subject to regular , annual audits . in addition , the sba's reporting and access to records requirements would be retained .