it is uncertain whether the united states will be willing to play this role again in the future . events since 2008 have shown that substantial risks remain in the global economy . global imbalances , exchange rate misalignment , volatile capital flows and exchange rate movements , and the accumulation of large stockpiles of foreign exchange reserves have led many analysts to question the functioning of the international monetary system , and by extension , the future of the imf . large swings in official portfolios of foreign exchange reserves can also have significant impact on exchange rates and the price of sovereign bonds . some analysts have proposed improving the fund's lender of last resort function . for example , one recent study proposed three main elements of what such reform could look like: ( 1 ) an automatic trigger to access the facility ; ( 2 ) unilateral country prequalification to the facility during article iv consultations ; and ( 3 ) liquidity funded by the world's "issuers of last resort. when considering expanding the role of the imf , however , the concept of moral hazard has often been considered . as imf lending increased after the financial crisis , especially after the large loans to greece , ireland , and portugal , many observers , including some members of congress , raised concerns that financing by the imf , particularly emergency financing provided during financial crises , encouraged the very behavior that it sought to prevent . simply put , imf lending may send the wrong signals to government officials . according to this view , in the best - case scenario , countries are spared the worst consequences of their poor economic decisions . in other cases , the imf program may not stabilize the crisis , further indebting the crisis - afflicted country . other analysts argue that , as the 1994-1995 mexican crisis , the 1997-1999 asian crisis , and the more recent 2008 crisis have demonstrated , residents of imf - recipient countries suffer painful consequences of a forced economic adjustment . the policy question is whether economic pain is mitigated by external financial support tied to a conditional economic adjustment program . a different type of "moral hazard" also arises with regard to investors . does the existence of an emergency financial mechanism encourage private investors to take on risks that they might otherwise shun in an attempt to reap greater financial returns ? in this context , some are troubled that , as a by - product of a "bailout," professional investors , who took on higher risks and were probably rewarded with higher returns , are made whole . imf conditionality and pre - qualification of imf loans might reduce concerns about moral hazard . edwin truman at the peterson institute for international economics argues that the imf's role can be improved , addressing moral hazard at the same time , through a "comprehensive prequalification" process where the fund presents "policy terms for lending" to every member country potentially eligible to borrow from the imf , based on the imf's bilateral and multilateral economic surveillance .