3189 in the 114 th congress . she stated that its policy rule provision would effectively put the congress and the gao squarely in the role of reviewing short - run monetary policy decisions and in a position to , in real time , influence the monetary policy deliberations leading to those decisions . this audit is published in the fed's annual report . this report will consider the two issues separately . this report provides an overview of existing fed oversight and disclosure practices , highlighting recent legislative changes and proposals . it also considers the potential impact of greater oversight and disclosure on the fed's independence and its ability to achieve its macroeconomic and financial stability goals . before the recent financial crisis , oversight of the fed already occurred in a number of forms . regular congressional oversight of the fed was , and still is , done through statutorily required semiannual hearings with and written reports to the house financial services committee and the senate banking , housing , and urban affairs committee , as well as ad hoc hearings on more focused topics , such as the fed's response to the financial crisis . indeed , the house financial services committee has a subcommittee dedicated primarily to monetary policy issues , the subcommittee on monetary policy and trade . the terms of the chairman and vice - chairmen of the federal reserve board of governors last for four years and are subject to presidential nomination and senate confirmation . this gives the senate a chance to review and weigh in on the fed's performance every four years . governors are also subject to presidential nomination and senate confirmation , but can serve only one full term , so it is rare for the senate to evaluate a sitting governor . the fed's regional bank presidents , who vote with the governors on monetary policy decisions , and regional bank directors are not subject to senate confirmation , but are chosen in part by the board of governors . one notable difference between the fed and most other government agencies is that there is no congressional budgetary oversight of the fed — the fed is self - financing and its budget is not subject to the appropriations or authorization process . thus , there is no regular avenue for congress to ensure that the fed is devoting resources to congressional priorities , or to use congressional control over resources as leverage to achieve its goals . within the federal reserve system , there is an office of inspector general ( oig ) that regularly issues reports stemming from its investigations . it also issues semiannual reports to congress that provide an overview of its activities . the fed's oig "promotes integrity , economy , efficiency , and effectiveness ; helps prevent and detect fraud , waste , and abuse ; and strengthens the agencies' accountability to congress and the public" ; it does not perform policy or economic evaluations . examples of oig reviews include the fed's emergency lending facilities and the board's implementation of the dodd - frank act .