the er and dir measures are both described below . the basic formula for the earnings rate measure is presented below . the er is a measure of the annual loan payment amount attributable to the median student loan debt borrowed by individuals who completed the gainful employment program during a base period , as a percentage of either the mean or median annual amount earned by those individuals during the most recent calendar year for which data are available . the greater of either the mean or median annual earnings of program completers is used in the denominator of the er measure . in essence , the er is a proxy for the proportion of annual earnings that a borrower with the median amount of student loan debt must devote toward making payments on student loans borrowed to finance enrollment in the program . a program would be considered to provide training that leads to gainful employment in a recognized occupation if the er was 12% or less . the basic formula for the discretionary income rate measure is presented below . the dir is a measure of the annual loan payment amount attributable to the median student loan debt borrowed by individuals who completed the gainful employment program during a base period , as a percentage of a measure of discretionary income for the most recent calendar year for which data are available . discretionary income is the difference between mean or median annual earnings of program completers , and 150% of the u.s. department of health and human services ( hhs ) poverty guideline income for a one - person family in the continental united states . the greater of either the mean or median annual earnings of program completers is used in determining discretionary income in the denominator of the dir measure . the dir is essentially a proxy for the proportion of discretionary income that a borrower with the median amount of student loan debt must devote toward making payments on student loans borrowed to finance enrollment in the program . a program would be considered to provide training that leads to gainful employment in a recognized occupation if the dir was 30% or less . descriptions of the procedures for calculating annual loan payment amounts , and mean and median annual earnings amounts used in both the er and dir rate measures are provided below . according to the final rule , title iv institutions with programs that prepare students for gainful employment would have been required to provide ed with certain information for use in the calculation of the debt - to - earnings measure . this includes the following: information to identify students ; the program name , the classification of instructional programs ( cip ) code , and completion date of program completers ; the amounts program completers received from private education loans and institutional financing plans ; and whether program completers matriculated or transferred to a higher credentialed program at the same or a different institution . in addition , ed would have obtained information on the ffel and dl program loans of program completers from the national student loan data system ( nslds ) .