"this the state cannot do. as a result the court affirmed the decision of the second circuit striking down the law . three justices dissented . those justices would have applied central hudson's intermediate commercial speech standard , and would have found that vermont's law withstood scrutiny under that standard . they then aggregate and analyze the data . the information they collect from pharmacies and hospitals about prescriber practices is then sold to pharmaceutical manufacturers for use in marketing . they also sell the data to researchers and others that might use the data for purposes unrelated to marketing , but this market is far smaller than the market consisting of pharmaceutical marketers . some doctors find better - targeted detailing to be useful . other doctors find the sharing of their prescriber history without their consent , and its subsequent use as a marketing tool , to be an invasion of privacy . three states — maine , new hampshire , and vermont — enacted statutes to restrict the sale and use of prescriber history data for the purposes of marketing ( though not for any other purpose ) without the consent of the doctor . as discussed below , the states claimed to be protecting the privacy interest of the doctors . also , the states were interested in lowering the costs of health care . because detailing effectively encourages the prescription of more expensive , brand - name drugs , data suggest that health care costs are measurably increased by detailing . the states reasoned that if detailing were less effective , then doctors might be more likely to prescribe generic drugs , which are cheaper than brand - name drugs , and health care costs overall would go down . the companies that collect , analyze , and sell these data challenged the laws , claiming that they were an unconstitutional restriction of their free speech rights under the first amendment , as incorporated against the states by the fourteenth amendment . the first and second circuit courts of appeals reached opposite conclusions regarding the constitutionality of the state laws that restricted the sale and use of prescriber data . the first circuit , in two separate cases , found the laws to be constitutional , because they did not restrict "speech. the second circuit not only found a similar vermont law to be a restriction of speech , but also found the law to be unconstitutional under the commercial speech standard of scrutiny , a standard considered to be less rigorous than the constitutional standard applied to fully protected speech . the supreme court affirmed the decision of the second circuit , but did so using what appeared to be a different standard of review that the court called "heightened judicial scrutiny. as noted above , the vermont law in question operated to restrict the sharing and use of prescriber - identifiable information in three ways . first , it prohibited pharmacies , health insurers , and others in possession of or gathering prescriber - identifiable information from selling that information without the consent of the prescriber .