( 2 ) duress . ( 3 ) minor participation . ( 4 ) equally culpable , disparate punished defendants . ( 5 ) no prior criminal record . ( 6 ) disturbance . ( 7 ) victim's consent. yet his options are not boundless . the evidence he offers must be relevant and not invite confusion or unfair prejudice . moreover , the prosecutor may question the weight that a mitigating factor warrants . subsection 3592 ( b ) of the federal death penalty act describes seven statutory mitigating factors and adds a catch - all that encompasses "other factors in the defendant's background , record , or character or any other circumstance of the offense that mitigate against imposition of the death sentence. the other seven cover the following: " ( 1 ) impaired capacity . treason : treason is punishable by death or imprisonment for not less than five years and a fine of not less than $10,000 . the death penalty for treason may only be imposed upon conviction , a finding of one or more of the statutory aggravating factors , and a determination that the aggravating factors outweigh any mitigating factors . the mitigating factors in a treason case are the same as those in a murder case , seven statutory factors and one catch - all: impaired capacity ; duress ; minor participation ; equally culpable but less severely punished defendants ; absence of prior criminal record ; mental disturbance ; victim consent ; and any other mitigating factor relating to the offender or the offense . different aggravating factors , however , apply in treason and espionage cases . the aggravating factors are four: prior treason or espionage conviction ; grave risk to national security ; grave risk of death ; and "any other aggravating factor. commentators have questioned whether the constitution allows imposition of the death penalty in cases involving treason , espionage , or murder - less drug offenses , since in such cases the statute on its face authorizes the death penalty without requiring the death of a victim . the court in kennedy specifically distinguished this class of crimes from those involving violence against individuals . each of the crimes presents considerations of its own and might under some circumstances survive scrutiny even under the individual violence standards . nevertheless , it seems likely that any court confronting the issue would at a minimum consider the kennedy standards ( indicia of "the evolving standards of decency that mark the progress of a maturing society" read in conjunction with the court's precedents ) . under the federal death penalty act , the death penalty does not follow inevitably from a treason conviction . capital punishment is confined to those cases marked by one of the three aggravating factors and by the absence of countervailing mitigating factors . the national security factor might be considered a bit too open ended , but that defect , if it is one , might be cured by jury instruction or appellate construction . of the three — treason , espionage , and murder - less drug kingpin offenses — commentators seem to consider treason the most likely to survive constitutional scrutiny .