arra was controversial when enacted . while most economists believe it was effective , there is dispute among some economists . nevertheless , there is widespread desire to accelerate job creation and economic recovery , although consensus on how to do so is not apparent . another factor is that debate about additional job - creating programs has merged with discussion among infrastructure advocates that has been ongoing for years about the need for investment to address problems of aging and deteriorating public works . these infrastructure problems have been increasingly recognized by policymakers and the public at large . it is argued that u.s. investments in public infrastructure have declined significantly in recent decades , to the point that this country is underinvesting in its critical assets , and is failing to construct new facilities or adequately maintain existing systems . the perception that current investment levels are inadequate is in part supported by data which show that , relative to gdp , infrastructure spending has declined about 20% , from 3.0% of gdp in 1960 to 2.4% in 2007 . during this same period , spending shifted from predominantly on capital ( 60% in 1960 , compared with 45% in 2007 ) to operation and maintenance ( 40% in 1960 , compared with 55% in 2007 ) . in a growing economy , infrastructure should hold its own , but other data show that that has not been the case . while total government spending on infrastructure increased from $92 billion in 1960 to $161 billion in 2007 , it declined from a high of $1.17 per capita in 1960 to $0.85 per capita in 2007 ( in 2009 dollars ) . in response to these multiple concerns , on september 8 , 2011 , president obama proposed the american jobs act ( s. 1549 ) , legislation that includes tax cuts for businesses , extended unemployment insurance , expanded payroll tax cuts , $80 billion in spending on transportation infrastructure and school repair and modernization , and establishment of a national infrastructure bank to finance large infrastructure projects . congress is to soon consider the president's proposal and possibly others for job creation and economic recovery . academics , economists , and policymakers debate two key issues concerning the contribution of infrastructure investment to the economy . one is the issue of the effects of infrastructure spending and investment on productivity and growth . the second related issue is the role of infrastructure spending , including short - term job creation , as a countercyclical tool to support economic recovery . public infrastructure's potential role in contributing to job creation at a time when the economy continues to sputter raises several questions , including does infrastructure spending really create jobs , does it invest in assets with long - term value , and how are needs and priorities determined ? these issues , along with the potential contribution of investments in "green" infrastructure , are explored in the remainder of this report . one of the ways in which congress has tried to spur job growth and stem job losses to mitigate the impact of recessions is by directly raising demand for ( i.e. , increasing spending on ) goods and services .