insurance. 2008 treasury blueprint in march 2008 , then - secretary of the treasury henry paulson released a blueprint for a modernized financial regulatory structure . although the financial crisis had begun at that time , the treasury blueprint was not primarily a response to the crisis , but instead an attempt to create "a more flexible , efficient and effective regulatory framework. a wide - ranging document , the blueprint foresaw a completely revamped regulatory structure for financial services . the 2008 treasury model proposed a prudential regulator to oversee the solvency of individual companies , a business conduct regulator to oversee consumer protection , and a market stability regulator to oversee risks to the entire system . as an intermediate step , it made two specific recommendations on insurance regulation . first , it called for the creation of a federal insurance regulator to oversee an optional federal charter for insurers as well as federal licensing for agents and brokers . second , recognizing that the debate over an optional federal charter was ongoing in congress , it recommended the creation of an "office of insurance oversight" in the department of the treasury as an interim step . this office would be charged with two primary functions: ( 1 ) dealing with international regulatory issues , including the power to preempt inconsistent state laws ; and ( 2 ) collecting information on the insurance industry and advising the secretary of the treasury on insurance matters . president obama's financial regulatory reform plan in june 2009 , the treasury department under secretary timothy geithner released a whitepaper entitled financial regulatory reform: a new foundation , outlining president obama's plan to reform financial regulation in the united states . the plan did not foresee as complete an overhaul as did the 2008 blueprint , but it would have substantially changed the financial regulatory system . specific changes called for included explicitly introducing systemic risk oversight by the federal reserve , combining the office of comptroller of the currency and the office of thrift supervision into a single banking regulator , and creating a new consumer financial protection agency . although the june report stated that the administration was open to additional changes in the insurance regulatory system , the specific regulatory changes called for in the released legislative language were focused on areas other than insurance . most insurance products , for example , were excluded from the jurisdiction of the new federal consumer protection agency . in general , the states were to continue to have a preeminent role in insurance regulation . insurance regulation , however , would have been specifically affected through two other aspects of the president's plan: the regulation of large financial companies presenting systemic risk and the creation of a new office of national insurance within the treasury . systemic risk regulation as proposed in the legislation would have been the primary responsibility of the federal reserve in conjunction with a new financial services oversight council made up of the heads of most of the federal financial regulators . the powers to regulate for systemic risk enumerated in the draft legislation extended to all companies in the united states engaged in financial activities .