the agendas for these meetings have not been disclosed . the apec gathering in honolulu is scheduled to conclude with the two - day economic leaders' meeting , to be hosted by president obama . he will be joined by the leaders of the other 20 apec members , or their chosen representatives . at past meetings , the u.s. president held one or more separate bilateral meetings with other leaders , usually including a meeting with the leader of the host member . it is unknown if president obama will hold similar meetings this year . the agenda of the economic leaders' meeting usually is based on the host's theme for the year , implying this year's meeting will center on regional economic integration , sustainable development , and regulatory convergence . as host , president obama is likely to push for progress on the formation of a free trade area of the asia - pacific ( ftaap ) , a contentious concept on apec's agenda since 2005 . while the united states seems to envision an ftaap as a larger , binding , and comprehensive free trade agreement among all apec members , other apec members see the ftaap either as the culmination of apec's "open regionalism" model or a free trade agreement centered in asia . in addition , the united states may use the event to inform the apec members about the status of the trans - pacific partnership ( tpp ) negotiations and possibly publicly announce a significant landmark in the tpp talks . the economic leaders' meeting typically ends with the release of a joint leaders declaration which summarizes the current status of apec and sets priorities for the organization's future . since the beginning , the obama administration has signaled that the asia - pacific region is a foreign policy priority . secretary hillary clinton's first international trip after taking office was to asia , with visits to china , indonesia , japan , and south korea . prior to her trip , secretary clinton stated that u.s. relations throughout asia are "indispensable to our [u.s.] security and prosperity. in november 2009 , president obama travelled to asia , with visits to china , japan , singapore , and south korea . during the trip , president obama attended the 2009 apec leaders' meeting and the first u.s. - asean leaders' meeting , which were held in singapore . president obama hosted the second u.s. - asean leaders' meeting in september 2010 in new york city and attended his second apec economic leaders' meeting in november 2010 in yokohama , japan . besides high - level trips to asia , the obama administration has sought to strengthen u.s. ties to the region . during a january 2010 trip to asia , secretary clinton announced that the united states would formally request membership in the east asia summit ( eas ) . she then attended the eas meeting in hanoi in october 2010 , at which it was disclosed that the united states — along with russia — would become a full member in 2011 .