the current and future physician supply may be inadequate . some experts suggest that there are too few physicians overall , too few primary care physicians specifically , and that physicians are inadequately distributed throughout the united states . the composition of the physician population also affects population health . it begins with a discussion of health professional shortages areas ( hpsas ) and medically underserved populations / areas ( mua / ps ) . the aca includes provisions to increase workforce planning and collect data needed to support these efforts . the aca includes provisions that may increase workforce planning at the federal and state levels . section 5101 establishes the national health workforce commission to evaluate and make recommendations about the health care workforce ( including physicians ) . the commission was appointed by gao in september of 2010 and is required to review health care workforce supply and demand and make recommendations on national priorities and policies . commission members are required to make reports to congress and to review reports from the state workforce development planning grants and from the national center for health workforce analysis ( see below ) . in high - supply areas , the population may receive unnecessary and excess care , whereas in low - supply areas , the population may receive little or no care because of long wait times or long travel distance to providers . rural areas , in particular , experience physician shortages ; however , some urban areas , specifically areas with economically disadvantaged populations , may have shortages as well . this section discusses physician shortages in specific geographic areas . the federal government uses these designations to determine areas and populations that have heath professional shortages ( including physician shortages ) . designated areas are eligible for a number of programs — some of which were amended or created by the aca — that aim to increase the number of health professionals in a specific geographic area . given the use of hpsa and mua / ps for guiding federal policies that seek to lessen geographic shortages of health professionals , it is necessary to understand this designation when discussing the geographic distribution of the physician population . the section also discusses some reasons why geographic areas may have physician shortages , and the aca provisions that may affect the geographic distribution of the physician population . researchers have suggested that the current distribution of specialists and primary care physicians may be linked with a number of adverse health outcomes , including higher mortality rates in areas with more specialists . with respect to shortages in certain specialties , several have been documented ( eg , in cardiology , dermatology , emergency medicine , and neurology ) , often by studies conducted by specialty professional associations . these associations may have an interest in publicizing shortages and minimizing oversupply ; therefore , determining which specialties are in shortage based only on these studies may be challenging . however , some specialties , such as general surgery , geriatrics , the pediatric subspecialties , and psychiatry , have more widely acknowledged shortages and have targeted federal programs to address these shortages .