no further action was taken during the 115 th congress . the office is currently led by acting register of copyrights karyn a. temple , who was named to the position by librarian of congress carla hayden on october 21 , 2016 . information is provided on each agency and summarized in table 1 . during the 115 th congress , the house and senate considered legislation that would alter the appointment of one position within one of these agencies — the register of copyrights . under current law pertaining to the copyright office ( 17 u.s.c . 701 ) : all administrative functions and duties ... are the responsibility of the register of copyrights as director of the copyright office of the library of congress . the register of copyrights , together with the subordinate officers and employees of the copyright office , shall be appointed by the librarian of congress , and shall act under the librarian's general direction and supervision . 1695 and s. 1010 , the register of copyrights selection and accountability act , would have made the register of copyrights a presidential appointment , subject to the advice and consent of the senate . the legislation would have established a seven - person panel to recommend at least three candidates for this position to the president . the panel would consist of the speaker of the house , president pro tempore of the senate , majority and minority leaders in the house and senate , and librarian of congress . the bills would have established a 10-year term of office for the register . 1695 was reported by the house judiciary committee on april 20 , 2017 ( h.r . 115-91 ) , and passed in the house , as amended , on april 26 ( 378 – 48 , roll no . the senate committee on rules and administration held a hearing on september 26 , 2018 . a senate committee markup of s. 1010 initially scheduled for december 12 , 2018 , was postponed . legislation to alter the appointment process for legislative branch agencies and entities has periodically been introduced for many years . questions remain about various reform proposals , including the ability of congress to remove the president from the appointment process for some of these positions . these may depend upon the implication or interpretation of the appointments clause of the constitution , the definition of an "officer of the united states," the specific office or agency in question , and whether or not a change in appointing authority would require any revision in the powers and duties of legislative branch agency leaders . some previous reforms and proposals have also attempted to find a role for the house of representatives , which does not play a formal role in the confirmation of presidential nominees , in the search for legislative branch officials . the report also briefly addresses legislation considered , but not enacted , in the 115 th congress to change the appointment process for the register of copyrights .