like h.r . 463 , these bills could make the actions of publicly traded companies more transparent , but may prompt concerns related to private - sector autonomy or appropriate levels of information protection: h.r . 2517 and s. 1360 , both titled the shareholder protection act of 2011 , would require publicly traded companies to obtain shareholder approval before making corporate campaign contributions . 2728 , the corporate politics transparency act , would require quarterly reports to stockholders of campaign contributions of more than $10,000 for any single candidate in any single election . could that staff be operational prior to an end to the conservatorship ? are there alternatives to foia to ensure appropriate oversight of fannie mae's and freddie mac's conservatorship ? not all of these questions can be answered in this report . this report examines the policy option of subjecting fannie mae and freddie mac to foia . it analyzes the costs and benefits of foia's administration and application . it then identifies additional policy options for congress . when congress enacted foia in 1966 , its primary purpose was to give the general public presumed access to certain federal records , as well as to provide citizens who are denied such access a formal procedure for legally challenging agencies that denied records requests . foia was amended in 1974 , 1976 , 1986 , 1996 , 2007 , and 2010 . making fannie mae and freddie mac subject to foia would give the public presumed access to the companies' records , and the companies would have to demonstrate why certain records should be withheld from release . as noted earlier in this report , attorney general eric j . holder stated that doj would "defend a denial of a foia request only if ( 1 ) the agency reasonably foresees that disclosure would harm an interest protected by one of the statutory exemptions , or ( 2 ) disclosure is prohibited by law. as noted earlier , it is unclear whether doj would specify different conditions for defending fannie mae's and freddie mac's decisions to withhold records requested pursuant to foia . some fannie mae and freddie mac records may be available through other channels , including the federal elections commission , fhfa , or by their own release . the next section considers some of the types of records that the public may request from fannie mae and freddie mac if h.r . 463 were adopted . as stockholder - owned and - controlled companies , fannie mae and freddie mac are not usually considered government agencies and would not appear to be covered by foia . however , while under conservatorship , the enterprises are controlled by fhfa . this conservatorship and the federal government's financial support have led to attempts to use foia to obtain information about the enterprises . this section analyzes these attempts and other instances where foia might be used . foia requests for records related to fannie mae and freddie mac that are submitted to fhfa may raise questions over ownership and control of the records . it is unclear whether conservatorship affects whether certain records are considered federal government property or remain the property of fannie mae and freddie mac .