appendix a . conventional vs . unconventional reserves and resources in the past , the oil and natural gas industry considered resources locked in tight , impermeable shale uneconomical to produce . however , advances in directional well drilling and reservoir stimulation have dramatically have improved the viability of these operations . unconventional shales are fine grained , organic rich , sedimentary rocks . the shales are both the source of and the reservoir for oil and natural gas , unlike conventional petroleum reservoirs . the society of petroleum engineers describes "unconventional resources" as petroleum accumulations that are pervasive throughout a large area and that are not significantly affected by hydrodynamic influences ( they are also called "continuous - type deposits" or "tight oil" ) . in contrast , conventional oil and natural gas occur in porous sandstone and carbonate reservoirs . under pressure exerted by water , the hydrocarbons migrated upward from its organic source until an impermeable cap - rock ( such as shale ) trapped it in the reservoir rock . though the shales may be as porous as other sedimentary reservoir rocks , their extremely small pore sizes make them relatively impermeable to hydrocarbon flow , unless natural or artificial fractures occur . in measuring quantities of oil and natural gas , the industry has defined the terms reserves and resources , which are sometimes used incorrectly in reporting . for a hydrocarbon accumulation to be considered a reserve it must be able to be produced with current technology , at existing prices of the day , and be able to reach a market . there are different levels of probability associated with reserves , distinguishing between proved ( highest probability ) , probable , and possible ( lowest ) reserves . below reserves on the likelihood of how much oil and natural gas is in a deposit is resource . resources are not subject to the constraints of today's technology , price or marketability , and therefore tend to be a larger number than reserves . resources do not require that evaluation wells be drilled in estimating their size and may rely on geological data and other information . the securities and exchange commission ( sec ) has modified their classification of reserves to include proved reserves , probable reserves , and possible reserves as defined above . by adding this more precise language to the degree of certainty associated with a particular volume of oil or natural gas , the sec sought to add clarity for investors . tight oil and natural gas are not viewed differently from other oil and natural gas formation by the sec . the sec does not distinguish reserves by the type of accumulation . appendix b . drilling and completion techniques drilling evolution well drilling has progressed from an art to a science . originally , drillers used "cable - tool" rigs and a percussion bit . the drill operator would raise the bit and release it to pulverize the sediment . from time to time , the driller would stop and "muck out" the pulverized rock cuttings to advance the well . though time - consuming , this method was simple and required minimal labor .