the report closes with further considerations . the patent system is grounded in article i , section 8 , clause 8 of the u.s. constitution , which states that "the congress shall have power ... to promote the progress of science and useful arts , by securing for limited times to authors and inventors the exclusive right to their respective writings and discoveries...." as mandated by the patent act of 1952 , u.s. patent rights do not arise automatically . inventors must prepare and submit applications to the u.s. patent and trademark office ( uspto ) if they wish to obtain patent protection . uspto officials known as examiners then assess whether the application merits the award of a patent . the patent acquisition process is commonly known as "prosecution. in deciding whether to approve a patent application , a uspto examiner will consider whether the submitted application fully discloses and distinctly claims the invention . in addition , the application must disclose the "best mode," or preferred way , that the applicant knows to practice the invention . the examiner will also determine whether the invention itself fulfills certain substantive standards set by the patent statute . to be patentable , an invention must consist of a process , machine , manufacture , or composition of matter that is useful , novel , and nonobvious . the requirement of usefulness , or utility , is satisfied if the invention is operable and provides a tangible benefit . to be judged novel , the invention must not be fully anticipated by a prior patent , publication , or other state - of - the - art knowledge that is collectively termed the "prior art. a nonobvious invention must not have been readily within the ordinary skills of a competent artisan at the time the invention was made . if the uspto allows the patent to issue , the patent proprietor obtains the right to exclude others from making , using , selling , offering to sell , or importing into the united states the patented invention . those who engage in these acts without the permission of the patentee during the term of the patent can be held liable for infringement . adjudicated infringers may be enjoined from further infringing acts . the patent statute also provides for the award of damages "adequate to compensate for the infringement , but in no event less than a reasonable royalty for the use made of the invention by the infringer. the maximum term of patent protection is ordinarily set at 20 years from the date the application is filed . at the end of that period , others may employ that invention without regard to the expired patent . patent rights are not self - enforcing . patentees who wish to compel others to observe their rights must commence enforcement proceedings , which most commonly consist of litigation in the federal courts . although issued patents enjoy a presumption of validity , accused infringers may assert that a patent is invalid or unenforceable on a number of grounds . the u.s. court of appeals for the federal circuit ( federal circuit ) possesses national jurisdiction over most patent appeals from the district courts .