4103 ( d ) and 4106 ( f ) ) . both the meaning of this provision and the far council's authority to promulgate such a regulation could have been in doubt , particularly after the decision by the court of federal claims . as amended , the regulation could have been construed to mean that neither protests of orders that allegedly increased the scope , period , or maximum value of the underlying contract , nor protests of orders valued in excess of $10 million , were authorized for civilian agency contracts . gao found that the word "subsection" in 41 u.s.c . ยง4106 ( f ) ( 3 ) "unambiguously refers" to the entirety of subsection ( f ) , which governs protests of civilian agency orders generally , not just subsection ( f ) ( 2 ) , which grants gao jurisdiction over protests of "large" orders . based upon this interpretation of "subsection," gao found that what expired in may 2011 were the limitations on its jurisdiction under fasa , as amended by the expansion of its jurisdiction under the ndaa for fy2008 . thus , it concluded that , because of the expiration of these limitations , its jurisdiction "revert[ed] to that originally provided in cica," and it could hear protests concerning orders of any value under civilian agency contracts , regardless of whether the order increased the scope , period , or maximum value of the underlying contract . subsequently , in its august 19 , 2011 , decision in med trends , inc. v. united states , the court of federal claims also found that it had jurisdiction over protests of orders of any value issued under civilian agency contracts . in so finding , the court rejected the government's argument that , "notwithstanding the clear language of the statute , the legislative history associated with the 2008 amendment makes clear that the grant of jurisdiction to gao in 2008 was a short - term experiment. the court did so , in part , because it , like gao , found that the word "subsection" referred to the entirety of fasa's provisions regarding protests of task and delivery orders issued under civilian agency contracts , not just those provisions regarding gao's jurisdiction over "large" orders issued under civilian agency contracts . because it viewed this statutory text as "unambiguous," the court accorded no weight to a 2007 conference report expressing the conferees' view that the expiration of gao's jurisdiction over "large" orders would provide "congress with an opportunity to review the implementation of the provision and make any necessary adjustments. it similarly declined to rely upon legislation introduced in the 112 th congress and accompanying committee reports that purportedly evidenced congress's intent that the sunset date apply only to gao's exclusive jurisdiction over protests of orders valued in excess of $10 million . had the 112 th congress not enacted legislation extending the sunset date , these decisions would have resulted in protests of orders issued under civilian agency contracts being treated differently than protests of similar orders under defense contracts , and could also have increased the number of bid protests .