what is dod doing to improve wartime contracting ? to what extent are the efforts being taken to improve contracting addressing the underlying problems with the contracting effort as it is performed in afghanistan ? is legislation required to address some of the differences between peacetime and wartime contracting ? contract risks can also differ greatly between peacetime and wartime . peacetime risks generally include cost overruns , schedule slips , and poor performance . additional risks that must be considered when awarding a contract in an environment such as afghanistan include diverting millions of dollars to warlords , criminal networks , or insurgents ; hiring private security and other contractors who may engage in abuses that undermine the legitimacy of coalition forces ; and the inflow of large sums of poorly managed contracting dollars fueling corruption . as general allen stated in his contracting guidance to commanders in afghanistan , it is important to "look beyond cost , schedule , and performance . evaluate the success of a contract by the degree to which it supports the afghan people and economy and our campaign objectives . winning the support of the local village is often more important than staying on schedule . helping train local nationals and building up the technical capabilities of local firms may be well worth a substantial increase in contract costs . include operational criteria in decisions to award contracts , such as the effect of the contract on security , local power dynamics , and the enemy. for these reasons , contracting in wartime is often far more complex than contracting in peacetime . some of the weaknesses of the current federal government acquisition process can be exacerbated by and exploited in a wartime environment , making it more difficult to adhere to best practices . these weaknesses include inadequate acquisition planning , poorly written requirements , and an insufficient number of qualified and capable acquisition and contract oversight personnel . for example , in a wartime environment , it is more difficult to write a good contract that incorporates the sometimes competing goals of counterinsurgency ( coin ) contracting , more difficult to research and evaluate companies bidding on a contract , and more difficult to conduct oversight of projects being built in dangerous locations . it is also more difficult to protect against contracting fraud and corruption in countries that have weak law enforcement and judicial systems . corrupt officials and warlords can exploit these weaknesses to divert contracting funds to their own coffers . the allocation of billions of contracting dollars to support military operations and reconstruction efforts in afghanistan raises a number of potential questions for congress that may have significant policy implications for current and future overseas operations . billions of contracting dollars have been spent to support u.s. interests in afghanistan , yet it is not always clear to what extent these contracting efforts are actually supporting strategic - level campaign goals .