we do everything together . yes , someone could goof . but the system works wonderfully — the [regional commanders] are some of the finest america has to offer . when the [commander] and ambassador are on the same page , it's a very powerful combination . what has been the response of our allies and potential adversaries as a result of the announced strategic shift ? will new title 10 authorities be required to facilitate this shift ? ambassador edward marks noted the geographic commands have essentially two tasks: war planning and fighting , and military engagement programs . both tasks remain , and will always remain , fundamental responsibilities of the department of defense and the military services . however while the war planning and fighting responsibility obviously remains uniquely a duty of the department of defense and the military services , the engagement programs no longer can be handled as a discrete military activity . in today's world , military engagement programs with other countries can only be seen as part of the overall engagement activity of the u. s. government . the so - called "nexus" of security challenges — terrorism , narcotics , smuggling , international criminal networks , etc. — can no longer be managed as single agency programs but must be integrated into "whole of government" programs . the concept of a "whole of government approach to national security" has taken on renewed emphasis since september 11 , 2001 . past and current senior military leadership have repeatedly called for greater participation in national security matters from other u.s. government agencies , even going so far as to publically advocate for greater funding levels for the state department and u.s. agency for international development ( usaid ) so they can play a greater role in military operations . in the current strategic environment , cocoms are being faced with security challenges that fall outside the traditional military realm . one such challenge , transnational criminal organizations or tcos , is a stated concern of combatant commanders both in a domestic and international context . in this regard , if tcos are expected to become a central security issue for cocoms and the president and dod include tco - related responsibilities in the ucp , enhanced interagency involvement in the ucp process from the justice department , other u.s. law enforcement entities and others could prove to be beneficial . it can be argued while greater resources for other u.s. government agencies are important , of equal importance is participation in the ucp process . it has been noted that military engagement programs are at the forefront of geographical cocom's responsibilities and as hostilities in iraq and afghanistan diminish over time , and the u.s. defense budget decreases , military engagement could become the primary focus of all geographical cocoms . under the current ucp development process , the u.s. interagency has a degree of visibility but participation is limited . while interagency participation in developing regional war plans might not be appropriate , a greater role in planning for military engagement activities might not only enhance these programs but might also identify areas of redundancy with other u.s. government regional engagement programs .