they are examined below . the ongoing economic recession , persistently high unemployment , and the growing national deficit resulted in a number of studies and reports during 2010 and 2011 that focused on reducing the cost of government , including defense . some of these reports made recommendations concerning the military retirement system . the six most prominent reports ( the quadrennial defense review independent panel , the sustainable defense task force , the defense business board , the debt reduction task force , the national commission on fiscal responsibility and reform and the president's plan for economic growth and deficit reduction ) are discussed and reviewed below and incorporated into table 3 at the end of this section for comparison . those who advocate reform of the military retirement system generally offer several criticisms of the current system . congress could determine that the current military retirement system , primarily the high - 3 , is the most appropriate method of meeting the retention requirements of an all - volunteer force and retain the current system . using the work of the dacmc and the qrmc to establish the foundation of a reformed retirement system , other options could be added or deleted to reduce costs or provide additional incentives . the resulting hybrid system could provide enhanced flexibility for force managers to retain personnel in critical skill areas , unconstrained by the current 20-year "all or nothing" system . it could also introduce a contributory element , the thrift savings plan , which has already proven popular with military personnel . with the framework established , congress could authorize dod to conduct a multiyear demonstration project prior to implementing the new system force - wide . if the demonstration is successful , it could be implemented for all new entrants and offered to currently serving members who otherwise are limited to redux or the high - 3 . congress could establish a national commission on military personnel — one of the recommendations made by the quadrennial defense review independent panel . the panel found that the complementary relationship between pay , bonuses , allowances , incentives , retirement , healthcare , and deferred and in - kind benefits resulted in a cost to dod that was unsustainable for the future and required a separate review process . specifically , the panel recommended the following areas to be addressed by the commission: compensation reform "continuum - of - service" issues such as promotion , professional development , career length and retirement age the active - reserve force mix active , reserve , and retired healthcare and retiree benefits reduction of the numbers and composition of headquarters and staffs the panel felt that a commission could complete this effort in a year . alternatively , as recommended in the president's plan for economic growth and deficit reduction , congress could set up a commission to develop recommendations for reforming the current system . the commission would receive input from dod , alter this proposal as appropriate and forward to the president for approval and release . the president , if concurring with the commission's recommendations , would then forward it to congress . congress would be required to approve or disapprove without modification .