it's his sanctuary. at the invitation of the sudanese government , the au special envoy for lra issues led a delegation to khartoum in september 2015 to discuss the kafia kingi allegations . they have agreed to send a joint fact finding mission to the area . international humanitarian assistance to lra - affected areas increased significantly between 2009 and 2013 . however , according to the u.n. office for the coordination of humanitarian affairs ( unocha ) , despite donor efforts , "only a few humanitarian agencies and nongovernmental organizations [are] able to provide assistance in remote areas where no state institutions are present. insecurity in car and south sudan appears to have further reduced access since 2013 , while nongovernmental organizations have begun to "phase out" from some lra - affected areas of drc as the number of displaced persons continues to decrease . the lra emerged in northern uganda in 1987 , the year after yoweri museveni , a rebel leader from southern uganda , seized power , ending nearly a decade of rule by leaders from the north . joseph kony , then in his 20s , initially laid claim to the legacy of alice lakwena , an ethnic acholi spiritual leader from northern uganda . lakwena was a key figure among northern rebel factions seeking to overthrow the museveni government , but her holy spirit movement ( hsm ) was defeated by the ugandan military in 1987 . kony , reportedly a relative of lakwena's , then founded the lra . the group , primarily composed of ethnic acholis , targeted civilians in acholi areas of uganda and sought support and protection from the government of sudan . in the late 1980s , the museveni government recruited acholis into government - backed civilian defense forces , which led the lra to escalate its attacks against acholi civilians and contributed to deep distrust between the government and northern communities . some analysts contend that president museveni initially had little interest in defeating the lra , either because his government and the updf were able to exploit the conflict for political and economic gain , or because the conflict was perceived as a way to further marginalize acholis , who had dominated the ugandan armed forces prior to museveni . ultimately , the ugandan military succeeded in pushing the lra out of the country in 2005-2006 . lra leaders then moved elsewhere in the region , notably to drc and then to car . as the lra's capacity has weakened amid u.s. military deployments to the region , some anti - lra advocates have begun to call for a shift in u.s. focus toward preparing for a post - lra environment . this might include reallocating resources from military operations and life - saving humanitarian relief toward recovery and development efforts . in may 2015 , the u.n. secretary - general suggested to the security council that the "lack of funding for protection , reintegration , and development programs in lra - affected areas remains a serious challenge," noting that several projects in the area had recently closed .