the federal code does not . the attempting to conspire or conspiring to attempt questions do not offer as many issues of unsettled interpretation as the attempt to attempt questions , for several reasons . first , the courts have had more occasion to address them . rarely have they prevailed . the defense of impossibility is a defense of mistake , either a mistake of law or a mistake of fact . legal impossibility exists when "the actions which the defendant performs or sets in motion , even if fully carried out as he desires , would not constitute a crime . may a defendant be charged with attempting to attempt an offense ? may a defendant be charged with conspiracy to attempt or attempt to conspire ? may a defendant be charged with aiding and abetting an attempt or with attempting to aid and abet ? this is no longer the case in federal court — if it ever was . in federal law , "[n]either common sense nor precedent supports success as a defense to a charge of attempt. the double jeopardy clause ordinarily precludes conviction for both the substantive offense and the attempt to commit it . the clause prohibits both dual prosecutions and dual punishment for the same offense . punishment for both a principal and a lesser included offense constitutes such dual punishment , and attempt ordinarily constitutes a lesser included offense of the substantive crime . instances where the federal law literally appears to create an attempt to attempt offense present an intriguing question of interpretation . occasionally , a federal statute will call for equivalent punishment for attempt to commit any of a series of offenses proscribed in other statutes , even though the other statutes already proscribe attempt . for example , 18 u.s.c . 1349 declares that any attempt to violate any of the provisions of chapter 63 of title 18 of the united states code "shall be subject to the same penalties as those prescribed for the offense , the commission of which was the object of the attempt. within chapter 63 are sections that make it a crime to attempt to commit bank fraud , health care fraud , and securities fraud . there may be some dispute over whether provisions like those of section 1349 are intended to outlaw attempts to commit an attempt or simply to reiterate a determination to punish equally the substantive offenses and attempts to commit them . conspiracy: the model penal code and national commission resolved attempt to attempt and conspiracy to attempt questions by banning dual application . crimes of general application would not have applied to other crimes of general application . a few states have comparable provisions . relation to the predicate offense : a defendant need not commit the predicate offense to be guilty of attempt . the traditional view is that legal impossibility is a defense to the charge of attempt – that is , if the competed offense would not be a crime , neither is a prosecution for attempt permitted. factual impossibility exists when "the objective of the defendant is proscribed by criminal law but a circumstance unknown to the actor prevents him from bringing about that objective.