the first such areas were designated in 1949 . the standards were revised in 1958 , 1971 , 1975 , 1980 , 1990 , and 2000 , as well as in 2010 . in a june 28 , 2010 , federal register notice , omb announced the standards for delineating core - based statistical areas — the two categories of which are metropolitan and micropolitan statistical areas — during the decade 2010 to 2020 . the terms "core - based statistical area" and "micropolitan" first were used in the 2000 standards . as omb explained , the "general concept of a metropolitan statistical area is that of an area containing a large population nucleus [core] and adjacent communities that have a high degree of integration with that nucleus . the concept of a micropolitan statistical area closely parallels that of the metropolitan statistical area , but a micropolitan statistical area features a smaller nucleus. the federal register notice also presented the 2010 standards for delineating new england city and town areas ( nectas ) , which are conceptually similar to cbsas . the new standards , superseding those for 2000 to 2010 , differ only slightly from the previous decade's and incorporate the changes recommended by the metropolitan and micropolitan statistical area standards review committee . one recommendation was that omb characterize the 2010 standards as being used to "delineate" rather than , as in the past , "define" the "boundaries or geographic makeup of an area. omb accepted the change because , in its words , the term "define" was not "intuitive" to those unfamiliar with the metropolitan areas program and "occasionally ... caused misunderstandings. other changes are noted below , in the detailed discussion of the 2010 standards . although omb declared the notice "effective immediately," it did not issue lists showing the actual delineations of cbsas under the 2010 standards — the titles of the areas , together with their principal city and county components — until february 28 , 2013 . newly delineated nectas and their components were issued then , too . producing these lists involved applying the 2010 standards to population data from the 2010 census , as well as employment and commuting data from the bureau's american community survey ( acs ) estimates for 2006 through 2010 . hence , although omb establishes the criteria for designating metropolitan areas , census bureau data are used to generate the specific areas . a core - based statistical area is a "statistical geographic entity consisting of the county or counties associated with at least one core ( urbanized area or urban cluster ) of at least 10,000 population , plus adjacent counties having a high degree of social and economic integration with the core as measured through commuting ties with the counties containing the core. cbsas comprise whole counties and county equivalents in the united states and puerto rico . counties that do not qualify to be in cbsas are classified as "outside core - based statistical areas. omb's inclusion of standards for delineating new england city and town areas acknowledged the particular importance of these jurisdictions to this six - state census division .