appendix a . further breakdowns of employment - based petitions pending by top countries further analysis that compares the distributions of the employment - based preference categories reveals additional differences among the top countries . even more striking , however , are the country differences between those approved visa petitions pending with the national visa center ( nvc ) and those approved i - 485 petitions pending with the uscis . approved visa petitions pending at the national visa center the number of approved 1 st , 2 nd , 4 th , and 5 th preference visas pending is small in contrast to the 3 rd preference category . table a - 1 presents the data for the different preference categories' top five countries . how many petitions are in the pipeline ? it is quite likely that additional people would seek employment - based lpr visas if the wait times were shorter . employers as well as prospective foreign workers may be more likely to file petitions if the delays were shortened . in other words , the reduction in the number of approved petitions pending might be short - lived . finally , if the per - country ceilings were eliminated for employment - based lprs without any other revisions to permanent legal immigration , it would likely have "ripple" effects on family - based immigration as well as other potential employment - based lprs . some observe that the per - country ceilings are arbitrary and argue that country caps should not be applied to employment - based preference categories . they maintain that employability has nothing to do with country of birth and that u.s. employers are not allowed to discriminate based on nationality or country of origin . they further opine that it is discriminatory to have laws that limit the number of employment - based lprs according to country of origin . proponents of per - country ceilings maintain that the statutory per - country ceilings restrain the dominance of high - demand countries and preserve the diversity of the immigrant flows . the immigration amendments of 1965 ended the country - of - origin quota system that overwhelmingly favored european immigrants , and subsequent amendments to the ina included immigrants from western hemisphere countries within the worldwide and per - country limits . supporters of current law maintain that u.s. immigration policy has been more equitable and less discriminatory in terms of country of origin as a result of these reforms , because the ina puts country of origin on an equal playing field . china makes up the largest portion of the approved visas pending at the nvc for the 1 st and 5 th preference categories . india has the largest number of approved visas pending with the nvc for the 2 nd and 3 rd preference categories combined and the philippines is responsible for the largest portion within 3 rd preference category . approved i - 485 petitions pending the following table looks at the portion of approved i - 485 petitions pending from select countries for each of the five employment - based preference categories .