sec . 641 — to bring within its purview the district of columbia government and its agencies . this change is long overdue in view of the district's unique status , and it comports with the overarching statutory scheme because the district is already included in the federal bribery statute ( 18 u.s.c . 201 ) and the statute governing theft and bribery from programs receiving federal funds ( 18 u.s.c . the need for this fix is acute: under current law , massive thefts of district of columbia funds — such as the recent d.c. tax and revenue allegations of a $44 million fraud — cannot be prosecuted on a federal theft theory . when penalty increases were proposed for various federal public corruption offenses during the 110 th congress , the committee report noted that the increases would reflect "the committee's view of the serious and corrosive nature of these crimes , and ... harmonize the punishment of these public corruption - related offenses with similar statutes. moreover , the committee was of the opinion that "[i]ncreasing penalties in appropriate cases sends a message to would - be criminals and to the public that there are severe consequences for breaching the public trust. reacting to the same proposals replicated in the house and senate bills , a representative of the defense bar contended that the proposals would "dramatically expand already lengthy prison sentences ... without any evidence of whether such an expansion is necessary or what the costs of such an expansion would be. specifically , the house and senate bills would increase the maximum term of imprisonment for the following existing federal public corruption offenses . sentencing defendants convicted of federal crimes begins with the sentencing guidelines . the court must calculate the sentence recommended by the guidelines and then weigh the other statutory sentencing factors mentioned in 18 u.s.c . the sentence imposed will survive appellate scrutiny , if it is procedurally and substantively reasonable . a sentence is procedurally reasonable if it is free of procedural error , such as a sentencing beyond the statutory maximum or below any statutory minimum , an incorrect guideline calculation , failure to consider the factors in subsection 3553 ( a ) , or a failure to explain the sentence imposed . a sentence is substantively reasonable if it is appropriate given all the circumstances of the case , including the extent to which the sentence imposed varies from the sentence recommended by the guidelines . the bills would direct the united states sentencing commission to examine the guidelines applicable in the case of a conviction under 18 u.s.c . 201 ( bribery of federal officials ) , 641 ( theft of federal property ) , or 666 ( theft or bribery in relation to federal programs ) . the commission would be instructed to amend the guidelines consistent with the considerations identified in the bills . 2572 and title ii are almost identical . there are a few differences , however . the penalty for bribery under 18 u.s.c . 201 ( b ) is now imprisonment for not more than 15 years . the penalty for illegal gratuities under 18 u.s.c . 201 ( c ) is now imprisonment for not more than two years .