not all criminal aliens are removable . data on arrests and incarceration of the criminal alien population data analyzed at the federal level , arrest data are compiled by the u.s . marshals service ( usms ) prisoner tracking system and published by the department of justice ( doj ) bureau of justice statistics ( bjs ) through its online federal justice statistics resource center ( fjsrc ) . federal incarceration data are published by the federal bureau of prisons ( bop ) and complied by the sourcebook of criminal justice statistics . as of august 2013 , the most recent published data available on noncitizen arrests were as of 2010 . figures for the federal noncitizen prison population from 2001-2011 are as of year - end and include sentenced as well as non - sentenced inmates , and inmates under jurisdiction as well as inmates in custody . figures for the state noncitizen prison population from 2001-2011 are as of mid - year and include the same types of inmates as those in the federal figures . figures for the local noncitizen jail population for all years ( 2001-2011 ) are as of mid - year and only include sentenced inmates and inmates in custody . for 2011 , however , federal figures for the noncitizen incarcerated population were available only as of midyear . hence , all 2011 figures – federal , state , and local – are as of mid - year . as of august 2013 , published data on the noncitizen incarcerated population for 2012 were unavailable at the federal , state and local levels . state incarceration data come from annually published bjs reports , prison inmates at midyear . data for that report come from the national prisoner statistics ( nps ) program of bjs , which obtains mid - year and year - end prisoner counts from correctional departments of all 50 states . bjs also conducts an annual survey of jails , from which it creates national - level estimates of the number of inmates incarcerated in local jails . in addition , it conducts a complete count of the local jail population every five years through its census of jails . together , these two local jail counts provide a consistent annual series of the total number of persons incarcerated in local jails , though these local data are problematic , as described below . data quality and limitations several obstacles challenge and limit the ability of researchers to accurately enumerate the criminal alien population or compare its criminal activity to other u.s. populations . for example , while federal bop data include information on citizenship status , not all state and local criminal justice systems collect such information , creating substantial inconsistencies in data quality and completeness at the state and local level . there is no single and consistent national enumeration of prisoners in the united states similar to the decennial census or the current population survey — much less one that focuses on subpopulations such as noncitizens . hence , attempts to quantify the u.s. criminal alien population have relied on estimation techniques , assumptions about the criminal alien proportion of the total criminal population , and federal surveys and censuses of prison inmates .