proponents of h.res . 35 indicated their determination to support the intent of the recommendations of the 9 / 11 commission and pointed to three principal concerns: the first was that the intelligence authorizing committee was routinely ignored by the administration and the intelligence community because they didn't provide the money . in this town , people follow the money . secondly , the appropriations committee , frankly , was negligent in its responsibilities for oversight... . the third problem that we faced is that there was grossly insufficient staff on the part of the appropriations committee to have decent congressional oversight.. . the other problem was that there was not sufficient emphasis on intelligence matters by the defense appropriations subcommittee because they had a lot of other things to do . opponents argued that the proposal did not significantly change the previously existing structure: "rather than consolidating oversight authority into a single committee that has both authorizing and appropriating authority , it just creates a new committee that has neither , doesn't have either of those powers. in july 2008 , the chairman of the panel , representative rush holt , described the panel's recommendations to the defense appropriations subcommittee , claiming that "in the course of a year and [a] half since the creation of this panel we have directly influenced the intelligence fund for five bills . three of these bills were supplemental appropriations and this is the second annual appropriations bill that we have acted upon. he indicated that the panel forwarded recommendations higher than the previous year's levels but lower than the administration's request . the panel's recommendations sought , he maintained , to require the odni to better manage the budget and enhance the role of congress in reviewing the budget request and overseeing the dni's performance . rush argued: "one of the problems of past congressional oversight has been that the intelligence community was forced to cut or add programs based on the changing whims of congress . the creation of this panel and stronger budgetary oversight over intelligence programs will hopefully provide stability for our nation's intelligence professionals. representative holt also noted that the panel recommended changes to space programs and encouraged a robust investment in foreign language training . in january 2011 , the 112 th congress eliminated the select intelligence oversight panel in h.res . in march 2011 , the chairman of the house permanent select committee on intelligence , representative mike rogers , announced a plan to permit three members of the appropriations committee to participate in house permanent select committee on intelligence hearings and briefings . the goal of the initiative , according to representative rogers , was to "knit together the intelligence committee with the appropriators and ... allow key appropriators important insights into the intelligence committee which they fund. the proposal did not , however , change the responsibilities of the two committees . senate initiatives the senate also recognized the need to respond to the 9 / 11 commission's recommendations . in january 2004 , the senate adopted s.res . 445 to improve the effectiveness of the senate select committee on intelligence and for other purposes .