duress . minor participation . will they nevertheless say death is not a disproportionate punishment for a drug kingpin offense ? the federal death penalty act establishes the same capital sentencing hearing procedures for all capital offenses — murder , treason , espionage , or murder - less drug kingpin offenses . the hearing is conducted only after the defendant has been found guilty of a death - eligible offense . it is held before a jury , unless the parties agree otherwise . the prosecution and the defense are entitled to offer and rebut relevant evidence in aggravation and mitigation without regard to the normal rules of evidence in criminal proceedings . "the supreme court has not expressly recognized a constitutional right to allocution [allocution is a defendant's unsworn statement to the judge or jury prior to the announcement of sentence] . the circuits that have addressed the question have held that there is no constitutional right to allocution before a jury in a federal capital sentencing hearing. as noted earlier , there is some question whether the prosecutors' arguments or rebuttal concerning the defendant's lack of remorse constitute a violation of the defendant's right not to testify . some also question whether prosecutors are free to argue that the death penalty is made more appropriate by a defendant's insistence of his right to a trial . the prosecution bears the burden of establishing the existence of aggravating factors and the defendant of establishing mitigating factors . the burdens , however , are not even . the prosecution must show proof beyond a reasonable doubt ; the defendant a less demanding proof by a preponderance of the evidence . the finding on aggravating circumstances must be unanimous ; the finding on mitigating circumstances need only be espoused by a single juror . capital punishment may only be recommended and imposed , if the jurors all agree that the aggravating factors sufficiently outweigh the mitigating factors to an extent that justifies imposition of the death penalty . if they find the death penalty justified , they must recommend it . if they recommend the death penalty , the court must impose it . if they cannot agree , the defendant must be sentenced to a term of imprisonment , most often to life imprisonment . a defendant sentenced to death is entitled to review by the court of appeals . the defendant is entitled to relief if the court determines that ( 1 ) the sentence was the product of passion , prejudice , or other arbitrary factor ; ( 2 ) the finding of at least one statutory aggravating factor cannot be supported by the record ; or ( 3 ) there exists some other legal error that requires the sentence to be overturned . convictions and sentences imposed in a capital case are subject to normal appellate and collateral review as well . once all opportunities for appeal and collateral review have been exhausted , a defendant sentenced to death is executed pursuant to the laws of the state where the sentence was imposed , or if necessary , pursuant to the laws of a state designated by the court .