appendix a . selected acronyms appendix b . teacher effectiveness . some organizations , such as cec and the national coalition on personnel shortages in special education and related services , assert that special education teachers should be fully included in any teacher evaluation system that measures the effectiveness of general education teachers . there may be difficulties associated with designing one teacher evaluation for all teachers ( i.e. , general education teachers and special education teachers ) . background information on the esea and the idea is available in other reports . in addition , some of the provisions of the esea have been modified for states that have had their applications for the esea flexibility package issued by the secretary of education ( hereinafter referred to as the secretary ) approved . in september 2011 , the secretary announced that states may request flexibility on various esea academic accountability requirements , teacher qualification - related requirements , and funding flexibility requirements that were enacted through the no child left behind act of 2001 ( nclb ; p.l . 107-110 ) in exchange for meeting four principles established by the u.s. department of education ( ed ) . the four principles , as stated by ed , are as follows: ( 1 ) college - and career - ready expectations for all students ; ( 2 ) state - developed differentiated recognition , accountability , and support ; ( 3 ) supporting effective instruction and leadership ; and ( 4 ) reducing duplication and unnecessary burden . taken collectively , the waivers and principles included in the esea flexibility package amount to a fundamental redesign by the administration of many of the accountability and teacher - related requirements included in current law . as of march 5 , 2014 , ed had approved esea flexibility package applications for 42 states , the district of columbia , and puerto rico . similar flexibility was also provided to a group of leas in california . if congress continues to work on esea reauthorization during the 113 th congress , it is possible that provisions included in any final bill may be similar to or override the waivers and principles established by the administration . the remainder of this report focuses primarily on the statutory and regulatory provisions of the esea and how they align with the statutory and regulatory provisions of the idea . it does not focus comprehensively on changes due to the issuance of the esea flexibility package , but does highlight some issues that may arise due to its issuance . this report is organized around four broad education policy issues that are relevant to both the esea and idea: standards , assessments , accountability , and teachers . the first three education policy issues are interrelated and comprise the esea accountability system . that is , states set academic standards for students , assessments measure whether students are achieving these standards , and the assessment scores inform the esea accountability system to determine whether certain goals are being met . the fourth policy issue , teachers , is not directly related to the overall accountability system , but it has important implications for the education of students with disabilities .