appendix a . current farm safety net programs evaluated by key criteria current program: direct payments ( dp ) program program type: fixed , decoupled income support based on historic program acreage and yields . commodity coverage: historic program crops: wheat , feed grains ( corn , grain sorghum , barley , oats ) , rice , soybeans , upland cotton , other oilseeds ( sunflowers , canola , flaxseed , rapeseed , mustard seed , safflower , crambe ) , and peanuts . loss coverage: no loss needed to trigger payment . program description: per - acre payments made to participating owners of historical base acres irrespective of current planting behavior . revenue protection: decoupled income support . geographic loss trigger: no loss needed to trigger payment . eligible acres: historic base acres , no planting required to receive payment . payment calculation: dp payment rate times 85% of historic base acres times the direct payment yield . payment limit: $40,000 per person ; $80,000 with spouse . conservation compliance: yes , conservation compliance linked explicitly to dp . cost to producer: none . budget cost estimate: projected cost of dp during fy2013-fy2022 is $49.6 billion or $4.96 billion per year . wto status: notified as green box ( i.e. , exempt from inclusion under the united states' ams limit of $19.1 billion ) . current program: counter - cyclical payments ( ccp ) program program type: variable , partially decoupled , commodity - specific income support . commodity coverage: current "covered commodities": wheat , feed grains ( corn , grain sorghum , barley , oats ) , rice , soybeans , upland cotton , other oilseeds ( sunflowers , canola , flaxseed , rapeseed , mustard seed , safflower , crambe ) , peanuts , and pulse crops ( dry peas , lentils , chickpeas ) . loss coverage: no individual farm loss required . partially offsets crop - specific revenue losses due to price declines that occur when the national season - average farm price falls below a national price trigger ( i.e. , the crop's target price less its dp rate ) . program description: payments are coupled with current - year farm prices — a payment is triggered when the national season - average farm price for a specific crop falls below its national price trigger ( i.e. , the crop's target price adjusted downward by its dp rate ) . payments are partially decoupled since they are made on historic base acreage and program yields . price / revenue protection: provides revenue protection when national farm price falls below a national price trigger . geographic loss trigger: national price trigger . eligible acres: historic base acres , no planting required to receive payment . payment calculation: total ccp payment = ccp payment rate times 85% of historic base acres times ccp program yield . ccp payment rate equals difference between the target price and the sum of the direct payment rate and the higher of the ( 1 ) national season - average farm price or ( 2 ) national loan rate . payment limit: $65,000 per person ; $130,000 with spouse . conservation compliance: yes . cost to producer: none .