this information is summarized in table 2 of the report . there are other components of the national preparedness system that are mentioned in the strategic guidance of ppd - 8 , the implementation plan , and the national preparedness goal . currently , there is little information available on the additional elements , preventing detailed analysis . these elements will likely be described further in a forthcoming description of the national preparedness system , due on november 24 , 2011 . table 3 summarizes what is known about these elements and how they are possibly related pkemra requirements . one of the major issues congress may wish to consider is the conformity of ppd - 8 and component policies with the full intention of pkemra . congress may decide that some the requirements of pkemra have not been fulfilled or that certain requirements are no longer relevant . since the ppd - 8 implementation process is in its early phases , it may be premature to assess comprehensive compliance with the statute . however , dhs is to submit a national preparedness report , due by march 30 , 2012 , intended to fulfill the reporting requirements in pkemra , notably 6 u.s.c . the report may be a valuable tool for congress to assess the progress of the executive branch in fulfilling the requirements of pkemra . additionally , congress may wish to examine individual national planning frameworks , including the conformity of the national disaster recovery framework to the pkemra mandate in 6 u.s.c . if , as predicted , a support function model is adopted by all of the national planning frameworks , congress may wish to evaluate the assignment of coordination and primary agency roles to federal departments and agencies . these roles typically carry a varied amount of additional responsibility for each department assigned with a new role . further , the frameworks may attempt to coordinate and de - conflict the authorities and resources through this support function model , and may potentially do so in a manner that is disagreeable to congress . congress may also wish to review the leadership responsibilities dictated under ppd - 8 policies . the president has directed the secretary of the department of homeland security ( dhs ) , through the assistant to the president for homeland security and counterterrorism , to lead the development of the national preparedness goal and system . hspd - 8 also directed the creation of the goal and system by the secretary of dhs . this delegation of leadership is an important distinction as it diverges from the language of pkemra that directed the president to develop the goal and system by acting through the administrator of fema . congress may wish to review the impact of this decision on the mission of fema and dhs and potential fulfillment of pkemra . additionally , ppd - 8 assigned leadership roles for the development and overall coordination of each national planning framework ( see table 2 ) . ppd - 8 policies are not , in principle , intended to place undue financial burden on state and local governments , the public and non - profit sector , and private citizens .