for each of the remaining years ( i.e. , fy2014-fy2021 ) , discretionary spending reductions will be achieved through a downward adjustment of the revised statutory spending caps . in contrast to the automatic spending reductions achieved through sequestration , lowering the annual discretionary spending caps allows congress and the president to determine through the annual appropriations process which accounts are to be reduced , and by how much , in order to meet those caps . lowering the annual discretionary spending caps also may make it more difficult to maintain funding levels for existing programs . in general , under bbedca section 256 , federal administrative expenses are subject to sequestration , regardless of whether they are incurred in connection with a program or activity that is otherwise exempt or subject to a special rule . thus , while the aca refundable tax credits may be exempt from sequestration , the federal administrative expenses associated with the program would be fully sequestrable . section 256 provides an exception for federal payments to state and local governments that match or reimburse these governments for their own administrative costs . such payments are not considered federal administrative expenses and are subject to sequestration , but only to the extent that the relevant federal program is subject to sequestration . for example , federal payments to state medicaid programs for administrative costs would be exempt from sequestration because the medicaid program as a whole is exempt . however , as discussed in the previous section , omb has determined that the sequestration rules in bbedca section 256 apply only to mandatory spending reductions required by the joint committee sequestration , and not to reductions in discretionary spending . with regard to federal administrative expenses , omb concluded that mandatory administrative expenses for an otherwise exempt ( i.e. , non - sequestrable ) program are subject to sequestration ( pursuant to section 256 ) , whereas discretionary administrative expenses for an otherwise exempt ( i.e. it is divided into three sections . the first section provides an overview of aca's health insurance reforms and some analysis of the congressional budget office's ( cbo's ) estimates of the impact of the law's implementation on federal direct spending and revenues . the second section examines the automatic spending reductions under the bca . the final section discusses which types of health reform spending are likely subject to , or exempt from , those reductions . the report is periodically revised and updated to reflect important legislative and other developments . the primary goal of aca is to increase access to affordable health insurance for the millions of americans without coverage and make health insurance more affordable for those already covered . in addition , aca makes numerous changes in the way health care is financed , organized , and delivered . these provisions are intended to slow the growth in health care costs and improve the quality of care by aligning payment incentives to increase efficiency and achieve savings ; organizing care delivery systems to promote accountable , patient - centered , and coordinated care ; and establishing benchmarks for better health outcomes .