eisa did not ban incandescent light bulbs . executives of major lighting companies have said they will comply with the 2007 statute . further , the funding limitation does not appear to curtail the ability of the ftc or state attorneys general , for example , to enforce provisions of the law . the obama administration opposed efforts to repeal eisa , noting that the industry has invested to prepare for the new standards and to develop next - generation lighting . through various research and development , loan , and grant programs , doe has invested millions of dollars into building the domestic led manufacturing industry , noting that the u.s. lighting industry has lost "most , if not all , of its incandescent and cfl manufacturing to asian countries in the last two decades," because it could not match production costs and other incentives offered by foreign governments . with the industry looking past existing technologies such as cfls and halogen bulbs , leds present new u.s. manufacturing possibilities . led technology already has reached a point where large and small manufacturers have access to investment capital and competition is fierce , but public policy could play an important role by stimulating demand , and providing research and development and startup assistance . doe predicts that the lighting provisions of eisa will reduce energy use and provide cost savings to consumers . u.s. primary energy consumption could fall by 21 quadrillion british thermal units ( btu ) and greenhouse gas emissions could decline by 330 million metric tons over the next 30 years . those forecasts depend on factors including consumer choice of bulb , which in turn depends on variables like purchase price and product satisfaction . other considerations in terms of total energy savings include whether more efficient bulbs are placed in high usage areas of a home , and whether the bulb actually meets forecasts for efficiency and longevity . experience shows that it can be difficult to get consumers to embrace new lighting products . significant energy savings can be realized only when there is widespread acceptance of energy - saving technology . that has been the case with cfls , which have been on the u.s. market since the 1970s . states and utilities have promoted cfls as part of programs to reduce energy use . some utilities gave cfls to customers at no cost , while others provided millions of dollars in subsidies for purchase of the products . retail prices of leds are still much higher than for traditional incandescent bulbs , but are falling . since the late 1960s , led light output has increased by a factor of 20 each decade , while the cost per lumen has fallen by a factor of 10 . the industry projects similar or faster cost reductions going forward . with technology advancing , some analysts project that general use led bulbs could fall to a price of $5 within 10 years . however , because led prices are still significantly more than for other replacements for incandescent lamps , consumer adoption initially could be limited . the development of led technology and markets is a global pursuit . major companies investing in the led arena include philips lighting , ge , and osram sylvania .