the bribery subsection would not . yet , bribery would be prosecutable only in the presence of a corrupt proposal to influence official conduct in exchange of something of value . the house bill would change the word "means" to the word "includes. the senate bill would not . under the senate bill the definition limits ; under the house bill it exemplifies . section 666 : section 666 outlaws bribery , embezzlement , and other forms of theft , involving more than $5,000 , in relation to federal programs . the defense bar contends , however , that the modification would undo a limitation imposed in the interest of federalism and to avoid federal over criminalization . the omissions may not be problematic . they would lower the threshold for federal prosecution from $5,000 to $1,000 . the new threshold corresponds to that found in the statute that outlaws embezzlement or other theft of federal property . the bills would increase the maximum term of imprisonment associated with the offense from , 10 to 20 years . the new maximum would match those under the mail and wire fraud statutes as well as the 20-year maximum that the bills would establish for the bribery of federal officials under section 201 . section 641 outlaws the embezzlement or other theft of money or anything else of value belonging to the united states or one of its agencies or departments . the district of columbia code outlaws embezzlement or other forms of theft , regardless of the victim . violations of the d.c. provision carry a maximum 10-year term of imprisonment , if the value of the property exceeds $1,000 and a maximum of 180 days in other cases . the house and senate bills contain other venue proposals , relating to perjury and the obstruction of justice , that would apply in federal public corruption cases and elsewhere . the supreme court in rodriguez - moreno expressly declined to rule on whether venue may lie in the district impacted by the crime charged . the witness tampering statute now has a subsection under which witness tampering and the obstruction of judicial proceedings may be prosecuted "in the district in which the official proceeding ... was intended to be affected or in the district in which the conduct constituting the alleged offense occurred. the bills would amend the subsection to permit similar treatment for the prosecution of obstructions in violation of 18 u.s.c . 1503 ( obstructing judicial proceedings ) , 1504 ( writing to influence a federal juror ) , 1505 ( obstructing congressional or federal administrative proceedings ) , 1508 ( eavesdropping on federal jury deliberations ) , 1509 ( obstructing the execution of federal court orders ) , 1510 ( obstructing federal criminal investigations ) . at the same time , they would create a new section that would afford federal perjury and subornation prosecutor the same options . the federal appellate cases announced after rodriguez - moreno suggest that the proposal's obstruction and perjury amendments may be limited to cases in which a conduct element occurs . w iretap authority : existing law authorizes federal courts to issue orders approving law enforcement installation and use of devices to intercept wire , oral , and electronic communications .