there is also a domestic table for each country . the united states table of allocations is maintained by ntia . the world radio conference ( wrc ) , held approximately every four years , is the primary forum for negotiating international treaties on spectrum use . each wrc provides an opportunity to revise the international radio regulations and international table of frequency allocations in response to changes in technology and other factors . modifications to rules from one wrc to the next are part of an ongoing process of technical review and negotiations . separate tracks of preparations to develop the u.s. positions on wrc agenda items are handled by the fcc and the ntia . the office of spectrum management of ntia , in consultation with federal agencies , reviews the wrc agenda and prepares its comments for the u.s. position . ntia and the fcc solicit input from the private sector and create working groups to address specific agenda items . ntia and the fcc submit recommendations to the department of state . the department of state coordinates and mediates the development of the u.s. position for each wrc and leads the u.s. delegation at each conference . all three agencies use committees and other means to interact with the private sector . preparation for each wrc is a collaborative process that includes opportunities for affected parties to comment on and participate in the formation of u.s. policy . the u.s. delegation to each wrc includes representatives from the federal government and the private sector . each wrc delegation is led by an ambassador appointed for that purpose by the president . the most recent conference ( wrc - 12 ) concluded on february 17 , 2012 , with the signing of a new treaty covering accords on technical and regulatory matters and other issues . as is customary , the preliminary agenda for the next wrc meeting was approved during wrc - 12 . wrc - 15 will be held in 2015-2016 . an fy2013 continuing resolution ( p.l . 112-175 ) for appropriations is in effect until march 27 , 2013 . the administration and congress have taken steps to increase the amount of radio frequency spectrum available for mobile services such as access to the internet . the increasingly popular smart phones and tablets require greater spectrum capacity ( broadband ) than the services of earlier generations of cell phones . this is an increase of 2.9% over the enacted fy2012 budget amount of $45.6 million . proposals from policy makers to use federal spectrum to provide commercial mobile broadband services include: clearing federal users from designated frequencies for transfer to the commercial sector through a competitive bidding system . sharing federal frequencies with specific commercial users . improving the efficiency of federal spectrum use and management . using emerging technologies for network management to allow multiple users to share spectrum as needed . the ntia supports the administration's policy goal of increasing spectrum capacity for mobile broadband by 500 mhz . to this purpose , ntia , with input from the policy and plans steering group ( ppsg ) , has produced a 10-year plan and timetable that identifies bands of spectrum that might be available for commercial wireless broadband service .