thus , under h.r . one , h.r . ( emphasis added ) . by comparison , the state of california is a "may - issue" jurisdiction . it provides: "the sheriff of a county , upon proof that the person applying is of good moral character , that good cause exists for the issuance , and that the person applying satisfies any one of the conditions … may issue to that person a license to carry a pistol …" ( emphasis added ) . because states with "may - issue" laws typically grant permits at their discretion , obtaining a permit in "may - issue" states is arguably more difficult than in "shall - issue" states . authorities in nevada notified the division of licensing that as of that date nevada would no longer honor florida concealed weapon licenses . therefore , in accordance with the reciprocity agreement provision set forth in section 790.015 , florida statutes , florida could not longer honor concealed weapon licenses issued by the state of nevada . notably , some states only honor out - of - state permits if the licensee holds a permit from his state of residence , otherwise an out - of - state visitor would have to apply for a non - resident permit , if offered , of the state in which he wishes to carry . for example , colorado , a "shall - issue" jurisdiction , provides that another state's ccp is valid if it is issued to a person who is 21 years of age or older , and "a resident of that state that issued the permit , as demonstrated by the address stated on a valid picture identification that is issued by the state that issued the permit and is carried by the permit holder. there are also other states that that honor out - of - state ccps irrespective of whether that individual is a resident or non - resident of the state from which he obtained his license . utah , for example , provides that its unlawful carrying penalties do not apply to any person to whom a permit to carry a concealed firearm has been issued by the state or by another state or county . carrying a concealed firearm should be distinguished from transporting a firearm in a vehicle . states generally provide an exception to their ccp requirements if the individual is transporting a firearm in a vehicle for specific purposes and the firearm is unloaded and disassembled . the state of michigan requires individuals to obtain a ccp in order to possess , carry , or transport a pistol in the state , unless the individual is "carrying a pistol unloaded in a wrapper or container in the trunk of his or her vehicle … [or that the pistol is] unloaded in a locked compartment or container that is separated from the ammunition for that pistol from the place of purchase to his or her home or place of business or to a place of repair or back to his or her home or place of business , or in moving goods from [one] place of abode or business to another place of abode or business.