for previous u.n . resolutions a potential u.n. general assembly resolution on palestinian statehood could be seen as contrary to the letter or spirit of u.n. security council resolutions 242 and 338 because these two resolutions are commonly seen as the foundational international legal basis for a negotiated "land - for - peace" peace process contemplated under the oslo agreements ( as discussed above ) . recognizing palestinian sovereignty within the 1967 borders in connection with a general assembly resolution could be interpreted as satisfying the palestinians' claims to land without requiring them to make commitments for peace with israel or otherwise address security considerations , and therefore as undermining unscrs 242 and 338 . what will be the substance and wording of its request ( s ) ? the following discussion sets forth possible implications stemming from the process , outcome , or aftermath of u.n. action on palestinian statehood . such implications could include consequences for day - to - day interactions between israelis and palestinians , precedents that could lead to further international action on behalf of the palestinians , and ramifications for possible future negotiations and internal israeli and palestinian political developments . plo diplomatic efforts in 2011 are unlikely to lead to u.n. membership for a putative palestinian state because of a near certainty that the united states would veto a security council membership recommendation vote . however , most observers believe that the plo has majority support for a possible general assembly resolution that would upgrade palestine's permanent observer status in the u.n. to that of a "non - member state. additionally , action by u.n. - affiliated agencies such as unesco to grant membership to a palestinian state is possible . the united states , israel , and european countries are likely to focus on influencing palestinian decisions on the venue of u.n. action and / or the substance and wording of a possible resolution — with special attention to the question of statehood and to the permanence or provisionality of borders along the 1967 lines . the future implications of u.n. action on palestinian statehood — beyond its potential symbolic value — are unclear . although such action is unlikely to immediately resolve any of the core issues of the israeli - palestinian dispute , it may affect developments on the ground . for example , tightened israeli security measures with respect to the west bank and gaza and popular unrest or civil disobedience among palestinians could ensue . although plo chairman / pa president mahmoud abbas maintains that he seeks an eventual return to u.s. - backed israel - plo negotiations , chances for a meaningful resumption of talks remain dim . an upgrade to palestinian statehood status at the u.n. could lead to subsequent efforts to apply greater political and international legal pressure on israel to change its posture on the ground , especially if the plo gains greater access to international courts — such as the icj or icc — or other forums in order to bring action against israel . such legal action could focus on israeli military and security practices and israeli settlements and infrastructure in the west bank and east jerusalem .