ten tables follow . table 30 , table 31 , based on department of defense price deflator . table 32 , table 35 , table 36 , and based on department of defense price deflator . table 37 provide the total dollar values for arms transfer agreements and arms deliveries worldwide for the years 2003-2010 . these tables use the same format and detail as table 3 , table 4 , based on department of defense price deflator table 5 , table 14 , table 15 , and based on department of defense price deflator . table 16 , which provide the total dollar values for arms transfer agreements with and arms deliveries to developing nations . table 33 , table 34 , table 38 , and table 39 provide a list of the top 11 arms suppliers to the world based on the total values ( in current dollars ) of their arms transfer agreements and arms deliveries worldwide during calendar years 2003-2006 , 2007-2010 , and 2010 . these tables are set out in the same format and detail as table 9 and table 10 for arms transfer agreements with , and and table 21 for arms deliveries to developing nations , respectively . total worldwide arms transfer agreements values , 2003-2010 table 32 ( supplier percentages ) are derived . total worldwide delivery values 2003-2010 table 37 ( supplier percentages ) are derived . tanks and self - propelled guns: this category includes light , medium , and heavy tanks ; self - propelled artillery ; self - propelled assault guns . artillery: this category includes field and air defense artillery , mortars , rocket launchers and recoilless rifles — 100 mm and over ; frog launchers — 100mm and over . armored personnel carriers ( apcs ) and armored cars: this category includes personnel carriers , armored and amphibious ; armored infantry fighting vehicles ; armored reconnaissance and command vehicles . major surface combatants: this category includes aircraft carriers , cruisers , destroyers , frigates . minor surface combatants: this category includes minesweepers , subchasers , motor torpedo boats , patrol craft , motor gunboats . submarines: this category includes all submarines , including midget submarines . guided missile patrol boats: this category includes all boats in this class . supersonic combat aircraft: this category includes all fighter and bomber aircraft designed to function operationally at speeds above mach 1 . subsonic combat aircraft: this category includes all fighter and bomber aircraft designed to function operationally at speeds below mach 1 . these values are expressed in current u.s. dollars . table 7 , derived from table 6 , gives the percentage distribution of each supplier's agreement values within the regions for the two time periods . data in the following tables set out actual deliveries of fourteen categories of weaponry to developing nations from 2003 to 2010 by the united states , russia , china , the four major west european suppliers as a group , all other european suppliers as a group , and all other suppliers as a group . other aircraft: this category includes all other fixed - wing aircraft , including trainers , transports , reconnaissance aircraft , and communications / utility aircraft .