coordination . the council facilitates communication among the heads of financial regulators . data collection and evaluation . the fsoc has a permanent staff with the ability to gather confidential financial information and the staff of the ofr are to be experts in the financial field . prudential regulation of certain non - banks . the fsoc establishes the criteria and designates which firms will be subject to additional prudential regulation by the fed , including capital requirements , asset tests , and similar safety and soundness regulations . safety and soundness regulation of certain financial market utilities . the fsoc establishes the criteria and designates which financial market utilities be subjected to safety and soundness regulation . an example of a financial market utility would be an organization that provides settlement and clearing services . resolution of non - banks . upon a determination of a threat to financial stability , a covered non - bank in danger of failing may under certain conditions be resolved by the fdic rather than through the bankruptcy process . evaluation of rules for consumer financial protection . the fsoc may set aside some financial regulations for consumers if the rules might cause systemic risk , under certain circumstances . section 112 of dfa lists three purposes of the fsoc: ( 1 ) identify risks to the financial system that may arise from large , complex financial institutions ; ( 2 ) promote market discipline by reducing expectations of federal financial support for failing institutions ; and ( 3 ) respond to emerging threats to the stability of the u.s. financial system . items ( 1 ) and ( 2 ) are arguably directed at minimizing the chances that particular firms will be viewed as too big to fail , or too connected to fail , or otherwise pose risks to the financial system . item ( 3 ) is arguably a more general catch - all for any factors that might destabilize the financial system . in instructing the fsoc to promote financial stability , the dfa uses the terms financial stability and systemic risk in several places . for example , section 112 directs member agencies of the fsoc to state in writing whether the agency believes that all reasonable steps are being taken "to ensure financial stability and to mitigate systemic risk that would negatively affect the economy. however , the dfa does not define the terms financial stability or systemic risk . the fsoc has 10 voting members and 5 nonvoting members . ( see table 1 above for a complete listing. ) the council is chaired by the secretary of the treasury . voting members include prudential bank regulators ( eg , the office of the comptroller and the currency [occ] and the fdic ) , securities market regulators ( eg , the commodity futures trading commission [cftc] and the sec ) , and an independent insurance expert appointed by the president , with senate confirmation . the nonvoting members include state level representatives from bank , securities , and insurance regulators , as well as the directors from the ofr and the federal insurance office ( fio ) . several agencies have special roles in addressing the kinds of systemic risks that the fsoc was designed to monitor .