i think not . the position would be decisive in his favor that by the rule of common law , in force when the constitution was adopted , he is a citizen . moreover , the absence of any avowal or expression in the constitution of a design to affect the existing law of the country on this subject , is conclusive against the existence of such design . it is inconceivable that the representatives of the thirteen sovereign states , assembled in convention for the purpose of framing a confederation and union for national purposes , should have intended to subvert the long - established rule of law governing their constituents on a question of such great moment to them all , without solemnly providing for the change in the constitution ; still more that they should have come to that conclusion without even once declaring their object . the treatise in question by emmerich de vattel was a work concerning the "law of nations," which we would now classify generally as "international law. however , the concept of citizenship within a particular country is one governed not by international law or law of nations , but rather is governed by municipal law , that is , the internal law of each country . vattel's writings on citizenship by "descent" reflected in many circumstances what the law or practice may have been in certain european nations at the time — that is , that citizenship followed the nationality or citizenship of one's father , as opposed to the place of birth . this concept , although prevalent on the european continent was , even as expressly noted in vattel's work itself , clearly not the law in england or thus the american colonies , and clearly was not the concept and common understanding upon which u.s. law was based . james madison , often referred to as the "father of the constitution," expressly explained in the house of representatives in the first congress , in 1789 , that with regard to citizenship the "place" of birth , and not "parentage" was the controlling concept adopted in the united states . additionally , the supreme court in 1971 simply and succinctly explained , after citing historical legal precedent: "we thus have an acknowledgment that our law in this area follows english concepts with an acceptance of the jus soli , that is , the place of birth governs citizenship status except as modified by statute. again in 1998 , the supreme court expressly recognized jus soli , the place of birth , as controlling in the united states , noting that in this country "citizenship does not pass by descent" except as provided by congress in statute . the "common" understanding of the term "natural born" citizen during the revolutionary period , the time of the drafting of the constitution , and in the generation after , was that of one who was a citizen "at birth" ( and the principal factor in the united states , as in england , was the place of birth within the country , rather than that of ancestry , lineage , or descent , except as provided in statute ) .