key among these is its title . while the proposed policy letter was titled "work reserved for performance by federal government employees," the title of the final letter has been changed to "performance of inherently governmental and critical functions" in order to "more accurately capture its scope and purpose. omb made this change , in part , because some commentators asserted that the proposed policy letter could be construed as concerned "only about ensuring that work is properly reserved for federal employees," as opposed to striking "the right balance between work that may be contracted out and work that must be reserved. as amended , the title of the policy letter would appear to signal more clearly that its guidance is intended to assist agencies in better managing their workforce mix in all phases of the contracting process , from requirements definition through contract administration , not just in determining whether particular functions must or should be performed in - house . similarly , some observers might conflate competitive sourcing with one particular possible outcome of public - private competition — outsourcing . ofpp notes in its policy letter , though , that "insourcing is intended to be a management tool — not an end in itself — to address certain types of overreliance on contractors. moreover , determining that a contractor's employees are performing inherently governmental functions might not necessarily lead to insourcing . addressing this possibility , the policy letter states: "in some cases , government control over , and performance of , inherently governmental responsibilities can be reestablished by strengthening contract oversight using government employees with appropriate subject matter expertise and following the protocols identified in far 37.114. . testifying in september 2011 , the head of ofpp stated that "the policy letter should not lead to a widespread shift away from contractors. his reasoning is as follows: most agencies have been informally following many of the overarching principles of the policy letter for more than a year and there has not been a significant shift to date . in addition , … agencies may , with proper management and oversight tools , rely on contractors to perform functions closely associated with inherently governmental functions . they may also permit contractors to perform critical functions that are core to the agency as long as the agency has the in - house capability to maintain control of its mission and operations . moreover , in many cases , overreliance on contractors may be corrected by allocating additional resources to contract management . in other words , rebalancing does not require an agency to insource . additionally , in cases where insourcing might be the appropriate response , practical , or other considerations , might mitigate against some possibilities . for example , when considering insourcing a function , agencies are advised to place a lower priority on reviewing certain work performed by small businesses . additionally , agencies are to apply the "rule of two" for work that remains in the private sector when "part of [the] contracted function to be insourced is currently being performed by small and the large businesses. small business goals might reinforce these considerations if agencies are reluctant to take steps that could compromise their ability to achieve those goals .