sec . gender - neutral occupational performance standards . ( a ) gender neutrality requirement . in the case of any military career designator that is open to both male and female members of the armed forces , the secretary of defense ( 1 ) shall ensure that qualification of members of the armed forces for , and continuance of members of the armed forces in , that occupational career field is evaluated on the basis of an occupational standard , without differential standards of evaluation on the basis of gender ; ( 2 ) may not use any gender quota , goal , or ceiling except as specifically authorized by law ; and ( 3 ) may not change an occupational performance standard for the purpose of increasing or decreasing the number of women in that occupational career field . ( b ) requirements relating to use of specific physical requirements . ( 1 ) for any military career designator for which the secretary of defense determines that specific physical requirements for muscular strength and endurance and cardiovascular capacity are essential to the performance of duties , the secretary shall prescribe specific physical requirements as part of the gender - neutral occupational standard for members in that career designator and shall ensure ( in the case of a career designator that is open to both male and female members of the armed forces ) that those requirements are applied on a gender - neutral basis . ( 2 ) whenever the secretary establishes or revises a physical requirement for a military career designator , a member serving in that military career designator when the new requirement becomes effective , who is otherwise considered to be a satisfactory performer , shall be provided a reasonable period , as determined under regulations prescribed by the secretary , to meet the standard established by the new requirement . during that period , the new physical requirement may not be used to disqualify the member from continued service in that military career designator . all of the military departments establish testable minimum physical fitness standards for their personnel regardless of the military occupational specialty or career designator . these physical fitness tests are administered upon entry and annually thereafter and are intended to encourage a minimum standard of physical fitness and health across the military forces . the standards and scoring table vary by both age and gender to account for physiological differences — a process sometimes referred to as "gender - norming" and "age - norming" . for example , a 22-year - old male is required to run 2 miles in a maximum time of 17:30 in order to pass the army physical fitness test ( pft ) . the maximum time for a 22-year - old female is 20:36 . in both instances , the individuals who achieve a passing time on the run receive the same score . the scoring tables differ under the principle that a woman who is able to run two miles in 17:30 is , on average , more physically fit ( in terms of muscular strength and endurance , and cardiovascular capacity ) than a man of the same age who is able to complete the run in the same time .