section 4006 of h.r . 2 , as passed by the house , would have changed broad - based categorical eligibility in a few ways . in states with broad - based options in place , some but not all households would be affected by this change . under the proposal , to be categorically eligible , households would have had to receive ssi , state general assistance , or "cash assistance or ongoing and substantial services" through a state program funded by tanf . while these terms would be subject to implementation , it was to be expected that a brochure may not meet this more specific tanf - funded benefit . there would have been two gross income limits for broad - based categorical eligibility: 1 . households with an elderly or disabled member must be at or below 200% of the federal poverty line . households without an elderly or disabled member must be at or below 130% of the federal poverty line . households meeting respective gross income limits and receiving a tanf - funded benefit or other benefit that conveys categorical eligibility would not have had to meet the law's asset tests . the congressional budget office ( cbo ) estimated that the amendments to categorical eligibility in the house committee's reported bill would reduce snap spending by $5.035 billion dollars over 10 years ( fy2019-fy2028 ) . cbo also estimated that in an average year , about 400,000 households would lose snap eligibility . as snap recipients are also eligible for free school meals , cbo estimated that in an average year , 265,000 children would lose access to free meals . on the house floor , section 4006 of the reported bill was amended by h.amdt . 606 to include a later implementation date , october 1 , 2020 , so the house - passed bill's cost and participation estimates could be different than those of the reported bill . as discussed earlier , the current "broad - based" categorical eligibility state option is in part created by usda food and nutrition service regulations finalized in 2000 . in the fall 2018 unified agenda , the trump administration indicated plans to change these regulations . in the fall 2018 unified agenda , the administration stated that it plans to publish a proposed rule "pertaining to categorically eligible tanf households by limiting categorical eligibility to households that receive cash tanf or other substantial assistance from tanf. as of the date of this report , the proposed rule has not yet been published . the unified agenda exists primarily for transparency and is not binding on agencies , meaning that the administration could still change its plans for moving forward with the proposed rule . one question will be how substantial assistance would be defined , since the tanf block grant can fund an array of programs and services . the plan indicates that "categorical eligibility conferred by any non - cash assistance would be limited to substantial ongoing assistance or services , such as child care , that have an eligibility determination process similar to cash tanf. like the farm bill proposals discussed above , the change is expected to leave "traditional" categorical eligibility in place .