successive u.s . administrations have supported russia's accession to the wto . most recently the obama administration included the issue as a priority as part of its efforts to "reset" u.s. relations with russia . the u.s. government has provided advice to the russian government on how to make its trade and investment regime wto compatible and to educate russian firms on the implications of wto accession . because the united states is the world's largest economy and has a lot of influence within the wto , its support is critical to the success of russia's application . however , the united states has also insisted that russia enter the wto on terms that provide meaningful trade liberalization and that require russia to adhere to wto agreements upon accession . u.s. support for russian accession is just one part of post - cold war u.s. trade and economic policy that has encouraged russia to establish a market economy . this policy is itself part of a larger u.s. foreign policy strategy to anchor russia in the world community and to reshape the u.s. - russian relationship into one of cooperation . u.s. support for russia in the trade and investment areas has come in the form of technical assistance , trade preferences ( including tariff preferences under the u.s. generalized system of preferences ( gsp ) program which gives duty free treatment to many developing countries ) , and financial assistance to u.s. exporters to , and investors in , russia through the u.s. export - import bank and the overseas private investment corporation ( opic ) . u.s. - russia trade and investment flows have increased in the post - cold war period , reflecting the changed u.s. - russian relationship . many experts have suggested that the relationship could expand further . between 2000 and 2008 , u.s. exports rose 343% , from $2.1 billion to $9.3 billion , but declined in 2009 in the wake of the global recession . u.s. exports span a range of products , including meat , machinery parts , and aircraft parts . u.s. imports increased more than 244% , from $7.8 billion to $26.8 billion from 2000 to 2008 , but declined in 2009 . the surge in the value of imports is largely attributable to the rise in the world prices of oil and other natural resources — which comprise a large share of u.s. imports from russia — rather than to an increase in the volume of imports . u.s. - russia bilateral trade increased in 2010 and 2011 as both countries showed signs of recovery . despite the post - cold war increase in bilateral trade , russia and the united states are still only moderately important trade partners to each other . russia accounted for 1.6% of u.s. imports and 0.6% of u.s. exports in 2010 , and the united states accounted for 3.3% of russian exports and 5.3% of russian imports . russia was the 31 st - largest export market and 14 th - largest source of imports for the united states in 2011 , while the united states was the 10 th - largest export market for russia and its 5 th - largest source of imports . similarly , investment relations are modest .