the most recent of these reports was completed in 2015 . both reports outline accomplishments and challenges related to cerp and non - cerp projects . finally , a report by the south florida ecosystem restoration task force ( a joint state / federal / tribal governance entity established in wrda 1996 ) publishes a biennial strategy and report on restoration accomplishments . progress has been made on everglades restoration for both cerp and non - cerp projects . for cerp activities , significant accomplishments have included the construction of a number of pilot projects , the completion of studies , and the initiation of multiple construction projects . table 3 , below , shows the status of recent major cerp projects . additionally , some non - cerp projects are complete or nearing completion , whereas others are ongoing . in addition to progress on the construction of projects , baseline information and processes also have been established and the scientific understanding of many of the issues associated with everglades restoration has improved significantly since initial enactment of cerp . for the most part , significant ecosystem benefits as a result of everglades restoration construction projects have yet to be achieved . however , some preliminary effects have been noted . according to recent reporting , documented ecosystem benefits of projects have included increased water levels and vegetation response , a reduction in seepage loss ( i.e. one widely noted challenge is the overall slow pace of everglades restoration to date . taken both individually and as a group , cerp projects have been implemented more slowly than initially anticipated . although some projects are nearing completion , the project schedules envisioned in earlier program documents have for the most part not been maintained ; a fraction of the project implementation reports originally envisioned under cerp have been finalized . funding for projects is a related challenge for everglades restoration , and one that could continue or even grow in coming years . recently authorized generation 2 and generation 3 cerp projects may in some cases compete with ongoing generation 1 and non - cerp projects for funding , and all of these projects must compete with other water resource projects and appropriations priorities . even if funding were to be maintained at current levels , project implementation could slow if funding were spread out among multiple projects as they are authorized . in light of decreased funding by the state of florida and its shift toward other restoration priorities in recent years , attaining new state funding where required for project cost shares also may be challenging . changing information also poses issues for everglades restoration . recent studies have shown that the everglades ecosystem was historically wetter than previously assumed ; thus , more water than initially thought may be required to restore the system . , increased water remaining in the natural system ) , and improved water quality in some areas . observers expect that most benefits will lag several years behind project construction and restoration of hydrologic conditions . maximizing these benefits is expected to require extensive monitoring and adaptive management , which would further confirm and refine approaches to restoration . selected cerp and non - cerp accomplishments as of june 2017 are discussed below .