these changes in h.r . 3012 would be instituted over four years . on november 29 , 2011 , the house passed h.r . 3012 by a vote of 389-15 . in the senate , a similar bill ( s. 1983 ) was introduced in december 2011 . rather than change the per - country limits on permanent admissions to address the issue of oversubscribed countries in the employment - based system , as discussed in the preceding section , some policymakers have proposed creating a separate visa category for prospective lprs with graduate degrees in science , technology , engineering , or mathematics ( stem ) fields . by pulling these individuals out of the numerically limited employment - based categories , this option would free up visas for the other prospective lprs waiting in the employment - based queue . the stem jobs act of 2012 ( h.r . 6429 ) would eliminate the diversity visa lottery and re - allocate those 55,000 diversity visas to two new categories it would create for foreign stem graduates who have job offers in related fields . in september 2012 , h.r . 6429 failed to receive the necessary two - thirds vote to pass under suspension of the rules . the legislation garnered 257 yeas and 158 nays , with bipartisan support as well as bipartisan opposition . the house passed a revised version of h.r . 6429 in november 2012 . there are several differences between this version and the one the house considered in september . perhaps the most significant addition to h.r . 6429 in the house - passed version is the expansion of the nonimmigrant visa for family members with approved or pending lpr petitions , commonly known as the "v" visa . the house - passed bill would allow the spouses and minor children of lprs to live in the united states on v visas ( without employment authorization ) while they wait for their lpr petitions or visa applications to be adjudicated or their visas to become available . immediate relatives of lprs would become eligible for v visas after a one - year wait . the purpose of the diversity immigrant visa lottery is , as the name suggests , to encourage legal immigration from countries other than the major sending countries of current immigrants to the united states . current law weights the allocation of immigrant visas heavily toward aliens with close family in the united states and , to a lesser extent , toward aliens who meet particular employment needs . the diversity immigrant category was added to the ina by the immigration act of 1990 ( p.l . 101-649 ) to stimulate "new seed" immigration ( i.e. , to foster new , more varied migration from other parts of the world ) . to be eligible for a diversity visa , the ina requires that the foreign national must have a high school education or the equivalent , or two years of experience in an occupation that requires at least two years of training or experience . the foreign national or the foreign national's spouse must be a native of one of the countries listed as a foreign state qualified for the diversity visa lottery .