designer drugs are a form of synthetic drugs . they slightly modify the molecular structures of illegal or controlled substances to circumvent existing drug laws . for over three decades , there has been national - level attention on the use and abuse of synthetic drugs . congress became concerned about the abuse of designer drugs in the early 1980s when policymakers were examining the diversion of controlled substances — intended for medical use — to the black market . there was concern about the health and safety effects of using and abusing pharmaceutically created drugs as well as other modified synthetics . while a bulk of this focus has been on methamphetamine , the spotlight has recently shifted to other synthetic stimulants as well as synthetic cannabinoids . congress may also alter the definition of a controlled substance or a controlled substance analogue to try to capture more of these rapidly evolving synthetic compounds . alternatively , congress may consider legislative options outside of the csa . as required by the csa , a drug must be evaluated on its history and current pattern of abuse ; scope , duration , and significance of abuse ; and risk to public health factors in order to be eligible for temporary or permanent scheduling by the attorney general . congress may also question whether u.s. policies on importation of substances sufficiently protect against dangerous analogue substances . the office of national drug control policy ( ondcp ) has noted that synthetic cathinones and cannabinoids are understudied substances , and there is limited research on these drugs . this lack of research may influence whether the attorney general ( through the dea ) permanently schedules certain synthetic stimulants under the csa . of note , while congress has scheduled several substances commonly marketed as "bath salts" ( including mephedrone and mdpv ) , congress did not schedule the full array of substances that have been and may be marketed as such ( eg , methylone ) . the dea permanently scheduled methylone on schedule i in april 2013 , and may still consider temporary and permanent scheduling of not - yet - scheduled substances . in contrast to what is required of hhs and the dea , congress is not statutorily required to consider research and data in its decision to schedule a drug under the csa . in the past , congress has exercised its scheduling authority by passing legislation to add drugs to the list of controlled substances , and congress has cited public safety interests as the reason for taking legislative action . in 2000 , for example , congress passed legislation that provided for emergency scheduling of gamma hydroxybutyric acid ( ghb ) , a synthetic stimulant also known as "liquid ecstasy. in doing so , congress cited ghb as "an imminent hazard to public safety that requires immediate regulatory action. congress may debate whether to exercise its authority and pass legislation to permanently schedule certain synthetic drugs under the csa . one related consideration is whether there is an imminent threat such that immediate scheduling through legislation may be more effective than the dea and hhs carrying out the scheduling process laid out under the csa .