hrit is an account under the ochco appropriation . a long - term strategic plan for hrit is being redefined and implemented by the chco , the chief information officer , and other department officials . what acquisition tasks , or activities , are most likely to be affected by the lack of a fully staffed and trained acquisition workforce ? under its balanced workforce initiative , has dhs discovered contractor employees performing inherently governmental functions ? has the department identified any situations where it had ceded control over its mission and operations to contractor employees ? how many contractors , and which contracts , might be affected by the agency's efforts to achieve a balanced workforce ? prior to the 9 / 11 attacks , terrorist watch lists were maintained by several agencies primarily to prevent foreign terrorists from entering the united states . in september 2003 , under the homeland security presidential initiative 6 ( hspd - 6 ) , the u.s. government's use of watch lists was consolidated and expanded to better screen such persons at consular offices and international ports of entry , and to better track them if they manage to enter the united states . while the post - 9 / 11 terrorist screening policies have resulted in valid watch list matches , misidentifications have also been a recurring issue for congress . initially , such problems were most frequently associated with the transportation security administration ( tsa ) , but misidentifications have also emerged as a problem for the u.s. customs and border protection ( cbp ) . in december 2010 , however , tsa fully implemented its secure flight program and the frequency of terrorist watch list misidentifications is expected to abate . in addition , the department of homeland security ( dhs ) has established a "watchlist service," which is a mirror database of the federal bureau of investigation ( fbi ) consolidated database of terrorist watch list records . while this move brings the u.s. government closer to the goal of employing a single , consolidated terrorist watch list , it arguably further diffuses responsibility for terrorist watch list records under an arrangement that could have already been justifiably described as byzantine . under hspd - 6 , the terrorist identification and watch list functions previously performed by state's bureau of intelligence and research ( inr ) were split between the terrorist threat integration center ( ttic ) , later renamed the national counterterrorism center ( nctc ) , and the then newly established terrorist screening center ( tsc ) . the nctc is responsible for indentifying international terrorists and collating all available information on those persons in the terrorist identities datamart environment ( tide ) . federal agencies within the u.s. intelligence community forward nominations to the nctc to include known and suspected international terrorists into tide based upon both foreign and criminal intelligence . the fbi , on the other hand , is responsible for identifying both international and domestic terrorists ( in the latter case , based upon criminal intelligence ) . the fbi - administered tsc is responsible for maintaining the consolidated terrorist screening database ( tsdb ) , into which both international and domestic watch list records are consolidated .