appendix b . money movements at mf globa . it is economically equivalent to a loan. ) according to the bankruptcy trustee's investigation later , mf global's exposure to sovereign european debt "was more than four and a half times mf global's total equity , a level that was orders of magnitude greater than the relative exposure at other , larger financial institutions. some press reports suggested that the position was profitable to the extent that the interest rate mf global paid on these repos was lower than the rate paid by the sovereign bonds . if the cost of financing the bond position rose , mf global would take a loss . in response to the mf global and peregrine failures , the cftc on november 14 , 2012 , proposed a rule aimed at increasing disclosure requirements for futures brokers to give customers greater accounting for their funds . the failure of peregrine , and subsequent loss of its futures customers' funds , further underscored the need to revisit whether measures to protect futures customers' funds were adequate . industry groups , however , have complained that the proposed rule would impose excessive costs . the nfa , the self - regulatory organization , came under criticism for failing to catch a shortfall in customer segregated account funds even though it was the front - line auditor of peregrine . the proposal arguably would require heightened disclosure by brokers about how client collateral is held at custodial banks and increase standards for auditors of brokerages . the cftc , in finalizing its proposed rule , would presumably weigh industry concerns that stricter safeguards could tie up additional capital and raise costs for futures customers with the policy goals of improving protections for customer funds . in a sense , this is what happened: creditors insisted that mf global post higher collateral against the position , either because the perceived credit risk of the bonds had increased or because mf global's own credit rating had been downgraded ( which happened on october 24 , 2011 ) . the markets appear to have taken a pessimistic view of mf global for some time prior to the bankruptcy . its stock price , which started 2011 at about $8 per share , began to decline in may and fell below $4 on october 3 . appendix a. mf global's regulatory oversight and bankruptcy proceedings figure a - 1 details the regulatory oversight of mf global prior to its bankruptcy . the left side of the chart shows the regulatory oversight of the fcm business and the right side shows the regulatory oversight of the broker - dealer business . figure a - 2 details the trustees assigned to handle the bankruptcy proceedings . on monday , october 24 , 2011 , moody's downgraded mf global's long - term debt to baa3 , the rating just above junk bond status . figures b - 1 , b - 2 , and b - 3 provide details and a timeline for cash movement out of mf global , based on the trustee's investigation . the next day , the stock price fell by 48% , from $3.55 to $1.86 .