age . plans can vary premiums by no more than a 3-to - 1 ratio for adults aged 21 and older . this provision means that a plan may not charge an older individual more than three times the premium that the plan charges a 21-year - old individual . each state must use a uniform age rating curve to specify the rates across all adult age bands , and each state must set a separate rate for all individuals aged 20 and younger . hhs created an age curve that states may choose to use , but some states have implemented standards other than the federal defaults . the rate review program aims to ensure that proposed annual health insurance rate increases in the small - group and individual markets that meet or exceed a specified threshold are reviewed by a state or cms to determine whether they are unreasonable . states have the option to establish state - specific thresholds , and a 10% threshold is in effect in any states that do not establish state - specific thresholds . plans subject to review are required to submit to cms and the relevant state a justification for the proposed rate increase prior to its implementation , and cms will publicly disclose the information . the rate review process does not establish federal authority to deny implementation of a proposed rate increase ; it is a sunshine provision designed to publicly expose rate increases determined to be unreasonable . a risk pool is used to develop rates for coverage . a health insurance issuer must consider all enrollees in plans offered by the issuer to be members of a single risk pool . more specifically , an issuer must consider all enrollees in individual plans offered by the issuer to be members of a single risk pool ; the issuer must have a separate risk pool for all enrollees in small - group plans offered by the issuer . ( however , states have the option to merge their individual and small - group markets ; if a state does so , an issuer will have a single risk pool for all enrollees in its individual and small - group plans. ) a result of the single risk pool requirement is that issuers must consider the medical claims experience of enrollees in all plans ( individual and small - group , either separately or combined ) offered by the issuer when developing rates . plans must cover the essential health benefits ( ehb ) . the aca does not explicitly list the benefits that comprise the ehb ; rather , it lists 10 broad categories from which benefits and services must be included . the hhs secretary is tasked with further defining the ehb . for 2014 through 2016 , the secretary asked each state to select a benchmark plan from four different types of plans . if the selected benchmark plan does not cover services and benefits from all 10 categories listed in statute , the state must supplement the benchmark plan ( according to a process outlined by hhs ) to ensure that all 10 statutorily required categories are represented .