hence , some creditworthy borrowers may be unable to obtain mortgage credit . the report begins with a summary of proposed ability to repay and risk - retention standards . next , the report describes risky underwriting and financing practices that occurred prior to the mortgage crisis , followed by a discussion of how access to mortgage credit might be affected . regulatory reforms will require creditors to consider whether borrowers have the ability to repay loans , and loan originators will also have to adhere to stricter underwriting or borrower qualification standards if they choose to sell loans to securitizers . ability to repay and risk - retention standards are designed to provide lenders and securitizers with legal protection when they refrain from lending practices that weaken overall financial stability as well as to protect borrowers from assuming mortgage obligations that are affordable only under certain circumstances . this report examines the developments associated with the implementation of mortgage lending reforms . this section provides an overview of the proposed rules having to do with the ability to repay and risk - retention standards . the typical errors that occur in mortgage lending can be characterized using a standard statistical framework . suppose a "type 1 error" occurs when borrowers who are likely to have repayment problems receive loans ; a "type 2 error" occurs when borrowers who are likely to repay their loans on time are denied credit . in this context , extending credit to unqualified borrowers ( type 1 errors ) can translate into substantial costs to lenders and foster a rise in aggregate indebtedness that makes both borrowers and lenders vulnerable to a sudden weakening of economic conditions . lender optimism during the height of a business cycle can translate into a substantial increase in debt accumulation or "leveraging" by the private sector . moreover , leveraging in response to a particular asset market bubble can result in overinvestment into a particular sector ( such as housing ) as well as numerous financial portfolios lacking diversification outside of one broad asset class . a "minsky moment" subsequently occurs when assets are unable to continue generating the level of revenues necessary to repay the loans that were used to purchase them . in other words , the expected future value of the collateral used to secure the loan fails to increase and may even decline , and the borrower lacks the income stream or the ability to sell the asset to repay the outstanding loan balance . recessions that occur after individuals have accumulated large levels of debt , therefore , are likely to be more severe than those characterized by lower debt levels . an escalation of defaults is likely to occur after a proliferation of leveraged investments have gone sour , which debilitates the banking system and impedes any subsequent lending necessary to stimulate recovery . rulemaking is now taking place to implement "ability to repay" and risk - retention standards as mandated by the dodd - frank wall street reform and consumer protection act of 2010 ( dodd - frank act ; p.l .