during september , drought conditions persisted . the public law includes $150,000,000 for international disaster assistance but does not specify in what countries or regions these funds will be used . after the initial emergency is over , assistance is provided through other channels , such as the regular country development programs of usaid . the state department also administers programs for humanitarian relief with a focus on refugees and the displaced . the emergency refugee and migration account ( erma ) is a contingency fund that provides wide latitude to the president in responding to refugee emergencies . assistance to address emergencies lasting more than a year comes out of the regular migration and refugee account ( mra ) through the population , migration and refugees ( prm ) bureau . usaid's long - term strategy for addressing east african emergencies , before the house committee on foreign affairs , subcommittee on africa , global health , and human rights , september 8 , 2011 . delivering humanitarian food , medicine , and fuel is never easy or unfettered . the horn of africa region offers up its own unique set of challenges . areas of somalia , in particular , stand out for their complicating factors . how to effectively and efficiently deliver life - saving assistance in an environment of pirates , bandits , terrorists , poor - to - nonexistent infrastructure , and a poor - to - nonfunctioning state , is the riddle the united states and its international partners strive to solve . sustaining the humanitarian effort through to the end of this crisis remains a huge concern . on january 16 , 2009 , the council , in resolution 1863 , expressed its "intent to establish a united nations peacekeeping operation in somalia , as a follow - on force to amisom. in this context , it requested the u.n. secretary - general to "provide a united nations logistical support package to amisom including equipment and services ... " on april 7 , 2009 , the u.n. general assembly adopted resolution 63 / 275a , financing of activities arising from security council resolution 1863 ( 2009 ) . this resolution established a special [assessed] account for the support of the african union mission in somalia ( amisom ) , including the united nations support office for amisom ( unsoa ) proposed by the secretary - general to coordinate the delivery of the logistical package . the u.n. security council , under resolution 1964 ( 2010 ) , authorized the mission to increase its troop size from 8,000 to 12,000 . the council most recently renewed amisom's mandate on september 30 , 2011 , unanimously adopting resolution 2010 ( 2011 ) to extend its authorization of amisom until october 31 , 2012 . the resolution supported achievement of the authorized level of 12,000 troops and encouraged development of a guard force within amisom's mandated troop levels to provide security , escort , and protection services to personnel from the international community . it also expressed the council's intention to review the possible need to adjust troop levels of amisom once the mission reaches its mandated level .