the last atvm loan was made in 2011 . the five companies , the loan amounts , and a short description of the covered projects are shown in table 1 , listed chronologically . approved projects include parts production and assembly for all - electric and plug - in hybrid vehicles , assembly of natural gas vehicles , and production and installation of advanced components for conventional vehicles . several months later , the company submitted an application for $14.4 billion of loans . the atvm program was established in 2007 and funded in 2009 . at that time , gm's then cfo chris liddell said , "withdrawing our doe loan application is consistent with our goal to carry minimal debt on our balance sheet. other applicants reportedly complained about the slow pace of consideration of loan applications , indicating that a lack of doe action was undercutting their ability to compete with rivals in asia and europe . others opted to use the commercial loan market for support with their business plans , as the costs of the current program may outweigh the benefits to their companies ( according to a 2013 gao report ) . in its 2011 report , gao found that the atvm program could better meet its objectives if it would apply greater use of independent engineering analysis to improve program evaluation . before additional loan disbursements are made , atvm procedures require that its staff will ensure that borrowers have made significant technical progress . gao's review of the program found that doe's atvm staff did not have sufficient engineering skills to effectively evaluate such progress . gao noted that without such independent evaluations of the manufacturing processes , atvm "cannot be adequately assured that the borrowers are delivering the vehicle and component projects as required by the loan agreements. gao cited instances in which borrowers had not spent funds as required and had spent loan funds outside the united states . in addition , gao said that four atvm projects ( those of nissan , ford , fisker , and tesla ) had reached critical stages where "heightened technical monitoring" was appropriate to avoid the "risk of not identifying critical deficiencies. gao also called upon doe to use additional performance measures so it could better assess whether loan recipients were meeting the program goals . the atvm program is neither unique nor without precedent . the federal government has supported a wide range of research , development , and production incentives for new domestic energy sources for several decades , as part of an overall commitment to reduce petroleum imports and , in the case of automobiles , raise fuel - efficiency levels . efforts to spur energy innovation in vehicles go back at least to the ford administration , when the first efforts to promote research and development of electric vehicles were enacted . since those initial efforts in the 1970s , the department of energy ( doe ) has continuously supported research initiatives on new types of electric batteries , fuel cells , and other vehicles and technologies as possible alternatives to vehicles fueled by petroleum .