it is not a bank program . it doesn't have anything to do with banks except that we are working in partnership with banks to lend money to small businesses which are desperate for money . opponents argued that the sblf could lose money , lacked sufficient oversight provisions , did not require lenders to increase their lending to small businesses , could serve as a vehicle for tarp recipients to effectively refinance their tarp loans on more favorable terms with little or no resulting benefit for small businesses , and could encourage a failing lender to make even riskier loans to avoid higher dividend payments . people are employed . the recession starts ending… . it has nothing to do with tarp money . it is not a tarp program . in addition , there were disagreements over the number of amendments that could be offered by the minority , which led several senators to oppose further consideration of the bill until that issue was resolved to their satisfaction . for example , on july 22 , 2010 , senator olympia snowe argued that although "under a cash - based estimate , cbo listed the official score for the lending fund as raising $1.1 billion over 10 years," sblf proponents "fail to mention" that when cbo scored the sblf using an alternative methodology that adjusts for market risk , it estimated that the sblf could cost $6.2 billion . senator snowe also argued that the bipartisan congressional oversight panel for tarp stated in its may 2010 oversight report that the proposed sblf "substantially resembles" the tarp and "is a bank - focused capital infusion program that is being contemplated despite little , if any , evidence that such programs increase lending. senator snowe noted that she regretted "that we are in a position where we have not been able to reach agreement allowing the minority to offer amendments , which is confounding and perplexing as well as disappointing. senator snowe later added that the sblf's incentives to encourage lending to small businesses also "could encourage unnecessarily risky behavior by banks … to avoid paying higher interest rates. opponents also questioned the sblf's use of quarterly call report data as submitted by lenders to their appropriate banking regulator to determine what counts as a small business loan . call report data denotes loans of $1 million or less as small business loans , regardless of the size of the business receiving the loan . as a result , the sblf's opponents argued that "the data used to measure small business lending in the sblf covers an entirely different set of small businesses than those that fall within the definition set out in the small business act or used by the sba. the senate's version of h.r . 5297 was agreed to on september 16 , 2010 , by a vote of 68-38 . the house agreed to the senate - passed version of h.r . 5297 on september 23 , 2010 , by a vote of 237-187 , and the bill , retitled the small business jobs act of 2010 , was signed into law by president obama on september 27 , 2010 . on february 14 , 2011 , the obama administration issued its budget recommendation for fy2012 .