ยง4532 ) is directed . unlike england , france , and germany , the united states has never sponsored private manufacturing establishments that specialized in the design and production of heavy munitions . instead of relying upon a vickers - armstrong , a schneider - creusot , or a krupp , the country from its beginning followed the policy of assigning responsibility for army munitions supply to a special government agency , the ordnance department of the army . during the revolutionary war and through the first few years of the country's existence , the army depended almost exclusively on foreign manufacturers for arms . desiring to break this reliance on foreign supply , congress authorized president george washington in 1794 to establish a federal manufacturing arsenal at springfield , ma . by the end of 1795 , the arsenal had produced its first 295 muskets . within a few years of the end of the war of 1812 , five federal arsenals , specializing in particular products they offered , were in operation . springfield and harpers ferry , va , manufactured small arms ( primarily muskets and pistols ) . watervliet , ny , produced artillery equipment and ammunition . watertown , ma , fashioned artillery gun carriages and small arms . frankford , pa , fabricated ammunition . two more facilities were built after the mid - nineteenth century , rock island , il , specializing in artillery recoil mechanisms , and picatinny , nj , mixing artillery ammunition , propellants , and explosives , while harpers ferry was destroyed at the beginning of the civil war and never rebuilt . the statute is a combination of two different provisions of law , enacted nearly 70 years apart , that were eventually combined into a single provision during the early 1950s when the united states code took its current form . subsection ( a ) , which requires the secretary of the army to have departmental supplies manufactured in government factories and arsenals to the extent that they can be manufactured "on an economical basis," first appeared in statute in the defense act of 1920 . subsection ( b ) originated in the army appropriations act for 1854 . the language of both sections has remained essentially unchanged since their enactment . except for wartime emergency , the war department ( predecessor to the department of the army ) did not place significant reliance on private industry to provide military arms and ammunition until after world war i . the first decades of the 20 th century saw significant military reform as congress created the general staff system and reorganized both the army and the war department before and after u.s. involvement in world war i . two of those reforms , included in the act of 1920 , had a direct impact on army supply . the first of these created a permanent assistant secretary of war , designating him as the chief procurement official for the army . the second stipulated that arsenals and factories be used for the manufacture of army supplies , as noted above .