other characteristics and purposes are described below . since the adoption and implementation of the e - "dear colleague" system in august 2008 , the number of "dear colleague" letters sent in the house has continued to increase . in light of the analysis of the volume , use , characteristics , and purpose of "dear colleague" letters , several possible administrative and operational questions could be raised to aid the house in future discussions of the e - "dear colleague" system . these questions can be divided into two broad categories: questions about the volume of letters and questions about the characteristics and purpose of letters . the use of electronic "dear colleague" letters has increased since 2003 . with the introduction of the e - "dear colleague" distribution system in 2008 , the number of "dear colleague" letters sent on an annual basis continues to increase . in 2003 , 5,161 "dear colleague" letters were sent , while in 2010 , 14,531 letters were sent in the house . this report analyzed the number of "dear colleague" letters sent and showed that overall more letters were sent during the first session of a congress than the second session . additionally , the average number of "dear colleague" letters sent in the second session declined between september and december , which coincides with a decline in overall legislative activity at the end of a congress . during the 111 th congress , data from the web - based e - "dear colleague" system showed that members sent the most letters ( 94% ) , and that the most popular topics were health care ( 8.8% ) , foreign affairs ( 7.9% ) , education ( 6.0% ) , family issues ( 5.8% ) , the economy ( 5.6% ) , and the environment ( 5.4% ) . the data demonstrated that the most frequent use of "dear colleague" letters in the 111 th congress was to elicit legislative co - sponsors ( 53% ) . finally , when examining "dear colleague" letters that were linked to a specific piece of legislation , the data showed that public laws with a linked "dear colleague" letter had a greater number of average co - sponsors ( 74 ) than public laws without an associated "dear colleague" letter ( 16 ) . the same can also be said for house resolutions , where resolutions associated with a "dear colleague" letter had an average of 50 co - sponsors and resolutions not associated with a "dear colleague" letter had average of 24 . congress has recently expanded its use of the internet and electronic devices to facilitate distribution of legislative documents . consequently , electronic "dear colleague" letters can be disseminated via internal networks in the house and senate , supplementing or supplanting paper forms of the letters . electronic communication has increased the speed and facilitated the process of distributing "dear colleague" letters . the house has developed a web - based distribution system — the e - "dear colleague" system . unveiled in 2008 , this system replaced an e - mail - based system .