appendix a . select u.s. natural gas import and export infrastructure appendix b. lower - 48 states natural gas hub ma . the crude oil export act ( h.r . 156 ) would repeal limitations on export of outer continental shelf natural gas under section 28 of the outer continental shelf lands act ( 43 u.s.c . other bills , such as the natural gas pipeline permitting reform act ( h.r . egypt and libya declined because of the turmoil in those countries . many of the projected projects in figure 5 are targeting the asian lng demand centers . although the locations of most of the proposed u.s. export terminals are on the u.s. gulf coast and the east coast , asia may be the target market for u.s. lng , as it tends to pay higher prices for its natural gas imports . the widening of the panama canal , scheduled to be completed in 2015 , would contribute to u.s. competitiveness in asia . europe has a lot of lng import capacity and growing demand , but needs to continue to improve its infrastructure connections to transport gas to markets . russia , the main supplier of natural gas to europe , may be put under increasing pressure by u.s. export projects to further delink its natural gas prices from oil . u.s. lng exports could also provide options for some countries that are highly dependent on one supplier . the growth in u.s. natural gas resources , particularly from shale gas , and the projected continued growth are what make increased natural gas exports a possibility . u.s. natural gas reserves have climbed approximately 80% since 2000 and 60% since 2005 ( figure 6 ) . these data include reductions for natural gas extracted during the period and so are net increases . in recent years , the increase in reserves is mostly attributed to development of shale gas , which has grown from 10% of u.s. natural gas reserves in 2007 to 45% in 2013 . by comparison , conventional u.s. natural gas reserves declined between 2007 and 2008 , and fell again in 2010 . though the decline was marginal , it highlights the importance of shale gas to future u.s. natural gas production . many industry analysts expect shale gas reserves to continue to rise and make up a greater portion of u.s. natural gas reserves unless new restrictions are placed on the industry , such as rules related to hydraulic fracturing , power plant emissions , pipeline development , or other factors . the total capacity proposed is approximately 42 bcfd . in addition , companies have active permits to re - export lng cargos from existing import terminals , which involves taking in foreign lng cargos , holding them in storage , and then reloading them onto lng tankers for shipment to foreign markets . increased pipeline exports to canada and mexico may also continue to rise if their domestic demand continues to increase . low u.s. natural gas prices ( especially in the gulf of mexico ) relative to other international markets have spurred interest in exporting u.s. produced natural gas ( figure 2 ) .