appendix a . global wind turbine manufacturers appendix b . selected examples of u.s. wind turbine production facilities appendix c. 48c manufacturing tax credi . the market potential of offshore wind power is not covered in this report . as this report describes , competition in the wind turbine sector from new asian entrants will likely become more significant in future years , but it is still unclear whether many of these companies have the technological abilities and financial resources to become significant players in the u.s. market . no offshore projects have been installed in the united states to date , and the industry faces difficulties with permitting , financing , and infrastructure availability . the wind industry asserts that a national renewable electricity standard is needed to create long - term stability and to attract investment in new turbine production facilities . manufacturers from south korea and china are also expanding production capacity and entering the u.s. market . federal interest in the u.s. wind turbine manufacturing industry is based on ( 1 ) increasing the role of clean energy technology in energy production ; ( 2 ) encouraging advanced manufacturing and the creation of skilled manufacturing jobs ; and ( 3 ) enhancing the diversity of u.s. energy sources . the production costs of u.s. plants that make turbine components appear to be competitive with those in other countries , and the difficulty and expense of transporting very bulky products over long distances serves as an obstacle to import competition . nonetheless , there are several obstacles that may impede the expansion of wind energy manufacturing in the united states . one is the history of policy - induced boom - and - bust cycles in wind energy investment , which may lead wind turbine manufacturers and component suppliers to conclude that future u.s. demand for their products is too uncertain . wind energy , like many energy technologies , benefits from government incentives . most wind farms are located at a distance from the urban areas where most electricity is consumed , and a shortage of transmission capacity could hamper wind farm creation or expansion . congress may wish to evaluate the seriousness of transmission issues in the context of other federal efforts to support wind generation . the structure of the wind manufacturing industry is also likely to undergo significant change . as is typical in budding industries , a large number of companies now compete in wind manufacturing . mergers and failures are likely to lead to consolidation as the sector matures . without them , it does not appear likely that there would be a u.s. wind turbine industry . to a large extent , the federal government sets the framework and influences the pace of domestic wind power development . one of the main federal policy tools to encourage wind generation is a tax credit , known as the production tax credit ( ptc ) , which is slated to expire at the end of 2013 . other policy drivers include state renewable portfolio standards , which have been adopted by more than half the states to mandate production of electricity from "clean" sources .