the 2008 farm bill was no exception . while almost all existing conservation programs were reauthorized , several programs were modified to address concerns . the 2008 farm bill also created new programs , expanding the range of usda conservation activities . currently , more than 20 agricultural conservation programs are administered by usda , mostly by the natural resources conservation service ( nrcs ) . starting in 1985 , each succeeding farm bill has expanded the range of natural resource problems to be addressed as well as the number of conservation programs and level of funding . the 112 th congress debated reauthorizing legislation in the house - reported ( h.r . 6083 ) and senate - passed ( s. 3240 ) farm bills . for a list of most agricultural conservation programs , see crs report r40763 , agricultural conservation: a guide to programs . this legislation did not pass before the end of the 112 th congress , leaving the 113 th congress to write a new farm bill . since its first inclusion in the 1985 farm bill , the conservation title has been a significant and visible title in the farm bill . as the title has grown in both size and interest , so too have questions and concerns about program funding , policy objectives , individual program effectiveness , comparative geographic emphasis , and the structure of federal assistance . congress has continued to debate and address these concerns with each omnibus farm bill . in some cases , the programs are subsets of overarching programs that apply to a specific place or a specific resource , but with unique provisions and eligibility requirements . though some similarities among these programs exist , each is administered with slight differences . current budgetary constraints continue to drive the debate related to the next farm bill . most programs authorized in the 2008 farm bill ( p.l . 110-246 ) will expire on september 30 , 2013 , because of the 2012 farm bill extension . many of the conservation issues discussed in the 112 th congress continue to be discussed , including program consolidation , environmental regulation , and conservation compliance . while the conservation title was arguably one of the less controversial titles debated during the 112 th congress's farm bill reauthorization consideration , tension remains on some key policy points , namely funding levels and compliance requirements . as congress debates conservation provisions in the next farm bill the focus continues to be on overall federal spending and agriculture's share . conservation funding has grown to represent a sizable portion of the overall farm bill baseline and could see reductions during reauthorization . many in the conservation community see this as inevitable ; however , they do not want to see a reduction in conservation that is disproportionate to other areas of agricultural spending . while most producers are in favor of conservation programs , it is unclear how much of a reduction in other farm program spending they would be willing to support to further conservation efforts .