according to p.l . 111-321 , repeal would take effect 60 days after the president , secretary of defense , and chairman of the joint chiefs of staff certify that they have "considered the recommendations contained in the crwg report and the report's proposed plan of action," "the department of defense has prepared the necessary policies and regulations to exercise [the repeal of section 654 , title 10 usc]," and ; the policies and regulations pursuant to such a repeal are "consistent with the standards of military readiness , military effectiveness , unit cohesion , and recruiting and retention of the armed forces. the then - secretary of defense , robert m. gates , released a memorandum calling on dod military and civilian leaders to deliver a plan for carrying out the repeal by february 4 , 2011 . this memorandum called for the creation of a repeal implementation team ( rit ) to develop plans for the repeal , update policies for publication following the repeal , train and prepare members of the force , and provide bi - weekly progress reports . this report will examine these issues . under the constitution , congress has the authority "to make rules for the government and regulation of the land and naval forces. congress , via its members and committees , maintains oversight of the armed forces . it is the duty of the president to execute the laws and to draft the means of implementing these laws . in the case of the repeal of section 654 , congress is removing the statutory language prohibiting open homosexuality and allowing the administration to implement the rules and regulations , subject to this oversight . ( congress did not add new language to federal statutes. ) prior to the adoption of section 654 ( and the dadt policy ) , there were no federal statutes banning gay individuals from serving openly in the military . instead , the ban was contained in various military regulations . repeal of section 654 returns to a situation in which there are no federal statutes regarding open service by gays . in this environment , it could theoretically be possible for this or any future administration to draft regulations that resemble the pre - 1993 ban or any number of similar restrictions . some have suggested that it is necessary for congress to go beyond repealing section 654 and put into place statutory language that prevents a return to restrictions on service based on sexuality . others dismiss the possible return to a gay ban as unlikely , particularly given such a change would be vulnerable to legal challenges , and therefore claim that the need for such legislation is unnecessary . still others have noted that , lacking any prohibitions in law , it is possible for state governors to establish such rules for state national guard members . advocates for repeal of section 654 suggested that congress could go further in considering language that would prevent a governor from taking such actions . concerns have also been expressed that such actions could potentially challenge or usurp a governor's authority when the national guard is under state control . a panoply of pay , benefits , and privileges are available to military personnel .