oil prices can be volatile . the economic recession , beginning in december 2007 , and accompanied by record high crude oil prices in 2008 , served to decrease demand . overall liquid fuels consumption in the united states is projected by the eia to remain about constant in 2014 compared to 2013 , and to have risen by 0.08% compared to 2012 . within these overall increases , gasoline consumption is expected to remain relatively constant from 2013 to 2014 , declining by about 0.4%,while distillate consumption is expected to increase by 2.4% . the relative increase in distillate consumption is likely to maintain , or increase , the price premium of these fuels over gasoline , and could create possible upside price risk over the stewfo projection for heating oil consumers . propane provides primary home heating for approximately 5.5 million households in the united states , about 4.7% of the total households . propane consumers are projected to experience a $120 , or 9% , increase in heating expenses during the 2013-2014 winter heating season . these cost increases make propane the second most expensive fuel among those covered in the stewfo . the number of households heating with propane has declined every year for the past five years , suggesting that propane is not a preferred fuel choice . most of the increased consumption is expected to occur in the industrial sector . the stewfo projects an increase in u.s. natural gas production of about 0.06% for 2014 compared to 2013 , and a 1.1% increase from 2013 to 2012 . the relative weakness of wellhead natural gas prices from 2010 to 2013 reflects the increased production resulting from shale gas and other non - conventional sources . however , these lower prices , and the growing price spread between petroleum liquids and natural gas , has shifted exploration and drilling activity in the direction of liquid deposits , slowing growth in natural gas . imports of natural gas are expected to decline by about 3% from 2012 to 2013 , mostly on pipeline imports from canada . lower natural gas prices in north america than in asia and europe will continue to make liquefied natural gas imports a small component of the u.s. gas picture as the united states prepares to become an exporter of liquefied natural gas . natural gas demand from households and commercial customers peaks in the winter , and to a lesser extent in the summer . this leads to accumulation of natural gas in storage facilities in the off - peak seasons . at the beginning of the winter heating season , october 1 , 2013 , natural gas in storage was approximately 3.5 trillion cubic feet , above the five - year average storage quantity . home heating oil is a middle distillate , derived from the same part of the refining process as diesel fuel . as a result , the price of home heating oil is closely related to the price of crude oil as well as the price of diesel fuel . approximately 5.8% of u.s. households heat with oil , and most of these consumers are in the northeast , where about 80% of u.s. heating oil consumption takes place .