this report is not an exhaustive review of the literature . reviewed studies were generally selected if they included attempts to quantify the cost of public services and benefits received by the foreign born and / or tax revenues contributed , and they explained their methodologies for computing estimates . hence , studies that applied excessively simple , incomplete , or undisclosed methodologies were generally not included . this report also excluded studies that intended to show only a favorable or unfavorable portrait of the foreign born , unless their methodological sophistication warranted their inclusion . the span of methodologies used in the analyses presented in this report ranges from basic arithmetic computations to sophisticated microeconomic and macroeconomic models . federal programs such as social security and medicare are oriented toward assisting the elderly , while state and local level jurisdictions are often responsible for services consumed by younger persons , such as public education and criminal justice administration . studies of the fiscal impact of unauthorized aliens reach less consensus than those of the total foreign - born population . three national estimates of the net fiscal impact of unauthorized aliens evaluated in a 1995 gao report varied considerably and left the agency unable to definitively quantify such impacts . moreover , the report distinguishes between cross - sectional studies that consider the fiscal impacts of the foreign born at a particular year , versus longitudinal studies that attempt to capture fiscal impacts of the foreign born across longer periods or several generations . with the exception of studies discussed in a 1995 general accounting office ( gao ) report that assess fiscal impacts of the unauthorized alien population , studies reviewed herein were completed after 1996 . studies within each section are generally reviewed in chronological order , with the earliest studies evaluated first . fiscal impact analysis for unauthorized aliens poses greater challenges than that for all foreign - born persons . two reasons explain the absence of reliable estimates . first , reliable estimates of public service costs and tax revenues of unauthorized aliens require the following: accurate counts of unauthorized aliens and accurate measures of their socioeconomic characteristics , reliable and complete information on public service utilization and associated costs , and reliable and complete information on tax and withholding revenue generated by unauthorized aliens . since these data generally do not exist , many studies are based on assumptions of the very items they are trying to estimate . without additional data , net fiscal impacts of unauthorized aliens remain estimates , with varying and unknown margins of error . second , as with research on the total foreign - born population , studies of unauthorized aliens analyze different services and revenues , hindering cross - study comparisons . state and local governments bear much of the cost of providing public services to unauthorized aliens residing in their jurisdictions . the most expensive public services are public education , health care , and law enforcement , although such spending for unauthorized aliens often makes up a small proportion of these governments' total spending . given these challenges , researchers attempting to quantify the costs and revenues of unauthorized aliens used more circumscribed methodologies . not all studies estimated both public service costs and revenue contributions .