for example , 10 u.s.c . section 114 ( a ) prohibits the appropriation of funds for military construction , procurement , and certain related research and development "unless funds therefore have been specifically authorized by law. such a statutory requirement for prior authorization of funding is effectively a directive to congress itself . thus , "if congress appropriates money to the defense department in violation of 10 u.s.c . a point of order against an amendment can only be reserved if allowed by the chair . a point of order must be raised against a provision in the bill during the reading of the bill for amendment , after the relevant paragraph has been read but before any amendments to that paragraph have been offered . a point of order against an amendment must be raised or reserved ( if permitted ) before debate against the amendment commences . if the point of order is not raised , or is raised too late , the house may consider and agree to the appropriation , regardless of whether it would otherwise be considered to be authorized by law . if a point of order is raised against a provision of an appropriations bill as being unauthorized , the burden of proof is on the manager ( normally the chair or ranking member of the committee that reported the measure ) to demonstrate that the appropriation is authorized . if a point of order is raised against a provision of an amendment , the burden of proof is on the member who introduced the amendment . the prohibitions against unauthorized appropriations under house rules may be waived by unanimous consent , suspension of the rules , or special rule . such special rules may waive points of order against the entire bill or specific provisions contained in the bill that violate rule xxi , clause 2 ( a ) . it is also possible for points of order against potential floor amendments containing unauthorized appropriations to be similarly waived by a special rule . a waiver of points of order against provisions in the bill do not apply to amendments thereto unless the waiver is also made specifically applicable to amendments . the senate has historically understood the meaning of "authorized by law" in broader terms than the house , and excluded appropriations as unauthorized in a more narrow set of circumstances . paragraph 1 of senate rule xvi currently provides that on a point of order made by any senator , no amendment shall be received to any general appropriation bill the effect of which will be to increase an appropriation already contained in the bill , or to add a new item of appropriation , unless it be made to carry out the provisions of some existing law , or treaty stipulation , or act or resolution previously passed by the senate during that session ; or unless the same be moved by direction of the committee on appropriations or a committee of the senate having legislative jurisdiction of the subject matter , or proposed in pursuance of an estimate submitted in accordance with law .