the icwa applies to child custody proceedings involving indian children . there were no bills introduced in the 112 th congress to amend the icwa , and no bills have been introduced in the 113 th congress thus far . the icwa has achieved success in reducing the rate at which indian children are removed from their homes and the rate at which indian children are placed in non - indian homes . nonetheless , indian children are still removed from their homes and placed in foster care at a rate higher than that for non - indian children . in 2008 , congress passed the fostering connections to success and increasing adoptions act , which made tribes eligible for direct funding for foster care and adoption assistance under title iv - e of the social security act , the act under which states receive federal funding for foster placement and adoption assistance . it is too early to know the results of this access to increased funding , but it may improve the tribes' ability to protect their children in a way that also protects the tribes . by recognizing both exclusive and concurrent tribal court jurisdiction over custody proceedings involving indian children , the icwa provides an important mechanism by which tribes may participate in the placement of indian children . the icwa recognizes that tribal courts have exclusive jurisdiction over child custody proceedings involving indian children who are residing on the reservation or who are wards of the tribal court , regardless of residency . it recognizes that tribal courts have concurrent jurisdiction over child custody proceedings involving children who reside off the reservation . to ensure that other jurisdictions respect tribal court orders , the icwa provides that "[t]he united states , every state , every territory or possession of the united states , and every indian tribe shall give full faith and credit to the public acts , records and judicial proceedings of any indian tribe applicable to indian child custody proceedings to the same extent that such entities give full faith and credit to the public acts , records and judicial proceedings of any other entity. over the years , there have been many bills introduced in congress to amend the icwa . in general , the amendments have been aimed at ensuring tribal notice and the opportunity for limited tribal intervention in voluntary adoptions , restricting the time in which parents may revoke their consent to voluntary termination of their rights , and providing criminal penalties for misrepresentation regarding an indian child . in addition , many of the proposed amendments have clarified when tribal courts have exclusive jurisdiction ; extended exclusive jurisdiction to tribes with reservations located in p.l . 280 states and to tribes without reservations , including tribes in oklahoma ; and , made clear that tribes in alaska have jurisdiction concurrent with state courts . only one bill has been introduced to limit the applicability of the icwa . the house committee on interior and insular affairs — the predecessor of the present - day house committee on natural resources — termed the disparity between placement rates for indians and non - indians "shocking.