parks with federal partners . the number of parks with private ownership and / or management partners has grown in recent decades . congress may achieve cost savings through these public - private partnerships — as , for example , when historic preservation groups provide the primary on - site staff at a historic site , allowing the park service to save on personnel costs . more broadly , do partnership parks further the mission of the national park service , or does extending the agency's reach through partnerships weaken its focus on its core priorities ? in considering proposals to establish partnership areas , a basic question for congress is whether the area should become a unit of the national park system or whether some other arrangement ( perhaps with less federal involvement ) is more appropriate . on the one hand , inclusion in the park system might better ensure ongoing conservation and stewardship of the land . nps assumes a basic financial responsibility for park system units , which may be desirable to previous land managers ( although in some cases partnership terms may dictate ongoing financial participation by existing land managers ) . furthermore , there is evidence that park system units benefit surrounding communities by drawing tourism to the area . on the other hand , some in congress are reluctant to add new units to the system , contending that the federal government's land holdings are already too large and that budgetary resources would be better used to address problems in existing parks . existing landholders , too , may have concerns about joining the park system , fearing a loss of control over their lands . potential units typically undergo study to determine whether they meet explicit criteria for establishment and then must win congressional approval and funding . even if successful , this process may take many years . for such reasons , it may be more attractive to legislators to enable the park service to assist in other ways — for instance , through the model of a national heritage area ( a type of area established by congress that is not under federal control but receives technical and financial assistance from nps ) or through grant programs such as the historic preservation fund . nps studies of sites for potential addition to the national park system are required to consider "whether direct nps management or alternative protection by other public agencies or the private sector is appropriate for the area. beyond this broad requirement , individual legislation to authorize studies of potential park units may also contain specific directions for nps to consider a range of protection options in addition to traditional park unit status . both nps and its partners may face constrained financial resources for management of a partnership park . nonfederal partners may seek national park status with the idea of receiving an infusion of federal funds for a struggling area , while federal legislators may specify partnership arrangements in order to limit the government's financial obligations for a new unit . in some cases , the establishing legislation for partnership units does not specify the exact breakdown of financial responsibilities between the park service and partnering managers .