4290 would extend the exclusion through 2015 . for more information on the exclusion for canceled mortgage debt income , see crs report rl34212 , analysis of the tax exclusion for canceled mortgage debt income , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] . the second benefit involves the low - income housing tax credit ( lihtc ) . traditionally , new affordable housing construction has been eligible for the so - called 9% credit that was designed to subsidize 70% of construction costs . the actual credit rate fluctuated according to market interest rates , and typically fell below 9% , but always delivered a 70% subsidy . the housing and economic recovery act of 2008 ( hera , p.l . 110-289 ) temporarily changed the lihtc rate to not less than 9% for new construction placed in service before december 31 , 2013 . the change implies that the applicable tax credit rate for new construction is temporarily the greater of 9% or the rate as determined under the original method designed to deliver a 70% subsidy . given the current interest rate environment , the 9% floors leads new construction to receive a subsidy exceeding 70% . house and senate versions of the same proposal ( h.r . 3661 and s. 1989 ) in the 112 th congress would permanently extend the floor on the 9% credit and provide a similar permanent floor for the so - called 4% credit that is reserved for rehabilitated construction . for more detail on the 4% and 9% floors , as well as a analysis of proposals to make the floors permanent , see crs report rs22917 , the low - income housing tax credit program: the fixed subsidy and variable rate , by [author name scrubbed] . moving forward , congress may address the growing concern about the size and sustainability of the united states' recent budget deficits and the country's long - term budget outlook . this concern has brought the issues of the government's revenue needs and fundamental tax reform to the forefront of the congressional debates . one place congress may choose to turn to address these issues is the set of tax benefits for homeowners . reducing , modifying , or eliminating all or some of the current tax benefits for homeowners could raise a substantial amount of revenue while simultaneously simplifying the tax code , increasing equity among taxpayers , and promoting economic efficiency . while it is unclear at this point if congress will make any housing policy tax changes , recent and past proposals have focused on the mortgage interest deduction . numerous proposals have been offered , from eliminating the deduction altogether , to limiting the deduction to primary residences , to converting the deduction to a tax credit . some are concerned , however , that the housing market is still too weak to start scaling back homeowner tax benefits . others have suggested that a gradual reduction over time of the available tax benefits would give the market time to adjust and reduce uncertainty among current and potential homeowners .