these effects operate through the demand side of the economy . in general , the largest effects are from direct spending and transfers to lower - income individuals , whereas the smallest effects are from cutting taxes of high - income individuals or businesses . this report then reviews the empirical evidence on the major contributors to growth . initially , it is important to make a distinction between the effects of policies aimed at short - term stimulation of an underemployed economy and long - run growth . in the short run , both spending increases and tax cuts are projected to increase employment and output in an underemployed economy , such as the united states today . long - run growth is a supply - side phenomenon . this section summarizes the theoretical insights and empirical evidence on the forces driving output and growth which supplement the information provided in the historical comparisons . more detailed discussion of various issues is contained in cited crs reports . claims that the cost of tax reductions is significantly reduced through feedback effects , because of increases in economic growth ( and that gains from tax increases are significantly reduced ) have been made . as indicated in the previous analysis , however , these effects are limited . although various dynamic models can potentially produce larger results , the models with responses most consistent with empirical evidence suggest a revenue feedback effect of about 1% for the 2001-2004 bush - era tax cuts . feedback effects could arise from shifts of taxable income outside of changes in real output ( such as increasing itemized deductions such as charitable contributions , realizing more income in fringe benefits , and similar responses ) . a series of studies providing direct relationships between tax rates and tax revenues designed to measure these responses initially found large effects . in the long run , the availability of jobs is not an issue , as an economy naturally creates jobs . output can grow through increases in labor participation and hours , increases in capital , and changes such as education and technological advances that enhance the productivity of these inputs . the remainder of the report addresses this longer - term growth issue . this section summarizes the historical insights about the effect of tax rates on economic growth and selected factors — labor force participation , savings , and growth in investment — commonly associated with economic growth . although this type of historical analysis is unable to identify causal relationships , it can offer suggestive evidence on the magnitude of the tax effect on these factors . to summarize , the evidence presented in this section suggests that past changes in tax rates have had no large clear effect on economic growth and selected factors commonly associated with economic growth . because much discussion is focused on the consequences of individuals in the top marginal tax rate brackets who provide much of the saving and entrepreneurial input in the economy , the following charts include examinations of the relationship between labor supply , savings , and growth rates for the top marginal rates .