appendix a . background on infrastructure financing the federal role the federal government , state and local governments , and the private sector all invest in what might be defined as infrastructure . clean water state revolving loan fund ( srf ) program . created in amendments to the clean water act ( p.l . 100-4 ) , this program provides grants to states to capitalize loan funds ( 33 u.s.c . states then may make low - interest loans and provide other types of credit assistance to help with the construction of publicly owned municipal wastewater treatment plants and for some other purposes . drinking water state revolving loan fund ( srf ) program . created in the safe drinking water act amendments of 1996 ( p.l . 104-182 ) , this program supports the financing of water system infrastructure ( 42 u.s.c . in 2008 , the congressional budget office ( cbo ) provided estimates of capital spending on infrastructure . these data show that government invests chiefly in transportation and water infrastructure whereas the private sector invests in energy and telecommunications infrastructure . within the public sector , state and local governments are typically responsible for a much larger share of infrastructure investment than the federal government . for example , about 25% of government spending on transportation and water infrastructure is from the federal government , with the other 75% from state and local government . the federal government assists in infrastructure investment in several ways . first , it spends directly on certain projects , such as the inland waterway system maintained and operated by the u.s. army corps of engineers . second , the federal government provides grants to state and local governments through a multitude of programs , such as those that provide funding for the maintenance , rehabilitation , and expansion of bus and transit rail systems . third , the federal government provides credit assistance to state and local government and the private sector through direct loans , loan guarantees , and tax preferences . in 2010 , direct federal spending on non - defense physical capital amounted to $48.1 billion and grants to state and local governments were another $93.3 billion . tax preferences were also significant . the amount of federal tax revenue foregone through tax - exempt bond financing for infrastructure was estimated to be $26.8 billion for 2010 . federal credit assistance programs as noted above , the federal government also has a number of existing programs that provide loans , loan guarantees , and other credit assistance for a wide spectrum of infrastructure projects , including the following: the transportation infrastructure finance and innovation act ( tifia ) program ( 23 u.s.c . 601 et seq. ) tifia provides federal credit assistance up to a maximum of 33% of project costs in the form of secured loans , loan guarantees , and lines of credit . the railroad rehabilitation and improvement financing ( rrif ) program ( 45 u.s.c . 821 et seq. ) rrif , also originally established in tea - 21 , provides loans and loan guarantees to freight railroads and amtrak for rail infrastructure improvements . the title xi federal ship financing program ( 46 u.s.c . chapter 537 ) .