each has advantages and challenges . open pond cultivation is generally less expensive and simpler to build , but is subject to weather conditions , contamination , and more water consumption . cultivation conditions may be better controlled in a closed system , but there are scalability concerns , and closed systems historically have been more expensive than open ponds . heterotrophic cultivation occurs in a fermentation tank and can use inexpensive lignocellulosic sugars for algae growth , which could lead to competition for feedstocks with other biofuel technologies . after cultivation , a variety of methods can be used to harvest the algae , including flocculation , filtration , and centrifugation . while algae harvest cycles vary based on the strain , in general algae can be harvested numerous times throughout the year , compared to once a year for many conventional crops . the next step is to process the algae , usually by dewatering or drying , which separates the algae into the various components necessary for biofuel conversion . afterward , certain components of the algae , such as lipids and oils , are extracted for biofuel conversion . the algal biomass is converted into biofuel through a chemical , biochemical , or thermochemical conversion process , or through a combination of these processes ( see figure 5 ) . congress has debated whether algae - based biofuel could help diversify the u.s. transportation fuel portfolio . while congress has created a policy that mandates the use of alternative fuels for transportation ( eg , rfs2 ) and set up tax credits that support alternative fuel production , much of the legislation and tax provisions for alternative transportation fuel is constrained to a set of feedstock types ( eg , cellulosic ) and fuel types as defined in the statute ( eg , ethanol , biodiesel ) . going forward , congress may choose to reevaluate how it supports alternative fuels by possibly expanding the feedstock and fuel types that qualify for transportation and energy mandates . for example , in the past the american taxpayer relief act of 2012 ( atra ; p.l . 112-240 ) amended both the cellulosic biofuel production tax credit and the cellulosic biofuel depreciation allowance to include algae - based biofuels . both tax incentives expired at the end of 2013 and it is not known if the incentives will be extended . additionally , algae is eligible for one part of the biomass crop assistance program ( bcap ) . some in congress have expressed interest in abb because it could have significantly lower greenhouse gas emissions on a life - cycle basis than conventional fuels . if abb is to become an alternative to help reduce u.s. dependence on petroleum and reduce greenhouse gas emissions , some stakeholders contend that consistent , comprehensive , long - term ( for the duration of multiple congressional sessions ) policy support , as well as further research and development , would be required . options that have been proposed for policies to encourage abb include modifying the rfs2 , creating a federal low - carbon fuel standard , or placing a tax on carbon .