the regulations were redesignated ( i.e. , renumbered ) in 1998 , but the 1980 provisions generally remain the same in 2011 . the recent administrative changes ( described in the earlier "reader's note" ) have led to a further restructuring of the regulations . an october 2011 direct final rule separated boem and bsee regulations , creating 30 c.f.r . part 550 for boem provisions ( bsee regulations were retained in their original location ) . the rule did not add or remove ocs requirements , but makes organizational changes needed to accommodate the doi administrative changes . selected elements of these regulations are discussed below . in several instances , part 55 directs ocs sources to air emission regulations in other caa regulations , codified in separate parts of the code of federal regulations . in general , these cross - references include the most substantive requirements for ocs sources . the doi authority to address ocs air emissions comes from the 1978 ocsla , which directs the doi secretary to promulgate regulations "for compliance with the national ambient air quality standards pursuant to the clean air act ( 42 u.s.c . 7401 et seq .

 ) , to the extent that activities authorized under this subchapter significantly affect the air quality of any state. to satisfy this directive , doi ( acting through the u.s. geological survey ) promulgated regulations in 1980 . in addition , doi or its agencies ( eg , mms , boem ) have periodically issued notices to lessees and operators ( ntls ) , which "clarify , supplement , or provide more detail about certain requirements. table 6 compares selected elements of the epa and doi air emission programs . the table examines the requirements applicable to outer ocs sources in epa's jurisdiction . inner ocs sources must follow the requirements that would apply to an onshore source in the corresponding onshore area . as discussed above , these provisions vary by state and whether the area is an attainment or nonattainment area . regardless , inner ocs source requirements would be at least as stringent as outer source requirements in all situations , and potentially more stringent in some locations ( eg , california ) . the primary difference between the epa and doi programs is rooted in the different statutory authorities: the 1990 caa and the 1978 ocsla . the lease sale was set to take place in 2011 . in the aftermath of the 2010 deepwater horizon oil spill , the obama administration canceled the sale ( may 27 , 2010 ) . in addition , in doi's most recent five - year plan for ocs leasing , doi decided not to include the mid - and south atlantic planning areas . many members of the 112 th congress have sought to expand ocs oil and gas development . the house has passed several bills that would direct doi to hold lease sales in particular areas , including the formerly proposed virginia lease sale and areas of southern california . in addition , areas of the u.s. arctic region , which were not subject to the moratoria , have generated recent congressional interest as industry has sought to establish a greater presence in the area .