appendix a . comparison of current rulemaking requirements and the proposed regulatory accountability act of 2011 appendix b . list of abbreviations used in this repor . sections 556 and 557 . under one reading of the raa's amendments , a court also may review a high - impact rule hearing if such hearing is considered to be "an agency hearing provided by statute. the raa would restrict its application to pending or completed rulemakings . the following raa amendments would not apply to pending or completed rulemakings on the date of the raa's enactment: the raa's amendments to the informal and formal rulemaking sections of the apa ; the raa's definition of "substantial evidence" ; the raa's new provisions that a court shall not defer to an agency's cost / benefit determinations and economic and risk assessments if the agency failed to conform to oira - established guidelines and that a court shall not defer to agency determinations made in the adoption of an interim rule ; the raa's addition of court reviews ( for abuse of discretion ) of agency denials of petitions during high - impact rule hearings "by an interested person who has participated in the rulemaking" related to "other issues relevant to the rulemaking," due to an agency "determin[ation] that consideration of the issues at the hearing would not advance consideration of the rule or would , in light of the nature of the need for agency action , unreasonably delay completion of the rulemaking" ; and the raa's addition of court reviews ( for abuse of discretion ) of agency denials of petitions for hearings under the apa's formal rulemaking provisions , 5 u.s.c . sections 556 and 557 . this section first provides a list of the most significant changes to the apa that the raa would make . this section then discusses some potential broad implications of the raa's changes to the rulemaking process . appendix a lists the provisions of the raa and provides a side - by - side comparison of those provisions with provisions from relevant statutes , executive orders , and omb documents . generally , the provisions of the table are listed in the order that they are included in the house version of the raa . unless otherwise specified in the table or indicated by quotation marks , the text is pulled directly from the sources mentioned . some components of the raa , such as those that define certain government entities ( i.e. the house passed h.r . 3010 on december 2 , 2011 , by a vote of 253-167 . if enacted , the raa would make broad changes to the federal rulemaking process . federal agencies currently issue regulations in accordance with requirements in the administrative procedure act ( apa ) , as well as other statutes and executive orders that apply to rulemaking . the raa would make the most significant legislative changes to the apa since its enactment in 1946 . the raa would modify and enact into law numerous new general procedures for rulemaking that appear in narrower form in existing law , executive orders , and office of management and budget ( omb ) documents .