hence , payday loans are expensive . the fee or financing charge is the equivalent of paying an estimated annual percentage rate ( apr ) lending rate ranging from 260% to 520% . such costs for credit may become very expensive for borrowers if they need to be rolled over or extended for additional periods . payday loans are considered abusive by some consumer advocates who argue that the industry targets vulnerable consumers . this type of lending may encourage chronic borrowing that causes frequent users to become trapped in a cycle of expensive debt . in november 2011 , the cfpb published a request for information about the private education loan market . the cfpb has authority to oversee all nonbanks in the residential mortgage , payday lending , and private education lending markets , but can only oversee the nonbank "larger participants" in other financial markets . in june 2011 , the cfpb submitted a notice and request for comment on a proposed rule with two main components: determining the threshold that will designate a market participant as "larger" and deciding what markets will be regulated . in determining the threshold , the cfpb solicited comments on , among other things , whether to use absolute or relative measures of size as well as the type of data that should be used . for which markets to regulate , the cfpb proposed six possible industries to monitor: debt collection , consumer reporting , consumer credit , money transmitting and check cashing , prepaid cards , and debt relief services . the cfpb received comments on the proposed rule but has not published the initial rule . the dodd - frank act instructs the cfpb to issue its initial rule on larger participants by july 2012 . the dodd - frank act gives cfpb authority to supervise a nonbank that would not meet the previously described requirements if , based on the complaints it has received or from other sources , it has reason to believe the nonbank poses risks to consumers in offering its financial services or products . the cfpb has not yet published a final rule to establish procedures to supervise a nonbank under this authority . the bureau is located within the federal reserve system ( frs ) . the federal reserve board , however , cannot veto a rule issued by the cfpb , but the financial stability oversight council ( fsoc ) , with the vote of two - thirds of its members , can set aside a cfpb proposed rule . the cfpb is funded through the earnings of the frs , which is not subject to congressional appropriation . the dodd - frank act caps the cfpb's funding at 11% of the frs's operating expense for fy2011 and at 12% thereafter . if the director determines that additional funding is needed , the dodd - frank act provides authorization for an additional $200 million in appropriations per year through fy2014 . the cfpb has the authority to enforce many of the financial consumer laws , primarily for large depository institutions with assets of more than $10 billion as well as some nonbank institutions .