what happened ? nobody knows what happened . i am not intimating that corruption creeps in ; i do not know what creeps in . the point is that not only we do not know , but it is intimated , if we get inquisitive , that it is none of our business . my reply is that it is our business , and it is the business of every man in the state ; we have a right to know all the particulars of that bills history . there is not any legitimate privacy about matters of government . government must , if it is to be pure and correct in its processes , be absolutely public in everything that affects it . i cannot imagine a public man with a conscience having a secret that he would keep from the people about their own affairs . there are private [lawmaking] processes . those are processes that stand between the things that are promised them , and i say that until you drive all things into the open , you are not connected with your government ; you are not represented ; you are not participants in your government . such a scheme of government by private understandings deprives you of representation ; deprives the people of representative institutions . it has got to be put into the heads of legislators that public business is public business . robert luce it may , of course , be said that the public ought to hear every argument addressed to that judgment , whether or not addressed by an outsider or by a fellow member . but is not that purely fanciful ? would it be suggested that no legislator ought ever to converse with a fellow member or anybody else about any measure in hand , unless a reporter were within hearing ? nothing short of that would disclose the particulars of every bill's history , which mr. wilson says we have a right to know . the contention is wholly unpractical , and not justified by any rule of conduct in the daily relations of life . universal experience tells us that in all manner of conference and deliberations , we reach results more speedily and satisfactorily if those persons directly involved are alone . behind closed doors compromise is possible ; before spectators it is difficult . legislators are neither cowards nor tricksters because they deliberate in private . they are but using in the public business those methods that have been found most efficacious and salutary in all the other relations of life . those methods are based on the characteristics of human nature . he who would quarrel with them should not rest until he has changed human nature . the divergent views of wilson and luce about secrecy and transparency surfaced again when the joint select committee on deficit reduction , established by the 112 th congress , began its work . in august 2011 , president obama signed the budget control act ( bca ) into law ( p.l . the statute created a 12-member , bipartisan joint select committee on deficit reduction .