no further action was taken . section 2 of the bill would prohibit all u.s. aid to pakistan except aid that would ensure the security of nuclear weapons . no further action has occurred . section 2 of the bill would prohibit non - security assistance to pakistan including development assistance , economic support funds , global health and child survival assistance , aid from the democracy fund , international disaster assistance , and any provision of law that authorizes the secretary of state to provide a contribution to the international committee of the red cross , assistance to refugees , including contributions to the international organization for migration and the united nations high commissioner for refugees and other activities to meet refugee and migration needs , certain food aid , the $1.5 billion in annual economic assistance to pakistan authorized by the eppa ( p.l . 111-73 ) and any law authorizing contributions to international organizations . section 3 states that security assistance may be provided to pakistan under any provision of law other than those in section 2 above and only during a period for which a certification or recertification is in effect . no further actions were taken . section 2 ( prohibition on assistance to pakistan ) states the following: ( a ) prohibition — assistance may not be provided to pakistan under any provision of law unless the secretary of state certifies to congress that the government of pakistan did not have any information regarding osama bin laden's possible whereabouts on or after september 11 , 2001 ; or if the government of pakistan did have information regarding osama bin laden's possible whereabouts on or after september 11 , 2001 , it communicated such information to the united states government in an expedited manner . ( b ) a certification described shall be submitted in writing and include specific findings and conclusions ; and in unclassified form , but may contain a classified annex if necessary . ( c ) this act shall take effect on the date of the enactment of it and shall apply with respect to amounts allocated for assistance to pakistan that are unexpended on or after such date . the certification must be transmitted by the president to congress . the foreign relations authorization act , 2012 , was introduced on july 19 , 2011 , and amended and reported out of the committee on foreign affairs on september 23 , 2011 . no further action has occurred . as reported in the house , section 1025a of the bill would amend the eppa ( p.l .