appendix a . history of part c risk adjustment payments to private plans under medicare are risk adjusted to account for the variation in the cost of providing health care among medicare beneficiaries . several different models have been used to calculate risk adjustment , each successive model gaining in complexity and explanatory power . this appendix briefly describes the risk adjustment models that are not otherwise discussed in the text of this report . the most recent ( proposed ) model is able to explain approximately 12.5% of the variation in expenditures . adjusted average per capita cost ( aapcc ) prior to payment year 2000 , private plan payments under the medicare+choice ( m+c ) and tefra risk programs — both predecessors to the medicare advantage program — were risk adjusted to account for the effect of certain demographic characteristics . the demographic variables in the aapcc model were age , sex , medicaid enrollment , institutionalized status for nursing home residents , and working aged status representing those medicare beneficiaries 65 years of age and over with employer sponsored insurance as their primary source of coverage . taken together , these demographic data explain less than 1% of the variation in medicare beneficiary expenditures ( see table a - 1 ) . this model did not account for the costs associated with beneficiary health . payments to individual plans were not adjusted for enrolling very ill beneficiaries . however , in the aggregate , private plan enrollees were healthier than enrollees in original medicare , leading to higher payments than if beneficiary health had been taken into account . principal in - patient diagnostic cost group ( pip - dcg ) the balanced budget act of 1997 required cms to implement a risk adjustment methodology that took into account beneficiary health status by no later than january 1 , 2000 . from payment year 2000 through 2003 , cms used the principal inpatient diagnostic cost group ( pip - dcg ) model . in addition to demographic variables , this model took into account , "the worst principal inpatient diagnosis ( principal reason for inpatient stay ) associated with any hospital admission. though , as shown in table a - 1 , the pip - dcg model explained more of the variation in medicare expenditures than the aapcc ( demographic only ) model , it had several limitations . first , illnesses that resulted in higher expenditures but did not result in a hospital admission were not counted in the model . second , any attempt to reduce hospital admissions through , for example , better management of chronic disease , could potentially result in lower risk - adjusted payments . though the pip - dcg model was to be phased - in , subsequent legislation held the phase - in schedule at 90% demographic - only method / 10% pip - dcg method through 2003 , in part to "soften the financial impact of risk adjustment on m+c organizations.