112-96 ) were not offset . while offsets address the issue of long - term fiscal sustainability , depending on design , they can diminish the short - term stimulative effects of the tax cut . having offsets occur after the period of economic weakness has passed could limit short - term contractionary effects while simultaneously promoting long - term fiscal sustainability . offsets that reduce spending , or increase revenues , are contractionary . in addition to the aggregate economic impacts of the offset , there are distributional effects . the percentage increase in after - tax income and the percentage decrease in average federal tax liability is greater for low - and middle - income taxpayers , as compared to the highest - income taxpayers ( see table 1 ) . offsets that reduce income or benefits to low - and middle - income earners , or offsets that otherwise increase taxes , could diminish the potential benefit of the payroll tax rate reduction for affected groups . a number of other issues were considered alongside an extension of the payroll tax rate reduction . extending the 100% bonus depreciation allowance would generate revenue losses . to avoid increasing the deficit , the cost of extending policies such as an extension of the 100% bonus depreciation allowance would require a budgetary offset . ultimately , an extension of the 100% bonus depreciation allowance was not enacted as part of the middle class tax relief and job creation act of 2012 ( p.l . the temporary payroll tax cut continuation act of 2011 ( p.l . 112-78 ) also provided a temporary extension of emergency unemployment compensation and a temporary readjustment of physicians' medicare reimbursements . 112-96 ) and subsequently allowed to expire at the end of 2012 . as part of the agreement on the temporary payroll tax cut continuation act of 2011 , a conference committee was appointed to consider a full - year extension of the payroll tax reduction . in addition to an extension of the payroll tax rate reduction , the conferees also considered a further extension of unemployment benefits and adjusting payments to doctors under medicare . the conference committee agreed to extend the payroll tax rate reduction , emergency unemployment compensation , and physician payments under medicare . short - term fiscal stimulus measures aim to boost economic activity primarily through increases in the demand for goods and services . the final legislation , however , did not fully pay for ( or offset ) these extensions . without stimulative policies the economy would eventually stabilize and recover , but recovery would take longer and the overall disruption to the economy would be greater . the congressional budget office ( cbo ) , in testimony before congress , has identified three key criteria for assessing proposals to stimulate the economy . the criteria are timing , cost - effectiveness , and consistency with long - term fiscal objectives . the following sections evaluate the payroll tax rate reduction using these criteria . extending the two percentage point payroll tax reduction through the end of 2012 cost an estimated $93.2 billion . in considering a further extension of the payroll tax reduction , many proposals include some form of budgetary offset .