that measure was not considered in the senate . in the 112 th congress , senator kay hagan introduced s. 1747 , the computer professionals update act . the legislation would have amended the section 13 ( a ) ( 17 ) exemption to include employees who work in a computer or it occupation as an analyst , programmer , engineer , designer , developer , or other similarly skilled worker and who meet both a job duties and a wage or salary test . administrators would have been included in computer - and it - related occupations . the job duties test would have been expanded to include employees whose primary duty includes the application of network or database analysis techniques . the duties test would have included employees who train or direct the work or lead teams of employees who meet the modified job duties test . as amended , section 13 ( a ) ( 17 ) would have applied to employees in computer - and it - related occupations who are paid on an hourly basis at a rate of at least $27.63 an hour and employees who are paid on a salary basis at a weekly amount provided in regulations ( i.e. , at least $455 a week ) . s. 1747 would have amended 13 ( a ) ( 17 ) of the flsa to exempt ( 17 ) any employee working in a computer or information technology occupation ( including , but not limited to , work related to computers , information systems , components , networks , software , hardware , databases , security , internet , intranet , or websites ) as an analyst , programmer , engineer , designer , developer , administrator , or other similarly skilled worker , whose primary duty is — ( a ) the application of systems , network or database analysis techniques and procedures , including consulting with users , to determine or modify hardware , software , network , database , or system functional specifications ; ( b ) the design , development , documentation , analysis , creation , testing , securing , configuration , integration , debugging , modification of computer or information technology , or enabling continuity of systems and applications ; ( c ) directing the work of individuals performing duties described in subparagraph ( a ) or ( b ) , including training such individuals or leading teams performing such duties ; or ( d ) a combination of duties described in subparagraphs ( a ) , ( b ) , and ( c ) , the performance of which requires the same level of skill ; who is compensated at an hourly rate of not less than $27.63 an hour or who is paid on a salary basis at a salary level as set forth by the department of labor in part 541 of title 29 , code of federal regulations . an employee described in this paragraph shall be considered an employee in a professional capacity pursuant to paragraph ( 1 ) .