these include the u.s . fish and wildlife service ( fws ) , national marine fisheries service ( nmfs ) , and animal and plant health inspection service ( aphis ) . this report summarizes the implementation of the 2008 amendments to the lacey act and discusses policy issues related to the amendments . a raid on gibson guitar corporation ( see box below ) brought to light several existing policy and legal issues related to the 2008 amendments to the lacey act . in broad terms , some question why u.s. importers should be held responsible for violations of foreign law potentially committed by foreign entities ( i.e. , not u.s. importers ) . they claim that it is difficult to monitor the harvesting and processing of plants and plant products in foreign countries to make sure that no foreign laws are being violated . other concerns address specific provisions of the 2008 amendments such as the declaration requirements for plants and plant products imported into the united states . several businesses have suggested that the declaration requirements for importing plants and plant products are cumbersome and in some cases , not possible to meet . for example , some claim that identifying species for the declaration can be difficult for composite wood materials or some finished products where the wood has been modified from its natural state . compliance with other requirements in the act is another issue . some contend that plants and plant products imported before 2008 should be exempt from the law . they note that getting declaration information about these products , sometimes years after importation , can be difficult . to temper these criticisms of the 2008 amendments of the lacey act , some are reiterating the intended positive effects of the amendments , such as the potential economic benefits of reducing illegal logging and the potential environmental benefits of reducing deforestation and corruption associated with the illegal timber trade . congressional interest in this issue stems in part from the wide - reaching applicability of the lacey act for u.s. industries and consumers and the environmental and economic benefits of reducing illegal logging . the 2008 amendments to the lacey act affect all industries that import plant and plant products , including musical instrument makers , furniture manufacturers , flooring companies , toy manufacturers , the auto industry , and some textile manufacturers that use fabrics that contain plant fibers . the 2008 amendments are expected to reduce illegal logging , which will reduce corrupt practices and increase biodiversity and conservation in timber - supplying countries , and increase revenues for foreign and domestic companies that sell and process wood . the 113 th congress has addressed the 2008 amendments with proposed legislation . 3324 would amend the lacey act so that importers would need to possess and make available certain information about the plant or plant products being imported . currently , importers are required to file this information . further , the bill would amend the rulemaking authority of the secretary to give more flexibility for specifying the applicability of declaration requirements . 3280 would amend the lacey act to exempt plants and plant products imported before may 22 , 2008 , from the lacey act .