, is also available . as noted earlier , the federal government's role in siting the keystone xl pipeline is limited to the border crossing facility , although its environmental review considered impacts of the entire project pursuant to nepa . however , some state and local government officials voiced concern regarding the pipeline's proposed route through areas perceived to present safety or environmental issues . at least one state , nebraska , took action in november 2011 , adopting two laws that ( 1 ) carve out a role for the state in siting "major oil pipelines" that run through the state , and ( 2 ) directing collaboration with the state department on a supplemental environmental statement for the proposed pipeline . for this reason , department of state intends to prepare an eis to address reasonably foreseeable impacts from the proposed action and alternatives . a supplemental draft eis was issued in april 2011 , and a final eis in september 2011 . following the decision to reroute the nebraska portion of the pipeline , a draft seis was issued in march 2013 . this new application identified proposed new routes through nebraska . also , on september 5 , 2012 , transcanada submitted this preferred alternate route to the nebraska department of environmental quality . the governor of nebraska approved this new route through the state on january 22 , 2013 . while this process played out at the federal and state administrative level , congress continued to show legislative interest in the pipeline . in addition to title v of the temporary payroll tax cut continuation act of 2011 , several other pieces of legislation were introduced in the 112 th congress to compel expedited review of the keystone xl application . another legislative proposal , the north american energy access act ( h.r . 3548 ) , would have transferred permitting authority over the keystone xl pipeline project from the state department to ferc , and would require the commission to issue a permit for the project within 30 days of enactment . this legislative interest has not abated in the 113 th congress , as multiple bills have been introduced that would effectively supersede the state department's permitting authority and grant a presidential permit for transcanada to construct and operate the border - crossing facility of the keystone xl pipeline , including h.r . meanwhile , on march 1 , 2013 , the state department issued a draft supplemental environmental impact statement ( draft seis ) as required by nepa , evaluating the environmental impacts of the revised proposal . the issuance of this document is followed by a 45-day comment period . after the comment period ends , the state department may issue the final eis , and subsequently a decision on whether to issue the presidential permit . this recent legislative activity intended to direct action on the two keystone xl presidential permit applications appears to represent the first congressional efforts to amend the established executive branch procedure for the permitting of cross - border pipeline facilities , and there is some question as to whether this raises constitutional issues related to the jurisdiction of the two branches over such facilities .