seq . established the position of the director of national intelligence . establishes mission responsibilities for some entities in the intelligence , homeland security , and national security communities . discusses issues related to the collection , analysis , and sharing of security - related information . establishes a privacy and civil liberties board within the executive office of the president . the act does not contain a single reference to cyber , cybersecurity , or related activities . its stated purpose is to "reform the intelligence community and the intelligence and intelligence - related activities of the united states government , and for other purposes. the act contains findings and recommendations offered in the 9 / 11 commission report and other assessments that address national and homeland security shortcomings associated with the terrorist attacks of september 11 , 2001 . numerous organizations , programs , and activities in the act currently address cybersecurity - related issues . irpta addresses many types of risks to the nation and threats emanating from man - made and naturally occurring events . the broad themes of the act could be categorized as how the federal government identifies , assesses , defeats , responds to , and recovers from current and emerging threats . the act might be updated to incorporate cybersecurity - related issues . however , any such update could affect numerous organizations and activities . ch . 263 , 20 stat . restricts the use of military forces in civilian law enforcement within the united states , unless it is within a federal government facility . courts have ruled that violations of the act occur when civilian law enforcement makes "direct active use" of military investigators , when use of the military pervades the activities of the civilian officials , or when the military is used so as to subject citizens to military power that is regulatory , prescriptive , or compulsory in nature . some observers claim that the act prevents the military from cooperating on cybersecurity with civil agencies that may lack the resident expertise and capabilities of the military and dod . in addition , it may sometimes be difficult to distinguish a criminal cyberattack from one involving national defense , especially if the attack is on a component of ci . some have therefore proposed that the act be amended to clarify when u.s. military can operate domestically regarding cyber threats to such infrastructure , most of which is privately owned . others maintain that no revision is needed because the president has the authority under current law to direct the military to support civil authorities in the event of a domestic disaster . a memorandum of agreement signed between dhs and dod and the creation of the united states cyber command's cyber national mission force to protect ci may increase the likelihood that the military would play a significant role in responding to a major cyberattack on u.s. information networks . however , some argue that the defense of u.s. information systems should be solely the purview of civilian agencies such as dhs and the fbi , because involvement of the military creates unacceptable privacy and civil liberties concerns . ch . 647 , 26 stat . ch . 349 , ยง73 , 28 stat .