the current funding authority for the esea expired after fy2007 . legislative action to reauthorize and amend the esea , along with the hqt requirements , has been previously undertaken by congress . legislative proposals have been forwarded and important action has taken place in the committees of jurisdiction in both chambers . several reauthorization proposals would amend the hqt requirement to make accommodations for certain teachers or schools . proposals address issues including multiple subject matter teachers , the definition of subject matter , middle school teachers , and rural , urban , and poor schools . in addition to legislative action , congress is concerned with issues raised by the secretary's recent offer to waive certain nclb requirements , including some associated with teacher quality . in exchange for these waivers , state and local educational agencies must commit to reforming their teacher evaluation systems , among other reforms . this may result in additional focus being placed on teacher performance as opposed to teacher qualifications . the remainder of this report will discuss issues raised by these waivers as well as other issues of interest to congress as it considers reauthorizing the esea . although the analysis in this report indicates that less than one in five teachers cover more than one subject , those who did teach more than one subject were much less likely to be hqt . among multiple subject teachers in this analysis , half did not meet the hqt standard . this small group — fewer than 6% of all teachers — may present a large problem for schools and states attempting to meet the 100% hqt requirement . solutions have been proposed for certain kinds of schools ( such as rural and hard - to - staff schools , discussed below ) ; however , some proposals seek to address the problem for teachers in all schools generally . these amendments would allow teachers teaching multiple subjects to demonstrate knowledge in one subject area using the existing methods and provide a second method for other subject ( s ) taught . for example , multiple subject teachers who are hqt in one of their subjects could be given a certain amount of time to accumulate coursework equivalent to an academic minor in the subject ( s ) for which they lack sufficient knowledge . the issue of multiple subject teachers is in part created by the definition of subject matter in nclb . specifically , section 9101 ( 11 ) of the statute states that , "the term 'core academic subjects' means , english , reading and language arts , mathematics , science , foreign languages , civics and government , economics , arts , history , and geography. as mentioned earlier , ed addressed issues related to science and social studies teachers in its nonregulatory guidance . states were given the authority to determine whether teachers qualified to teach in one field of science or social studies were qualified in other fields in those areas . some have proposed legislative solutions that would recognize "generalist" certificates in these and other areas as proof of subject - matter knowledge . many of the teachers found not to meet the hqt standard are teaching middle school students .