appendix a . the svgp on september 10 , 2014 , epa issued notice of final permit issuance of the svgp for small vessels . this general permit was scheduled to become effective on december 19 , 2014 , unless the existing temporary permit moratorium were extended by congressional action — as in s. 2444 , passed by congress on december 10 ( see " small vessel permit moratorium " ) . by announcing this final permit more than three months ahead of the effective date , epa intended to give affected vessel owners and operators sufficient lead time to meet the permit's requirements . the 2014 svgp was to apply to non - military , non - recreational vessels operating in a capacity of transportation that are less than 79 feet in length . epa estimated that approximately 115,000 to 138,000 domestic and 156 foreign vessels were potentially subject to the svgp . they include various types of commercial fishing vessels , tugs and towing vessels , water taxis and small ferries , tour boats , and various other types of vessels used for non - recreational purposes . approximately 68,000 are commercial fishing vessels , comprising the largest category , which includes vessels involved in fish catching , fish processing , and charter fishing . the second - largest category is "unspecified" vessels ( totaling 27,000 ) , followed by passenger vessels ( 21,000 ) , such as charter fishing vessels and harbor cruise vessels . these vessels were excluded from the 2008 vgp by the initial moratorium in p.l . 110-299 , which congress subsequently extended — most recently to december 18 , 2017 , in s. 2444 . the svgp would have regulated several categories of discharges , including fuel management , engine and oil control , solid and liquid waste management , vessel hull maintenance , graywater , fish hold effluent , and ballast water . it prescribed bmps such as preventive maintenance of engines and fuel tanks to minimize the occurrence of leaks and spills that could release fuel or oil to receiving waters , and the minimization of graywater discharges that may contain soaps and detergents or nutrients into sensitive water bodies and confined waters . most of the practices are already widely implemented by vessels subject to the draft svgp , according to epa . epa concluded that few vessels covered by the svgp are affected by ballast water management requirements , because vessels less than 100 feet long typically do not load and discharge ballast or rely on ballast for stability . however , for vessels less than 79 feet long that do use ballast as a stability enhancer , the svgp prescribed bmps , because in epa's view , no existing treatment systems are believed to have been developed for vessels with these small amounts of ballast water . appropriate ballast water management bmps include avoiding or minimizing ballast water uptake in areas with a high potential to contain harmful organisms and only discharging the minimal amounts of ballast water necessary in u.s. coastal and inland waters . because of the large universe of vessels covered by the svgp , epa determined that requiring all of these vessels to submit an noi would be an extremely large administrative burden .