the senate has not acted on h.r . a senate bill , s. 609 , similar to an earlier version of h.r . 2401 , has also seen no action . for the senate to act on either bill would generally require a favorable report from the committee of jurisdiction ( the senate environment and public works committee ) and the votes of 60 senators in order to get the bill considered on the floor . there is another route , however , that removes the main obstacles to senate action on the regulations: the congressional review act ( cra ) . under the cra , after a rule is final and is transmitted to congress , the congress can consider a resolution of disapproval under special procedures . if a cra resolution disapproving a rule is enacted , the rule cannot take effect , and the agency may not reissue either that rule or any substantially similar one , except under authority of a subsequently enacted law . see figure 2 . in both cases , the low reserve margins appear to have little to do with the utility mact or other epa rules . in 2015 , the ercot region will have 79,415 megawatts ( mw ) of anticipated generation capacity , giving it an anticipated reserve margin of 10.4% . deratings and retirements due to epa rules will have reduced that capacity by only 267 mw ( 0.34% ) , according to nerc . the nerc data suggest that ercot may experience reliability problems , but the emission standards will play a minor role . in new england , nerc reports conflicting information . it begins its analysis by stating: for this 2011 long - term reliability assessment , iso new england inc. ( iso - ne ) forecasts no major reliability issues with respect to fuel supply , availability of both supply or demand - side resources , or the capability of the regional transmission system to serve the projected seasonal peak demands and energy requirements of the six - state new england subregion . following this statement , however , the report shows reserve margins consistently below 15% . as with texas , the low reserve margins would exist even in the absence of the utility mact . nerc finds that the new epa regulations will cause 237 mw of retirements or deratings , 0.7% of the region's 32,649 mw of anticipated capacity . according to nerc , the epa rule will have its biggest impact in three regions known as pjm , miso , and serc - se . these areas cover 12 states in the midwest and mid - atlantic , plus alabama , georgia , the district of columbia , and small parts of four other states . in serc - se , the area that covers georgia and alabama , the retirements and deratings remove 2.7% of anticipated capacity . but none of these areas falls below a 17% reserve margin . the obama administration has made a significant commitment to promulgation of the utility mact and considers it one of the administration's major achievements . as a result , legislation restricting epa's authority to act , if passed by congress , would likely encounter a presidential veto .