program status . they may include . this section addresses the program status and funding of some of the most prominent uas programs being pursued by dod , and most likely to compete for congressional attention . this section does not attempt to provide a comprehensive survey of all uas programs , nor to develop a classification system for different types of uas ( eg , operational vs. developmental , single mission vs. multi mission , long range vs. short range ) . one exception is a short subsection below titled "small uavs. the uavs described in this section are distinguished from the proceeding uavs by being man - portable and of short range and loiter time . these smaller uavs are not currently , and are unlikely to be , weaponized . the services do not provide as detailed cost and budget documentation for these uavs as they do for major uas programs . individually , these uavs appear very popular with ground forces , yet do not necessarily demand as much congressional attention as larger uas programs like predator or global hawk . as a whole , however , these small , man - portable uavs appear likely to increasingly compete with major uas programs for congressional attention and funding . in the mid - 1990s , the pentagon began developing a uas designed primarily for combat missions . the result was two separate unmanned aerial combat vehicles ( ucav ) programs , the air force's ucav and the navy's ucav - n demonstrator program . the air force favored boeing's x - 45 for its program , while northrop grumman's x - 47 pegasus and boeing's x - 46 competed for the navy's project . however , in june 2003 , the pentagon merged the two programs in order to establish the joint unmanned combat air system ( j - ucas ) project under the management of the defense advanced research projects agency ( darpa ) . the objective of the j - ucas merger was to create a flexible offensive network in which the air and ground elements are adapted to meet specific combat missions . as part of program budget decision ( pbd ) 753 in december 2004 , darpa was ordered to transfer administration of the j - ucas resources to air force . j - ucas was cancelled in 2006 . the total money spent on the j - ucas / ucav program , which reached more than $1.45 billion in rdt&e funding , made it one of the most expensive uas ventures undertaken by dod . subsequently , in may 2010 , the navy issued a request for information for a carrier - borne ucav called uclass , seeking ideas on a stealthy strike / surveillance platform that could operate alongside manned aircraft as part of a carrier air wing by the end of 2018 . the notional system would comprise four to six aircraft capable of autonomous operation from nimitz - and ford - class carriers , with an unrefueled endurance of 11-14 hours and the capability for both hose - and - drogue and boom - and - probe aerial refueling .