appendix a . other tools . identified in the appendix of the september 2012 fda report . there are limitations associated with the above sources of information on postmarket problems caused by medical devices . "currently , medical device data arise from disparate data sources with variable data elements , data definitions , data quality , and frequently from only limited subsets of patient exposures. because of these limitations , fda is attempting to create a new resource for all stakeholders — patients , physicians , hospitals , payers , manufacturers , regulators , and other federal entities — involved in the use of medical devices . the september 2012 cdrh report described "fda's vision" for the creation of a national system focused on medical devices that "would augment , not replace , other mechanisms of surveillance such as fda's mdr and medsun. the new national system would conduct "active surveillance in near real - time using routinely collected electronic health information containing unique device identifiers [udis] , quickly [identify] poorly performing devices , accurately [characterize] the real - world clinical benefits and risks of marketed devices , and [facilitate] the development of new devices and new uses of existing devices through evidence generation , synthesis and appraisal. the september 2012 cdrh report proposed four specific actions to strengthen the u.s. medical device postmarket surveillance system: 1. establish a udi system and promote its incorporation into electronic health information ; 2. promote the development of national and international device registries for selected products ; 3. modernize adverse event reporting and analysis ; and 4. develop and use new methods for evidence generation , synthesis , and appraisal . the agency held a series of meetings in september 2012 in order to solicit public comments regarding the u.s. medical device postmarket surveillance system . in a series of subsequent reports , fda and its partners have further refined this vision and provided updates on efforts to move toward the creation of a new national evaluation system for health technology ( nest ) . two reports focus on providing medical devices with a udi that corresponds to the product's manufacturer and model . incorporation of udi into patient electronic health records , health insurance claims , and registries would eventually allow for assessment of medical device performance in large patient populations . the remaining reports discuss recommendations for implementing the system as a whole , including a coordinating center , a seven - year implementation plan and several pilot programs . the cost to implement and maintain the system over the first five years is estimated to be $200 million to $250 million , or about $50 million annually , $25 million from appropriations , and $25 million from user fees . the reports by fda and its partners on the medical device postmarket surveillance system are listed in the text box below . a january 2016 senate health , education , labor and pensions committee minority staff report on antibiotic - resistant infections associated with the use of duodenoscope devices recommends that congress fully fund the national medical device evaluation system .