borders. however , the white house stated that it "will not support legislation that reduces freedom of expression , increases cybersecurity risk , or undermines the dynamic , innovative global internet. several websites , including wikipedia , reddit , and mozilla , participated in a 24-hour shutdown of their webpages on january 18 in order to express their opposition to the protect ip act and sopa . the online protests , increased public awareness and negative opinions concerning the bills , and largely unfavorable media coverage , contributed to several members of congress withdrawing their support for the legislation in its current form . on january 20 , 2012 , senator reid announced that , "in light of recent events," he was postponing the cloture vote that had been scheduled for the protect ip act on january 24 , although he expressed his hope that a compromise could be reached between supporters and opponents of the legislation "in the coming weeks. moments after senator reid's announcement , chairman smith released a statement that the house judiciary committee would similarly postpone consideration of sopa "until there is wider agreement on a solution" to the online piracy problem . the following is a brief summary of the key provisions of s. 968 , as reported in the senate . as introduced , sopa contains two titles: ( 1 ) combating online piracy and ( 2 ) additional enhancements to combat intellectual property theft . prior to the titles are savings and severability clauses . the first savings clause pronounces that "nothing in this act shall be construed to impose a prior restraint on free speech or the press protected under the 1 st amendment to the constitution. the second savings clause explains that nothing in title i of this act shall be construed to enlarge or diminish copyright infringement liability for any cause of action under the copyright act , including any limitations on liability that the copyright act provides . the severability clause explains that if any provision of this act is held to be unconstitutional , the other provisions of the act are not to be affected by that determination . numerous concerns have been raised about the provisions of the protect ip act and sopa by a variety of organizations , including human rights and civil liberties groups , technology companies , law professors , public interest groups , and consumer organizations . these concerns , and the responses by the legislation's supporters ( the bills' sponsors as well as organizations representing intellectual property rights holders , labor unions , and small and large businesses that manufacture and sell goods ) , can be organized broadly into the following categories . as noted earlier in this report , house judiciary chairman lamar smith released a manager's amendment in the nature of a substitute to h.r . 3261 on december 12 , 2011 . the manager's amendment offers several substantial changes to sopa , several of which would more closely align the provisions of sopa with those in the protect ip act , including the following: adds additional savings clauses , including one that clarifies that nothing in title i of sopa shall be construed to impose a duty on service providers to monitor activity on their network or service .