some of those goals are discussed below . while there are a number of goals and potential benefits associated with federal loan guarantees for innovative clean energy technologies and projects , there are also multiple concerns about loan guarantees as an incentive mechanism for clean energy . the congressional budget office ( cbo ) released a background paper in 1978 regarding concerns about loan guarantees for new energy technologies . a brief overview of cbo's paper is provided in the text box at the end of this section . should congress decide to debate the use of loan guarantees , or other government financial tools , as a clean energy deployment support mechanism , several policy options might be explored as a means to achieve clean energy policy objectives . as discussed earlier , a primary goal for loan guarantee programs is to provide a source of capital to projects that may not be able to secure low cost financing in the commercial market . should this continue to be the fundamental objective of this type of incentive mechanism , the following discussion explores some policy options that congress may also choose to consider . in the 112 th congress , the clean energy financing act of 2011 ( s. 1510 ) proposes to create a clean energy deployment administration ( ceda ) within the department of energy . as proposed in s. 1510 , ceda would be able to use financial tools such as direct loans , loan guarantees , and insurance products to support clean energy technology manufacturing and deployment . the bill allows for a portfolio management approach as a way to manage financial risk . s. 1510 also allows the use of "alternative fee arrangements" such as profit participation , stock warrants , and others as a way to potentially reduce the amount of upfront cash fees . programs for such projects typically consist of a small number of projects with large capital requirements . as a result , it is difficult for loan guarantee programs for these types of projects to be actuarially sound because there is not a large enough project pool to spread the risk . while federal credit guidelines require credit subsidy costs ( much like a loan loss reserve ) for loan guarantee projects be collected , these costs are typically paid for through federally appropriated funds . congress has two primary mechanisms for controlling federal loan guarantee programs . first , congress can appropriate funds to pay for credit subsidy costs , and this approach can limit the amount of federally supported loan guarantees once the credit subsidy appropriation has been exhausted . second , congress can stipulate volume limits for loan guarantee programs . for example , congress could limit the total value of loans supported by a certain program to $20 billion . federal loan guarantee authorizations for demonstrating alternative energy technologies date back to the 1970s , when the geothermal energy research , development , and demonstration act of 1974 ( p.l . 93-410 ) authorized loan guarantees for geothermal demonstration facilities . the department of energy act — civilian applications ( p.l . 95-238 ) , which became law in 1978 , authorized the secretary of energy to guarantee loans for alternative fuel demonstration facilities .