some believe that this policy uncertainty made the crisis worse . the rapid shift from market discipline to government assistance during the crisis undermines the future credibility of the pre - crisis policy approach . if policymakers wanted to return to a market discipline approach , making that approach effective would arguably require statutory changes that "tie the hands" of policymakers to make assistance more difficult in the event of a future tbtf failure . this could be accomplished by eliminating broad , open - ended authority that was invoked during the last crisis , such as section 13 ( 3 ) of the federal reserve act and the fdic's systemic risk exception to least cost resolution . policymakers dispute whether dodd - frank act changes that narrow but preserve emergency authority have accomplished this goal . a congress may not bind future congresses , however . policymakers cannot be prevented from enacting future legislation allowing assistance , much as tarp was enacted expeditiously when the crisis worsened in september 2008 . each of these policy approaches to coping with tbtf has strengths and weaknesses ; there is no silver - bullet solution to the problem because future policymakers face incentives to deviate from the approach to avoid crises , please interest groups , increase financial innovation and the availability of credit , and so on . judging the relative merits of each policy approach depends in part on which approach future policymakers can best commit to and effectively carry out . the dodd - frank act devised a strategy to end tbtf that , to varying degrees , incorporated each approach discussed in this report . most of the ongoing requirements have already been implemented , whereas the emergency powers have never been invoked . its attempts to limit the size and scope of firms were narrow and limited , however . some take the fact that many of the largest financial firms have become larger since the crisis ( at least in dollar terms ) as a sign that the tbtf problem has not been solved . the existence of very large firms is necessary but not sufficient evidence that a tbtf problem exists . in principle , the tbtf problem can be eliminated even if large firms do not shrink , but it is difficult to verify success because ultimately , the only definitive test of whether the strategy succeeds is whether the failure of a large firm can be managed without a "bailout" and whether large firms stay healthy in a financial downturn — events that may not occur for years or even decades . some argue for eliminating tbtf directly by reducing the size or scope of the largest firms . it is uncertain what size limit would eliminate tbtf — given that interconnectedness is a nebulous concept — and policymakers would only know if they had set the right size limit by observing what occurs after a firm fails . weighed against the benefits of eliminating the tbtf problem by eliminating large firms , the benefits to the financial system that would be lost are also disputed . in the case of reducing scope , some very large firms would remain , and they would be less diversified against risk .