that was especially true for 2012 . after years of negotiations , the national democratic and republican parties reached agreement on a plan to organize the schedule of primaries and caucuses and reduce front - loading . in recent election cycles , the iowa and new hampshire contests had been pushed from february into january , under pressure from other states that sought a place at the beginning of the process . democratic party rules usually kept these states from jumping ahead of iowa and new hampshire , but did not prevent a rush to schedule early events within the rules . inter - party cooperation averted a similar result for 2012 , which featured a significantly less front - loaded calendar . another development that shaped the nominating contest was a change to the republican rules for awarding delegates according to the presidential vote . the winner - take - all method that had been widely used was replaced with a proportional system for contests before april 1 , although strict proportional allocation was not mandated . with an open race for the republican nomination , the pace of primaries and caucuses and the new allocation rule had an important effect by extending the contest in comparison to past nominating seasons . significant changes in campaign finance law are expected to shape campaign finance in the 2012 election cycle . iowa and other caucus states that held events ahead of the march 6 start date were not penalized because the results were not binding . similarly , missouri's february 7 primary was not binding as well . finally , the calendar and rule changes also led to speculation that no candidate would accumulate a majority of delegates by the end of the primary season , resulting in a brokered convention . others suggested that only one of the candidates could prevail by the end of the primary season . while there were mixed views about how long the contest would go on and how it would end , many party leaders decried the changes brought about by the new rules and argued that they would damage the nominee in the general election . at the 2012 convention , the party adopted two rules changes that will potentially affect the contest in 2016 . the first change will bind delegates to primary and caucus outcomes and was strenuously opposed by supporters of representative ron paul , while the second allows the party to change rules between elections , rather than only at the quadrennial conventions . campaigning for the presidency requires more money today than ever before . raising funds increasingly requires highly professional campaign staffs , typically supplemented with fundraising consultants and assistance — where permissible — from national party committees . the money raised is spent on every facet of the campaign , particularly political advertising , which is typically a national campaign's largest budget item . purchasing broadcast airtime to run political ads is especially expensive in major media markets . even without high airtime costs , the advertising must be produced ( usually through the services of professional media consultants ) , polls must be commissioned to track the campaign's popularity and messages , and all sorts of everyday operational costs must be met .