•    transparency . metcalf argued that transparency helps guarantee evaluation independence . klerman described the possibility of an "appropriate balance" that included a third party . related to the ongoing evaluation of the recovery act period ( 2009-2011 ) , the doe ig issued a progress report and gao has contributed a major performance audit . is that sufficient third party involvement ? otherwise , what objective indicators should be used to gauge the sufficiency of third party involvement for each evaluation ? is there an optimum degree of third party involvement ? the debate between metcalf and reingold produced some other ideas for establishing independence of the evaluation function . one notable strategy suggests using other ( third party ) organizations to play a more central role in managing the program evaluation process . reingold suggests: ideally , congress , the gao , and perhaps the national academy of sciences [national research council] could play a more active role in screening and selecting evaluation plans and firms . was the selection of deloitte and apprise competitive ? what objective indicators should be used to gauge the competitiveness of the selection process ? is there an optimum degree of selection process competitiveness ? will this dimension be fulfilled by the public release of the three final reports ? otherwise , what objective indicators should be used to gauge transparency for each evaluation ? is there an optimum degree of transparency ? •    third party involvement . three variations on this strategy , in increasing order of dependence on the outside agency are: ( 1 ) have the doe office of the inspector general ( doe ig ) or gao or congressional budget office ( cbo ) ensure that the third party contractor evaluation work is performed in an independent manner . ( 2 ) move the contractor ( evaluator ) selection process from the agency to the office of the inspector general , gao , cbo , or the national research council ( nrc ) . ( 3 ) transfer full responsibility for conduct of the evaluation to the doe ig , gao , cbo , or nrc . appendix a. doe weatherization program: historical data appendix b. doe weatherization funding chart figure b - 1 , below , shows the entire history of annual requests and appropriations for the doe weatherization assistance program ( wap ) . requested amounts for fy1977 , fy1978 , and fy1979 were not available . a final fy2012 appropriation figure had not yet been determined at the time this report was prepared . and ( 2 ) who controls the content and the dissemination of the research product ? these questions are typically defined by the contract , and the rights no longer lie intrinsically with the institution nor , by extension , with the researchers it employs to conduct the research . further , he claims that there is an increased tendency for researchers and clients to agree explicitly , in advance , on the research methodology and the scope of reports . this process tends to protect the client ( agency ) from unexpected surprises , and protects the researcher ( contractor ) by allowing less "wiggle room" for the client to reinterpret results .