other factors may complicate cooperation . for example , the united states and the eu have differing views on regulatory policy and standards , and some view u.s. and eu businesses as competitors in the mena region . finally , some of these countries already have strong economic ties with the eu and want to develop closer economies ties with the united states , as was the case with the u.s. - morocco fta . for example , present ustr engagement with egypt is centered on making the country's business environment more conducive to trade and investment . such efforts could pave the way for fta negotiations in the future , though this is not necessarily a current goal for the administration . going forward , any trade policy agenda pursued by u.s. policymakers in the region could be affected by a host of external factors , including the following: u.s. trade and investment relationships in the region are diverse , resulting in different "starting points" for engagement . at one end of the spectrum , libya is not yet a member of the wto , which many view as a starting point for further u.s. engagement . at the other end of the spectrum , the united states has well - established trade relationships with morocco and jordan — which include a bilateral fta with each country — that serve as a foundation for the recent bilateral agreements on principles on investment and ict services under the mena - tip . countries in the region have markedly diverse economic situations and priorities . some countries , such as egypt , are more focused on maintaining macroeconomic stability over the short term , delaying longer - term initiatives , including trade and investment liberalization . other countries with more stable economic conditions may be able to engage more effectively with the united states on trade policy issues . ongoing political uncertainty in some countries can make it challenging to negotiate on trade policy — or even , more fundamentally , know with whom to negotiate . for instance , despite the long - standing u.s. - egyptian bilateral relationship , it is difficult for u.s. trade negotiators to know with whom to negotiate on the egyptian side , given the fluid nature of egypt's political situation . as another example , political uncertainty also can make it more difficult for foreign commercial service staff to operate in the region . in contrast , tunisia's relatively "smoother" transition has facilitated u.s. engagement with tunisia under the re - invigorated tifa process . u.s. trade policy responses are affected by the demand of u.s. companies for doing business in certain areas of the world . while agencies such as opic , ex - im bank , and tda can choose to make supporting u.s. commercial activity in the region a top priority and make resources available for this purpose , u.s. businesses will take advantage of the financing and funding only if they have sufficient commercial incentives to do so .