dispositions. the plan does not specify a particular location within the united states where detainees would be housed ( although it states 13 possible sites have been identified ) , but emphasizes the attorney general's 2014 conclusion that relocation to the united states would not risk ascribing to transferees additional rights under the u.s. constitution or immigration laws . ( this analysis , required by section 1039 of the national defense authorization act for fy2014 , is attached as an appendix to the plan ) . predicting that the closure of the detention facility will save between $140 million and $180 million over fy2015 operating costs , the plan lays out how the administration hopes to resolve the disposition of the 91 detainees remaining at guantanamo bay . the u.s. government , it says , is pursuing three lines of effort: identifying transfer opportunities for detainees designated for transfer ; continuing to review the threat posed by those detainees who are not currently eligible for transfer and who are not currently facing military commission charges ; and continuing with ongoing military commissions prosecutions and , for those detainees who remain designated for continued law of war detention , identifying individualized dispositions where available , including military commission prosecution , transfer to third countries , foreign prosecutions or , should congress lift the ban on transfers to the united states , transfer to the united states for prosecution in article iii courts and to serve sentences . the administration predicts that a "limited number" of detainees will not be suitable candidates for transfer or prosecution , and hopes to persuade congress to permit their continued detention somewhere within the continental united states . of the 91 detainees remaining at the guantanamo detention facility , 35 have been determined to be eligible for transfer ; 29 of these are yemeni nationals ; 7 non - eligible detainees are in the pretrial phase of military commissions proceedings ; 2 have pleaded guilty and are awaiting sentencing ; and 22 other non - eligible detainees were initially referred by the guantanamo review task force for prosecution and might yet be prosecuted either by military commission or , in the event transfer prohibitions are lifted , in an article iii court . the report suggests that 30-60 detainees will fall into the category requiring continued detention pursuant to the aumf . the plan has come under criticism from some members , primarily because it failed to identify a specific location in the united states considered most suitable for securing detainees transferred to the united states . shortly after h.r . 4435 was passed by the house and s. 2410 was ordered reported by the senate armed services committee , the united states transferred five taliban detainees from guantanamo to qatar as part of an exchange to effectuate the release of u.s. army sergeant bowe bergdahl , who had been held captive by taliban - affiliated forces for several years . in completing this prisoner exchange , the executive did not comply with notification requirements contained in section 1035 of the 2014 ndaa , which required it to notify congress at least 30 days before a detainee transfer occurs .