leadership transition . north korea's power centers appear to be consolidating around kim jong - un , at least as the country's nominal leader . the most tangible sign of this occurred on december 30 , when a key organ of the communist party ( officially the workers' party of korea , or wpk ) met and selected kim as "supreme commander" of the north korean military ( officially , the korean people's army , or kpa ) . although north korean propaganda outlets have been routinely referring to kim jong - un as "supreme leader" since kim jong - il died , this move by the wpk was the first actual position to be bestowed upon the younger kim since . for the future , an indicator north korea experts are watching is whether kim jong - un is named to other key positions , particularly chairman of the national defense commission and / or general secretary of the wpk secretariat . kim jong - il held both titles , and used the national defense commission as his institutional base of power . north korea's diplomacy . instability in north korea would pose a number of challenges and possibly threats to the united states , south korea , and the region . perhaps the most worrisome are the possibilities that controls over north korea's nuclear materials might loosen , that a weak leadership in pyongyang could lash out militarily , and that a power vacuum could suck u.s. , south korean , and chinese military forces into north korea . in the coming months , both stabilizing and destabilizing dynamics will be operating simultaneously inside north korea . it is likely that that cohesive tendencies will predominate in the short run , as members of the ruling elite rally around kim jong - un , as has been seen by members of the ruling elite paying their respects to the new ruler in the days since his father's death . in particular , most analysts expect that the regime collective will strive to maintain unity at least until april 2012 , when the country is planning to celebrate the 100 th anniversary of the birth of founder kim il - sung . however , over time , few would be surprised if tensions were to mount among the power centers of the north korean system . traditionally , the united states has had a number of goals with respect to north korea , including limiting if not curtailing north korea's ability to sell its nuclear and long - range missile technology , rolling back or containing its nuclear and missile programs , detering an attack on south korea , and improving the lives of the average north korean people . kim jong - il's death can be viewed as something of a rorschach test for one's opinion of north korea policy . many who were inclined to favor negotiating with north korea will likely argue that recent developments present an opportunity for engagement , while those seeking a harder - line approach will strongly disagree . the united states faces a range of options , many of which are not necessarily mutually exclusive , but all of which entail risks .