, recidivism is down ) . estimates based on enforcement and survey data and accounting for estimated apprehension and deterrence rates suggest that total unauthorized inflows in 2009-2011 were well below levels observed in the two decades after irca's passage , but that unauthorized inflows increased somewhat in 2012 . this section reviews trends in each of these areas . for 90 years , the border patrol has recorded the number of deportable migrants apprehended in the united states ; and migrant apprehensions remain the agency's primary indicator of immigration enforcement . the agency also collects several additional measures of immigration enforcement , including unique apprehensions , migrant recidivism , and estimated turn backs and got aways . these enforcement outcomes provide insight into the state of the border , as discussed in this section , but they confront certain limitations when it comes to estimating unauthorized border inflows ( see " metrics of border security " ) . while the border patrol has data on various enforcement outcomes , these enforcement data were not designed to measure overall border security or unauthorized inflows . furthermore , enforcement data depends on enforcement resources . in general , usbp enforcement outcomes ( eg , apprehensions , estimated got aways ) are a function of ( 1 ) the underlying unauthorized flows and ( 2 ) the agency's ability to detect such flows . enforcement data alone cannot disentangle these two factors . as a result , enforcement data may tend to overestimate unauthorized flows where resources are robust , and to under - estimate such flows where resources are scarce . thus , dhs officials have testified that current enforcement data do not offer a suitable metric to describe border security . given the limits of existing border enforcement data , over time , dhs and usbp have developed different metrics for estimating unauthorized border flows and describing border security . border security metrics are used at both the strategic and operational levels . at the strategic level , dhs uses metrics to understand its ability to meet border security objectives . the department is currently working to develop a new metric of border security , the unauthorized flow of migrants into the united states . the estimate will be generated through the use of the repeated trials method , also known as the capture - recapture method . additionally , dhs also reports two other metrics of border security on its annual performance reports . first , the percentage of people apprehended multiple times along the southwest border , or the recidivism rate , is used to capture usbp's ability to deter migrants from re - entering the united states . second , the rate of interdiction effectiveness along the southwest border between ports of entry , or the effectiveness rate , measures usbp's ability to apprehend unauthorized migrants . at the operational level , usbp conducts risk assessments that use a range of metrics . its methodology , "state of the border risk methodology," estimates the magnitude of risk through the use of intelligence information , a detailed awareness of threats at the border , and a standardized measure of risk .