this request was denied by dol . in a letter to the office of management and budget , the ranking members of house committees on education and the workforce and oversight and government reform expressed their concerns over costs associated with compounded medications in the feca program and cited , as examples , a single tube of a compounded ointment that cost over $67,000 and a compounded cream containing resveratrol that cost over $32,000 per prescription . on october 14 , 2016 , owcp announced new guidelines for the prescription and dispensing of compounded medications in the feca program . these new guidelines require that all compounded prescriptions receive prior authorization from owcp based on a letter of medical necessity ( lmn ) submitted by the claimant's treating physician . each compounded prescription may be authorized for no more than a 30 day supply for a total of 90 days . after 90 days , a new lmn and authorization is required to continue the use of the compounded medication . state workers' compensation programs have seen success at using policy reforms , including prior authorization reforms similar to those adopted by owcp , to reduce the use and costs associated with compounded medications . express scripts , a pharmacy benefit manager ( pbm ) , reports that new state policies on compounded medications have contributed to a 62.3% decrease in workers' compensation spending on compounded drugs since 2014 . the federal tricare program reports similar costs savings after implementing restrictions changes to its coverage of compounded drugs in may 2015 with monthly spending on compounded medications dropping from $497 million in april 2015 to $10 million in june 2015 . it should be noted , however , that many of the state reforms associated with savings on compounded medications included provisions such as reimbursement caps , drug formularies , and the mandatory use of pbms that are not components of the new owcp guidelines . in addition , the tricare strategy includes the use of a proprietary list of compounded medication ingredients , developed by express scripts , the tricare pbm , that are excluded from coverage . appendix a. feca scheduled benefits appendix b . legislative history of feca the feca program has its origins in a law from the late 1800s that covered only the employees of a federal agency that has long since ceased to exist on its own . the modern feca system has its roots in legislation enacted in 1916 ; many of the basic provisions of this original law , such as the basic rate of compensation , are still in effect today . congress passed major amendments to the 1916 legislation in 1949 , 1960 , 1966 , and most recently in 1974 . although these amendments made significant changes to the feca program , the basic framework of the program endures as does the overall intent of congress through the years to maintain a workers' compensation system for federal employees that is in line with the basic principles that have governed workers' compensation in this country for a century .