this has led to an erosion of the corporate tax base . and third , corporate sector profitability has fallen over time , leading to a further erosion of the corporate tax base . as congress considers options for tax reform , background on the decline in corporate tax revenue could prove useful in preserving any tax reforms enacted , or structuring a reform to obtain a desired revenue effect , such as revenue neutrality or enhancement . the house committee on ways and means and the senate committee on finance have held hearings on tax reform throughout the first session of the 112 th congress . this report discusses the three main factors for the decline . first , the average effective corporate tax rate has decreased over time , mostly due to reductions in the statutory rate and changes affecting the tax treatment of investment and capital recovery ( depreciation ) . second , an increasing fraction of business activity is being carried out by partnerships and s corporations , which are not subject to the corporate income tax . in his 2011 state of the union address the president called for corporate tax reform that did not add to the deficit . generally , the corporate tax reform discussion has focused on reducing statutory rates and achieving revenue neutrality through broadening the tax base by eliminating various deductions , exemptions , and credits , among other things , such as shifting to a territorial tax system . this report begins by documenting the decline in corporate tax revenue . an analysis of the three main factors explaining this decline is then presented . the data and calculations used in this report may be found in the appendix . the analysis in this report focuses only on nonfinancial corporations for two reasons . first , nonfinancial corporations are the firms primarily affected by investment - and depreciation - related tax changes since they account for the majority of physical capital investment . second , the bulk of revenue that is generated from the corporate tax comes from taxing nonfinancial companies . corporate tax revenues are low by historical standards . in the post - world war ii era , corporate tax revenue as a share of gross domestic product ( gdp ) peaked in 1952 at 6.1% and generally declined since ( see figure 1 ) . today , the corporate tax generates revenue equal to approximately 1.3% of gdp , although projections ( not shown here ) have the corporate tax raising revenue over 2.4% of gdp in several years as the economy recovers and temporary bonus depreciation provisions expire . while corporate tax revenues have fallen , overall federal tax revenues have remained relatively stable , averaging around 17.7% of gdp since 1946 ( aside from business cycle fluctuations ) . revenues generated from the individual tax have exhibited similar relative stability , averaging around 8.1% of economic output . the analysis presented below suggests that both factors have played a role in the decline in revenues generated by the corporate tax . corporate tax revenues have been declining for the last six decades . the analysis in this report points to three primary factors responsible for the decline .