the motion is not debatable . a senator may interrupt another senator to make the motion and may cause the other senator to lose the floor . once in a secret session , the senate operates under applicable portions of senate rules xxix and xxxi . rule xxix specifies which of the senate's officers and staff may stay during the closed session and authorizes the presiding officer to include other staff at his discretion . rule xxxi requires senate business to be transacted in open session , but states that the senate by majority vote may determine that a specific treaty , nomination , or other matter may be considered in secret session . a motion to return to open session is in order at any time , is not debatable , and requires a simple majority vote , a quorum being present . when the senate is conducting an impeachment trial , it may hold deliberations behind closed doors . during this time , senate standing rules are supplemented by additional rules , called "rules of procedure and practice in the senate when sitting on impeachment trials. members and staff of both houses are prohibited from divulging information from secret sessions . in the senate , staff are sworn to secrecy , whereas in the house , staff must sign an oath not to reveal what happens in the secret session , unless the house decides to make its actions public . violations of secrecy are punishable by the disciplinary rules of a chamber . a member may be subject to a variety of punishments , including loss of seniority , fine , reprimand , censure , or expulsion . an officer or employee may be fired or subject to other internal disciplinary actions . the proceedings of a secret session are not published unless the relevant chamber votes , during the meeting or at a later time , to release them . then , those portions released are printed in the congressional record . under rule xvii , if the house decides not to release the transcript of a secret session , the speaker refers the proceedings to the appropriate committee ( s ) for evaluation . the committees are required to report to the house on their ultimate disposition of the transcript . if a committee decides not to release the transcript , it becomes part of the committee's noncurrent records ( pursuant to house rule vii , clause 3 ) and is transferred to the clerk of the house for transmittal to the archivist of the united states at the national archives and records administration . transcripts may be made available to the public after 30 years unless the clerk of the house determines that such availability "would be detrimental to the public interest or inconsistent with the rights and privileges of the house" ( rule vii , clauses 3 and 4 ) . if the senate does not approve release of a secret session transcript , it is stored in the office of senate security and ultimately sent to the national archives and records administration . the proceedings remain sealed until the senate votes to remove the injunction of secrecy .