not all countries compile information on each subject . manufacturing value added amounted to 12% of total u.s. gross domestic product ( gdp ) in 2016 . manufacturing is more significant in the united states , relative to the size of the economy , than in the united kingdom , france , and canada , but much less important than in japan , indonesia , germany , china , and south korea ( see figure 3 ) . the manufacturing share of total economic output in china declined from 32% in 2010 to 27% in 2016 , while the share of manufacturing in the u.s. economy remained relatively stable . in this respect , it is important to note that a high ratio of manufacturing value added to gdp is not necessarily a sign of economic vibrancy . to the contrary , a high ratio may indicate that various policies or practices , such as labor regulations , credit subsidies , or protection from imports , are standing in the way of a reallocation of capital and labor from manufacturing to other sectors in which they might contribute more to economic growth . it does not describe or discuss specific policy options . the charts and tables on the pages that follow depict the position of the united states relative to other major manufacturing countries according to various metrics . this report draws on data from a number of sources , and has certain unavoidable statistical problems of which the reader should be aware . despite meaningful progress in standardization , countries define "manufacturing" in different ways . some associate manufacturing with factory production , while others may label a self - employed artisan as a manufacturing worker . some countries have sophisticated sampling systems to collect data about production and employment from firms and households , whereas others rely heavily on estimates drawn from macroeconomic models or collect data only from a non - random subset of enterprises . international comparisons of compensation data are especially difficult because of national differences in taxation and employee benefits . complicating matters further , the organizations that compile statistics obtained from national governments may adjust the raw data in different ways to improve compatibility , such that certain figures used to prepare this report may not be identical to those published by national statistical services . additionally , analysis of trends in manufacturing is complicated by often arbitrary distinctions between manufacturing and non - manufacturing activity . if , for example , a manufacturing firm owns the trucks that deliver its goods , statisticians may count the truck drivers as manufacturing - sector workers , and their wages may be included in manufacturing value added . if the manufacturer instead contracts with a separate trucking company to deliver its goods , statisticians will consider the truck drivers to be transport - sector workers and their wages will be included in transport - sector value added , making the manufacturing sector appear smaller — even though there has been no change in the total amount of labor or the tasks performed . all of these factors argue for caution in the use of these data , and warn against unwarranted assumptions of precision .