this provision was again included in the senate bill . the house draft bill proposed to prohibit fta from signing any agreement with a federal share of more than 50% . this is due to several factors . route reductions by airlines have resulted in an average of six new communities joining the program each year in recent years . also , there is a requirement that planes servicing eas communities must have , at a minimum , capacity to carry 15 passengers . critics of this requirement note that smaller planes would be cheaper to operate and that the number of passengers at many eas airports could be handled by smaller planes . the administration proposed to limit fy2012 funding in the program to those communities which received subsidies in fy2011 ( the same proposal was made for the fy2011 budget , seeking to limit recipients to those funded in fy2010 ) , and to eliminate the 15-passenger aircraft requirement . the senate - passed bill supported both of these proposals . the house draft bill supported the limit on new recipients . the governors said their states could not afford the costs of improving or building and maintaining rail lines that would likely require ongoing operating support . the conference agreement included both administration proposals . it also included a provision barring any efforts to implement a plan that would require eas communities to assume the costs of the subsidies they require ( "local participation" ) ; this provision has been included in dot appropriation acts since the "local participation" program was created in 2003 . the budget proposed $5 billion for a national infrastructure bank . the bank would provide loans or grants to finance transportation projects having national or regional significance . such projects , such as major bridges on the interstate highways system , are often difficult to build under the current structure of transportation funding , because they benefit the residents of many states but their costs fall on the residents of the state in which the project is located . in the past , such projects have sometimes been financed through specific funding designations ( earmarks ) by congress . the national infrastructure bank would , according to the administration , provide a means for such projects to be evaluated and for the most productive projects to be selected and financed . legislation to implement this proposal was not enacted , and the proposal was not funded by the house draft , the senate - passed bill , or the conference agreement . the budget proposed $4 billion for high speed and intercity passenger rail development under a new account , network development . this was described as the first installment of a proposed six - year , $53 billion program . high speed and intercity passenger rail development is seen as a way of creating new jobs ; providing a new transportation option for intercity travel ; and increasing the capacity , competitiveness , and environmental sustainability of the transportation system . to date , congress has provided $10.1 billion for dot's high speed and intercity passenger rail grant program , beginning with $8 billion in the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 .