ambassadors . appendix e examines proposals to create or improve interagency personnel policies and mechanisms . the appendices exclude discussion and proposals concerning specific field or program level interagency issues ( such as those involving the structure and operation of provincial reconstruction teams ) and proposals to strengthen the capacity of individual agencies and departments , other than the interagency role of the state department . they also do not include proposals that already have been implemented . enhance the military geographic combatant commands ( gccs ) most reform at the regional level to date has focused on enhancing the gccs . the u.s. africa command ( africom ) , created in 2008 as a model for interagency organization as mentioned above , set the standard for civilian integration into military geographic commands . however , there has been continued work to improve the model , and about the time that command was created , rand and the american academy of diplomacy offered further suggestions for enhancing civilian input into gccs , as well as other dod units ( table c - 6 ) . nonetheless , some analysts are skeptical that combatant commands will be able to attract sufficient personnel from civilian agencies to operate with the degree of interagency integration originally envisioned for africom . the obama administration pledged in the qddr to support gccs in a number of ways: making available senior ambassador - ranked personnel as civilian deputies in addition to existing foreign policy advisors , providing usaid high - level development advisors where appropriate , and , "consistent with personnel availability," detailing mid to senior - level state and usaid personnel to gccs . create new civilian regional structures a few analysts advocate creating new civilian regional structures ( table c - 7 ) . some would make the military commands subordinate to them . while none of the think tank studies surveyed for this report advanced proposals for civilian regional "command," one study by an air force officer argues for new state department - led regional - level interagency organizations . two experts on interagency organization propose that chief of mission authority be expanded to provide appropriate leadership for civilian - led interagency teams that could be used at the regional level , as well as elsewhere . the obama administration , in the 2010 qddr , states its intention to establish "regional hubs" in some embassies , creating a home base for personnel dedicated to regional programs in cross - cutting issue areas who will travel to posts throughout the region ( table c - 7 ) . this is a key reform in its plan to improve the state department and usaid ability "to think and act regionally. the qddr states that regional hubs will offer "cost savings over deploying such experts to every bilateral mission. in a related action , the administration stated it would improve regional communication among bilateral posts . it would also create a new state department "regional forum" under the state department under secretary for political affairs , where representatives from relevant agencies would "meet regularly to coordinate regional initiatives and proposals. review and augment civilian personnel authority and capacity only a few studies surveyed here have explicitly recommended reviewing or increasing civilian personnel authorities and capacity .