they are not an exhaustive summary of either agreement . stakeholder views on the klamath agreements can broadly be divided into those supporting the agreements and those opposed to one or both of the agreements . however , such a simple characterization may not do justice to the motivation and preferences of many groups . while a majority of interest groups involved in initial settlement negotiations endorsed both agreements , reasons for support among these groups are varied , and in some cases are likely to be contingent on specific parts of one agreement or another ( eg , water certainty , dam removal ) going forward . among those opposed to the agreements , reasons for opposition also vary widely , and include perceptions of economic damages resulting from the agreements , overall lack of environmental protections and / or subversion of existing federal or state laws . as previously discussed , both klamath agreements require congressional authorization to move forward , and companion bills to authorize the klamath agreements have been introduced in the 112 th congress in both the house and senate ( h.r . 3398 and s. 1851 , respectively ) . the bills authorize the agreements by reference , and reinforce other provisions in the agreements , seemingly without significant changes to the contents of the agreements . if it chooses to consider these bills , congress might focus on a number of issues , including whether it endorses the strategies and specific actions ( eg , dam removal , water allocations , restoration actions , and aid for tribal and local interests ) in the agreements . in addition to deciding whether it agrees with the strategies / actions themselves , congress might also consider the broader obligation of the federal government to act on the agreements , and whether federal expenditures on these actions are justified ( and if so , how much ) . to many , the klamath agreements represent a potential solution to a series of conflicts between a complex array of interest groups with a history of conflicting values and perspectives . to others , they represent an unfair and unnecessary resolution to contentious issues that should be solved in other venues . the ability of the two interrelated agreements to solve long - term issues in the klamath basin will depend on a number of factors , including complex ecological and hydrological processes that are not fully understood . in considering the preferred course of action in the klamath basin , congress may weigh these factors along with the potential costs and benefits of implementing the agreements , and how they compare to other potential scenarios . appendix a. klamath basin fish species appendix b . summary of previous events the 2001 "water crisis" recent controversies in the klamath basin have resulted from the interaction of reclamation's annual operation of the klamath project for irrigation with other purposes and legal considerations — specifically , the appropriate levels of and releases from upper klamath lake — and the effect of that operation on threatened and endangered species in the basins .