the system is working . democratic institutions are working. russian officials denounced the osce's preliminary report as biased and hypocritical , but seemed to focus their ire on a statement by secretary clinton ( see below ) . united russia's control of over 50% of the seats and the leadership positions assure the passage of legislation it supports . some analysts suggest that united russia will need to seek allies in the duma in order to pass legislation changing the constitution , which requires a 60% vote . others discount this as a serious impediment , since the ldpr in particular has usually supported united russia on major issues . debate and the tenor of legislation may be affected , however . the minority parties that gained seats in the duma are socialist - nationalist parties , reflecting increasing "leftist" and nationalist views among the public , according to some polls . the obama administration selectively has praised russia for respecting human rights and the rule of law in some areas , but also has stressed that serious problems remain . in the run - up to the election , the administration mostly avoided open calls for free and fair polling , but reportedly about $9 million in u.s. assistance was provided over several months for voter education and other non - partisan efforts to enhance the electoral environment . the day after the duma election , on december 5 , 2011 , secretary of state clinton stated that the united states has "serious concerns about the conduct of the elections," as detailed in the osce observers' preliminary report , including ballot - box stuffing . she stated that "we are also concerned by reports that independent russian election observers , including the nationwide golos network , were harassed , had cyber attacks on their websites , totally contrary to what should be the protected rights of people to observe elections and participate in them and disseminate information. she averred that she was "proud" of golos and other russians who attempted to bring about a fair and free and credible election , and that "russian voters deserve a full investigation of all credible reports of electoral fraud and manipulation. prime minister putin retorted that he considered secretary clinton's comments to be a "signal" to the russian opposition to "begin active work," with state department help , to foment unrest . he stated that it was "unacceptable" that "foreign money is pumped into electoral processes," and called for new laws to limit such alleged funding . secretary clinton responded to putin on december 8 by stating that while the united states values its relationship with russia , "the united states and many others around the world have a strong commitment to democracy and human rights.... we expressed concerns that we thought were well - founded ... and we are supportive of the rights and aspirations of the russian people...." the white house also responded that the united states would continue to speak out about human rights violations in russia and elsewhere and would continue to seek engagement both with the russian government and with civil society groups .