there shall be no suspension of transit passage. the general provisions ( arts . 34-36 ) establish the legal status of waters forming straits and scope of application . the remaining articles in part iii identify the legal regimes of transit passage and innocent passage , including the rights and duties of transiting vessels as well as the rights and duties of states bordering the straits . transit passage is defined as "the exercise in accordance with this part of the freedom of navigation and overflight solely for the purpose of continuous and expeditious transit of the strait between one part of the high seas or an exclusive economic zone and another part of the high seas or an exclusive economic zone. this is primarily exports from qatar to europe and asia . the united states imports little lng . the persian gulf is also home to the world's spare oil production capacity . current estimates for global spare oil production capacity tend to be around 2 to 3 mb / d . opec members hold spare capacity as a result of their market management strategy . basically all of this spare capacity is held by persian gulf oil producers — mostly saudi arabia , with small amounts in kuwait and the united arab emirates . spare capacity is viewed as a cushion to the oil market which can be used to offset supply disruptions . however , given its location , this spare capacity would not be available to offset a disruption to the strait of hormuz . there is little ability for oil shipments to bypass the strait through alternative routes , particularly in the short - run . according to reports , saudi arabia could redirect 1.5 mb / d of oil currently exported through the persian gulf to terminals on its red sea coast through unutilized capacity currently available on its east - west pipeline . a 1.5 mb / d pipeline to bypass the strait is being built in the united arab emirates , but it is not likely to be completed until the middle of 2012 . several other pipelines that ran through iraq and saudi arabia to the mediterranean and red sea export facilities have been out of operation for many years , and it is unclear how readily they could be returned to operation . a disruption of oil through the strait of hormuz could significantly affect global oil prices . though most of the flows through the strait go to asia , the oil market is globally integrated and a disruption anywhere can contribute to higher oil prices everywhere . a disruption of oil exported from the persian gulf to asia would leave asian refineries bidding for oil from alternative sources elsewhere . due to the wide number of relevant variables , there is significant uncertainty on how much a disruption could contribute to higher crude oil prices . while disruption risks in the past may have contributed to prices being higher than they might have otherwise been , actual iran - related events have not necessarily resulted in clear and significant price increases ex - post ( see table 1 ) .