i unhesitatingly answer this by saying no . under the constitution neither house can adjourn for more than three days without the consent of the other . in 1993 , a brief submitted by the department of justice in the case of mackie v. clinton articulated this argument more fully . arguing that the recess during which the recess appointment at issue in the case was made was of sufficient length , the brief stated , if the recess here at issue were of three days or less , a closer question would be presented . the constitution restricts the senate's ability to adjourn its session for more than three days without obtaining the consent of the house of representatives... . it might be argued that this means that the framers did not consider one , two and three day recesses to be constitutionally significant.… apart from the three - day requirement noted above , the constitution provides no basis for limiting the recess to a specific number of days . whatever number of days is deemed required , that number would of necessity be completely arbitrary . pursuant to the adjournments clause , congress generally provides for an intrasession recess of more than three days by adopting a concurrent resolution . this form of measure is appropriate for each house to consent to a recess of the other , because it requires adoption by both houses , but not action by the president . these resolutions typically specify the date or range of dates on which each of the chambers will adjourn and the date upon which each chamber will reconvene . practices implemented unilaterally by the senate the logic of the argument laid out in the department of justice brief appears to underlie congressional practices that were first implemented during the 110 th congress . from november 2007 through the end of the george w. bush presidency , the senate structured its recesses in a way that was intended , at least initially , to prevent the president from making recess appointments . the approach involved the use of pro forma sessions , which are short meetings of the senate or the house held for the purpose of avoiding a recess of more than three days and therefore the necessity of obtaining the consent of the other house . normally , it is understood that during a pro forma session no business will be conducted . on november 16 , 2007 , the senate majority leader announced that the senate would "be coming in for pro forma sessions during the thanksgiving holiday to prevent recess appointments. the senate recessed later that day and pro forma meetings were convened on november 20 , 23 , 27 , and 29 , with no business conducted . the senate next conducted business after reconvening on december 3 , 2007 . during the remainder of 2007 and 2008 , similar procedures were followed during most other periods that would otherwise have been senate recesses of a week or longer in duration , including not only intrasession recesses , but also the period of sine die adjournment at the end of 2007 .