regulations implementing p.l . 95-202 specify which groups the secretary has determined were employed in active duty service . the regulations also established the department of defense civilian / military service review board and advisory panel to review each application for active duty status . following its review , the board recommends to the secretary whether the applicant group should be considered active duty for the purposes of the act ; the secretary makes the final decision . changes and clarification to the regulations were implemented in 1989 in response to "a federal court determination [ schumacher v. aldridge ] that the department of defense had failed to clarify factors and criteria in their implementing directive concerning p.l . to date , only certain groups who participated in world war i and world war ii have been accorded active duty status under this procedure , including women's air force service pilots ( wasps ) , signal corps female telephone operators unit ( world war i ) , engineer field clerks ( world war i ) , male civilian ferry pilots ( world war ii ) , and other groups of employees with war - related occupations . civilian groups granted veterans status pursuant to p.l . 95-202 are eligible for va burial benefits including interment or inurnment in va national cemeteries . pursuant to legislation enacted on may 20 , 2016 ( p.l . 114-158 ) , these veterans are eligible for inurnment in the columbarium or niche wall at arlington cemetery but not ground burial . merchant mariners are civilians who engage in certain maritime activities , such as the transportation of military equipment by sea , in support of the armed forces . in general , merchant mariners are not considered veterans for the purposes of any va benefits . members of the national guard and reserves who are never activated for federal active duty military service do not meet the active duty requirement . 95-202 , the following groups of merchant mariners are considered veterans for purposes of eligibility for all programs administered by the va: united states merchant seamen who served on blockships in support of operation mulberry in world war ii ; and american merchant marine personnel who served in oceangoing service during the period of armed conflict between december 7 , 1941 , and august 15 , 1945 . in addition , pursuant to section 402 of the veterans programs enhancement act of 1998 ( p.l . 105-368 ) , merchant mariners may qualify for interment or inurnment at a va national cemetery and va burial benefits only if they were members of the united states merchant marine , army transport service , or naval transport service who served between august 16 , 1945 , and december 31 , 1946 . the va uses a two - step process to evaluate claims for benefits . first , the claimant must demonstrate eligib i l ity for veterans' benefits in general . that is , the claimant must prove that he or she is a bona fide veteran and verify certain related matters . second , the veteran must prove entitlement to the particular benefit being sought .