most of the programs were not statewide . however , other observers pose the "what if" question . they wonder what would happen if mandatory work and training program were imposed on low - income noncustodial parents who are unable to pay their child support obligations and for whatever reason these parents are not contributing to their child's support after participating in such a program . would not incarceration be an appropriate option for low - income noncustodial parents who flunked out of an imposed work / training program , dropped out of the program , or could not keep the provided job ? they contend that incarceration as a penalty of last resort for nonpayment of child support is a logical and long - standing option given that noncustodial parents ( like custodial parents ) have a moral and financial obligation to support their children and not meeting that obligation is criminal and may have long - term negative consequences for their children . they note the fact that all 50 states and the district of columbia have criminal sanctions for nonpayment of child support is not happenstance . the failure to pay child support has been a crime in most states for many years . in the beginning , most of the laws were on the books but in practice rarely used . in the 1990s , nonpayment of child support was viewed as a serious crime . many states even had a "most wanted" list for child support debtors . moreover , a 1992 law also made nonpayment of child support a federal crime . but , observers ask , how can use of a threat be effective if everyone knows that there are no teeth behind it ? many noncustodial fathers maintain that the cse system is dismissive of their financial condition and continues to pursue child support payments ( current as well as arrearages ) even when it knows that many of them can barely support themselves . they argue that for welfare families , the cse program generally does not improve their child's well - being because their child support payments are used to benefit the state and federal government ( i.e. , welfare reimbursement ) rather than their child . they contend that the cse program causes conflicts between them and their child's mother because the women often use it as leverage by threatening to report them to cse authorities , take them back to court , have more of their wages garnished , or have them arrested . some commentators assert that jails are expensive , dangerous places in which people become aggressive in order to manage their fears or survive the sentence . therefore , they contend that although most of these people may have been nonviolent before they were incarcerated , they often are no longer so after being in jail or prison . noncustodial parents who are incarcerated for violations related to nonpayment of child support are usually put in jail rather than prison . one widely held myth is that jails only hold nonviolent offenders .