112-175 , the continuing resolution for fy2013 . no other disaster relief designations were carried forward in p.l . caps were placed on discretionary spending from fy2012 through fy2021 . if these caps are exceeded , an automatic cancellation of budget resources — known as sequestration — would take place across most discretionary budget accounts to reduce spending down to the cap . however , the bca includes a mechanism that recognizes the unexpected nature of disasters and the periodic need for disaster relief funding beyond what the budget might envision . this mechanism has changed the way congress approaches spending on major disasters allowing for a less crisis - driven debate on providing relief funding in the immediate wake of an incident and providing somewhat more transparency into federal disaster relief spending . the first section of this report addresses the pre - bca funding mechanism for major disaster declarations , including the role of the president's disaster relief fund ( drf ) . next , this report provides a basic overview of how that funding mechanism has evolved under the bca , and how hurricane sandy was addressed under that mechanism . finally , the report explores a number of other issues pertinent to disaster relief funding in the bca - regulated environment , including time frames for congressional action after a large - scale disaster strikes ; the implications of the rising number of stafford act declarations ; funding disaster relief efforts in severe disaster years ; offsetting the cost of disaster relief ; calculating the allowable adjustment for disaster relief ; the degree to which different types of disaster relief are included in the methodology for calculating the 10-year average on disaster relief spending ; and the possible implications of excluding stafford act assistance for emergencies and fires from the allowable adjustment calculation . the drf is a no - year account that is used to fund response activities and pay for ongoing recovery programs resulting from declared major disasters , emergencies , and fire management assistance grants ( fmags ) . the majority of its funding goes to pay for response to and recovery from major disasters . the robert t. stafford disaster relief and emergency assistance act ( p.l . 93-288 , hereinafter the stafford act ) authorizes the president to declare a major disaster in response to a governor or tribal nation leader's request for federal assistance . the declaration enables federal agencies to provide assistance to state and local governments overwhelmed by the incident . while the majority of federal assistance for major disasters to states and localities is provided through the federal emergency management agency ( fema ) , other federal agencies and offices also may provide assistance once a major disaster has been declared . these agencies include the u.s. army corps of engineers , the department of transportation , and the department of education among others . the assistance provided by these agencies may be funded through their own budgets , but in many cases is requested and paid for by fema . in some circumstances , however , federal agencies have the authority to provide assistance regardless of whether a disaster is declared under the stafford act .