bill ( p.l . as previously noted , as many as seven possible causes have been cited for the hollow force of the late 1970s . if these seven causes are examined for contemporary relevance , five of the seven causes would be non - applicable . most analysts would likely agree public support for the military is at a high point . for example , a may 2010 national telephone survey conducted by rasmussen reports , llc found that 74% of americans surveyed had a favorable opinion of the u.s. military . in terms of recruiting and retention , crs report rl32965 , recruiting and retention: an overview of fy2009 and fy2010 results for active and reserve component enlisted personnel , notes in an overview of fy2010 results: all the active components achieved their recruit quantity goals while recruit quality generally increased over the previous year , in some cases markedly . virtually all new recruits had high school diplomas , and nearly three - quarters scored above average on the armed forces qualification test . retention remained strong for all the services , with the army and navy exceeding their goals by substantial margins . the air force missed its goal for first term ( "zone a" ) personnel by 7% , and was slightly short of its goal for career ( "zone c" ) personnel . all of the reserve components except the army national guard met or exceeded their recruit quantity goals . the national guard shortfall was due to an intentional effort to cut back recruiting in order to lower its strength , which had gone beyond its authorized end - strength . recruit quality continued to improve for nearly all the reserve components . all of the reserve components finished the year under their attrition ceilings , and almost all showed lower attrition ( better retention ) than in fy2009 . it can be argued that a smaller military and a smaller budget could instead result in the military being even more selective in terms of recruiting and retaining service members , thereby improving the overall quality of the force . the issue of declining pay also does not appear to be a relevant factor in the potential return to a hollow force . crs report rl33446 , military pay and benefits: key questions and answers , notes that in the nearly 10 years since the terrorist attacks of september 11 , 2001 , basic pay has increased nominally by nearly 35% ( figure not adjusted for inflation ) . this figure does not include other increases in allowances , bonuses , or incentives . the cumulative effect is that most analysts now agree that the average annual cost per servicemember exceeds $100,000 . when increased housing allowances , subsistence allowances , and enlistment and reenlistment bonuses are added , total cash take - home pay has increased even more . and when increases in retirement benefits , due to tricare for life medical benefits and concurrent receipt of military retired pay and veterans disability benefits , are considered , military compensation has grown by more than 55% above inflation since fy1998 . there have recently been calls to reduce military compensation as a part of deficit reduction measures .