for president chávez , the election was his fourth presidential victory . capriles said that he would continue to serve the venezuelan people . for the opposition , the election showed a significant strengthening of support – it received about 2.2 million more votes than in the last presidential election in 2006 , and its share of the vote grew from almost 37% in 2006 to 44% in 2012 . most reports indicate that election day was peaceful with only minor irregularities . without legislative support , he would have faced difficulty in making significant policy changes . for the united states , however , an opposition victory would likely have reduced tensions in bilateral relations and allowed potential progress in the key areas of anti - drug and counterterrorism cooperation . it affirmed his longstanding popular support as well as support for his government's array of social programs that have helped raise living standards for many venezuelans . in his victory speech , president chávez congratulated the opposition for their participation and civic spirit and pledged to work with them . the pri and the allied pvem party failed to capture a simple majority in either house . as a result , the pri will have to form cross - party coalitions in order to pass key reforms , particularly those requiring constitutional amendments . the pri will most likely find support from the panal and possibly the pan , which lost seats in the chamber but retained a powerful bargaining position . the prd - led coalition , which will now have more seats in the chamber than the pan and remains the third - largest force in the senate , could complicate some reform efforts , including those aimed at increasing private participation in the energy sector , a key priority for peña nieto . some members of congress may be concerned that the leadership changes resulting from the july 1 , 2012 , mexican elections will significantly impact u.s. - mexican relations , particularly now that the party controlling the presidency has changed . however , few analysts are predicting that the transition from pan to pri rule will result in seismic shifts in bilateral relations . during the campaign , enrique peña nieto sought to reassure u.s. policy makers that a pri administration would continue to combat organized crime , while also striving to reduce violence in mexico . he also expressed support for increased bilateral and trilateral ( with canada ) economic and energy cooperation . since the elections , peña nieto has said that he is committed to "having an intense , close relationship of effective [security] collaboration measured by results" with the united states . president obama has congratulated peña nieto on his victory and assistant secretary of state for western hemisphere affairs roberta jacobson has said that u.s. officials "look forward to working with him" after he takes office . for additional background , see crs report r42548 , mexico's 2012 elections , by [author name scrubbed] . in venezuela's october 7 , 2012 presidential race , president chávez won reelection by a margin of 11% , receiving 55.07% of the vote compared to 44.31% for opposition candidate henrique capriles , according to the national electoral council .