the proposed exemption provided in the bill is very broad . twenty - eight states have enacted laws which have been interpreted to require insurers to cover contraceptives in the same way as other prescription drugs may be covered . these states have adopted varying approaches to define the scope of entities that may be exempt from the mandates based on religious or moral objections . table 1 provides a description of the definition used in each state with a contraceptive mandate . these definitions can be separated into four general categories , although there are variations among the states within each category . first , nine of the 28 states with some form of a contraceptive mandate provide no explicit exemption based on religious or moral objections . however , in many instances , the mandate may be avoided by refraining from offering prescription drug coverage generally , or by seeking regulation under erisa . second , eight of the remaining 19 states that do exempt some religious entities define the scope of exempt religious entities using some variation of a multi - pronged test , requiring some or all of the following criteria to be met: 1 . the entity's purpose must be the inculcation of religious values ; 2 . the entity primarily must employ members of the same religion ; 3 . the entity primarily must serve members of the same religion ; and 4 . the entity must be a church , an integrated auxiliary of a church , a convention or association of churches , or engaged in the exclusively religious activities of any religious order under section 6033 of the irc . this multi - pronged definition resembles the definition adopted in the final rules , which requires all four prongs to be satisfied . three of these eight states , california , new york , and oregon , also require all four prongs to be met in order to qualify as exempt from the respective state contraceptive coverage mandate on the grounds of a religious objection . the remaining five states ( arizona , arkansas , hawaii , michigan , and north carolina ) only require two or three of these criteria , in different combinations , to be met . for example , arizona does not require an entity's purpose to be the inculcation of religious values in order to be exempt , while north carolina does not require exempt entities to serve primarily members of the same religion . in the third category are six states ( connecticut , new jersey , maine , massachusetts , rhode island , and west virginia ) which use definitions that incorporate the definition of "church" under the federal income contributions act ( fica ) . the fica definition includes churches , conventions or associations of churches , or elementary or secondary schools which are controlled , operated , or principally supported by a church or by a convention or association of churches . finally , five states ( delaware , maryland , missouri , nevada , and new mexico ) provide an exemption for religious employers or entities , but do not further define what a religious entity is or provide a specific test to be used .