other provisions of h.r . opponents of h.r . 3581 argue that market risk is not relevant to the federal budget and a fair value adjustment would make loans and loan guarantees appear more costly than an equivalent grant or tax expenditure . it is not a law - it is not signed by the president nor can it be vetoed . instead , its purpose is to establish a framework within which congress considers legislation dealing with spending and revenue legislation . the budget resolution includes enforceable levels of overall federal spending and revenue , as well as spending limits for each committee . 3581 would not change the availability of federal loans or loan guarantees through existing programs , or the interest or other fees paid by borrowers and received by the government . 3581 contains language that prevents this change from affecting budgetary enforcement rules and adjusts the discretionary spending caps created by the budget control act to accommodate increases in recorded discretionary spending as a result of the subsidy re - estimates . the method in which the levels included in the budget resolution are enforced is by members of congress raising points of order against any subsequent legislation that is being considered on the floor , if it would violate the spending or revenue levels agreed to in the budget resolution . such points of order , however , may be waived , either by a simple majority in the house or by three - fifths in the senate . budget process reform proposals often seek to alter the content , characteristics , or consideration of the budget resolution . current support for such reform efforts may be strengthened by the fact that the house and senate did not agree to a budget resolution for fy2011 or fy2012 . on january 23 , 2012 , the house rules committee held a mark - up and ordered reported h.r . 3575 , the legally binding budget act of 2011 , which would require that the budget resolution be a joint resolution sent to the president for signature . as stated above , the budget resolution is presently a concurrent resolution , considered by both the house and senate , but not sent to the president for his signature or veto . instead , the president submits his preferred budgetary levels in his annual budget submission , as required by law , and in addition , he may sign or veto any legislation that congress enacts implementing budgetary policy . by replacing the concurrent resolution with a joint resolution , h.r . rather , the projections ... reflect cbo's best judgment about how the economy and other factors will affect federal revenues and spending under existing policies . specific rules for calculating the baseline appear in section 257 of the balanced budget and emergency deficit control act of 1985 . in projecting the baseline , direct spending and receipts are generally assumed to continue at levels specified in existing law . these projections are based upon economic assumptions ( eg , economic growth , inflation , and unemployment ) and other technical assumptions ( eg , demographic and workload changes ) about future years .