appendix a . drug safety . the pdufa v agreement calls on fda to evaluate risk evaluation and mitigation strategy ( rems ) requirements that fdaaa added in 2007 , as well as working toward standardizing rems for classes of drugs and integrating the rems process into the health care system . regulatory science . the pdufa v agreement describes five areas in which fda will use pdufa revenue to enhance regulatory science to expedite drug development . specific activities relate to enhanced communication with sponsors , developing meta - analysis methodologies , advancing the use of biomarkers and pharmacogenomics in drug review , advancing the development of patient - reported outcomes , and advancing the development of drugs for rare diseases . risk - benefit assessment in decision - making . the pdufa v agreement says fda will plan and begin to develop a "structured benefit / risk assessment in the new drug approval process. the agreement also says the agency will develop a process to obtain patient perspectives on risks and benefits . the agreement also includes activities around the sentinel initiative , other pharmacovigilance systems , and related information systems and infrastructure . information technology and performance management . the pdufa v agreement includes items on required electronic submissions ; data standardization ; investments in automated , standards - based information technology ; and improved fda performance management . across all these areas , the pdufa v agreement specifies fda commitments to produce draft and final guidance documents and to hold public meetings and workshops . these items are shown in table b - 2 in appendix b . the five - year authority pattern that congress first set with pdufa i in 1992 has created a legislative vehicle that , every five years , attracts additional provisions — some closely related to user fee activities and others peripherally so . the urgency to pass pdufa reauthorization stems from pdufa revenue's accounting for more than half the fda human drugs program budget . in 2012 , again , congress built a multi - titled bill , the first of which was the prescription drug user fee amendments . the overall vehicle , fdasia , included 10 other titles . a separate crs report describes provisions in those titles , which cover reauthorization of the medical device user fee act , new user fee authorization for generic drug and biosimilar biological products , and provisions concerning pediatric drug development and labeling , medical device regulation , pharmaceutical supply chain security , antimicrobial development incentives , expedited drug approval , drug shortages , and other topics . provisions in ffdca sections 735 , 736 , and 736b appendix b. pdufa v agreement: performance goals and procedure . the following paragraphs present highlights of those commitments . drug review performance goals , communication , and timing . at the core of pdufa's history is fda's commitment to completing review within a specified timeframe in exchange for an industry source of revenue to support that activity . although subsequent pdufa laws have added other kinds of commitments , the review time goals continue to be a focus of pdufa agreement negotiations .