3559 ( e ) . a child for purposes of subsection 3559 ( e ) is a minor under the age of 17 . the federal predicate offenses for purposes of the subsection include both violations of chapter 109a and other similar federal and state offenses , that is , violations of "section 1591 ( relating to sex trafficking of children ) , 2241 ( relating to aggravated sexual abuse ) , 2242 ( relating to sexual abuse ) , 2244 ( a ) ( 1 ) ( relating to abusive sexual contact ) , 2245 ( relating to sexual abuse resulting in death ) , 2251 ( relating to sexual exploitation of children ) , 2251a ( relating to selling or buying of children ) , 2422 ( b ) ( relating to coercion and enticement of a minor into prostitution ) , 2423 ( a ) ( relating to transportation of minors ) " ; or any state equivalent felony . this is a brief overview of those provisions . in a united states sentencing commission survey which addressed mandatory minimum sentences in child pornography cases but not other sex offense cases , a majority of the judges responding thought that the mandatory minimum sentences for production and distribution of child pornography and other child exploitation offenses were generally appropriate . well over two - thirds , however , considered those for receipt of child pornography too high . the commission's report on mandatory minimum sentencing statutes noted that its "review of available sentencing data [relating to sex offenses] indicates that further study of these penalties is needed before it can offer specific recommendations in this area. it concluded preliminarily , however , that "the mandatory minimum penalties for certain non - contact child pornography offenses may be excessively severe and as a result are being applied inconsistently. constitutional considerations : defendants sentenced to mandatory minimum terms of imprisonment have challenged them on a number of constitutional grounds ranging from congress' legislative authority , to cruel and unusual punishment , through ex post facto and double jeopardy , to equal protection and due process . the double jeopardy clause may also bar punishment for receipt of child pornography under both subsection 2252 ( a ) ( 2 ) and 2252a ( a ) ( 2 ) , unless the offenses involve different violations ; for example , the 2252a ( a ) ( 2 ) offense involves a digital image and the other involves a real child . reproduction or promotion : knowingly reproducing or promoting child pornography carries the same 5-year mandatory minimum term of imprisonment ( 15 years for recidivists ) . finally , congress' commerce authority includes the power to regulate those activities having a substantial relation to interstate commerce. when a statute falls for want of legislative authority , the penalties it would impose fall with it . this has yet to occur in the area of mandatory minimum sentences . cruel and unusual punishment : the eighth amendment bars mandatory capital punishment statutes . and although the case law is somewhat uncertain , the amendment seems to condemn any punishment that is "grossly disproportionate" to the misconduct for which it is imposed .