legislating and rulemaking are inherently governmental functions . the litigation concerning constitutional rights itself can take two forms . first , there are cases involving the "state action doctrine," which consider whether private actors are performing inherently governmental functions in determining ( 1 ) whether those actors must provide the same constitutional rights to third parties that the government must provide , and ( 2 ) whether those actors can claim sovereign immunity for certain actions like government officials can . second , there are cases involving the "private delegation doctrine," which center upon whether a private party was given impermissible authority to legislate or make rules on the government's behalf . the courts , like gao , do not have an independent definition of inherently governmental functions . in deciding cases under the fair act or other authorities , the courts use the definitions provided in these sources . moreover , in at least some such cases , courts give considerable deference to the executive branch's classification of a function as inherently governmental or commercial because of the political question doctrine , under which courts decline to hear issues that have been entrusted to the discretion of another branch of government and that lack judicially discoverable and management standards for their resolution . in arrowhead metals , ltd. v. united states , for example , the court categorized the coinage of money as inherently governmental because it is one of the powers that the constitution grants to congress . however , the court also found that the u.s. mint has discretion to determine whether the stamping of blanks constitutes coinage . in reaching this conclusion , the court noted its "desire to avoid a legislative - executive controversy" regarding whether the striking of blanks in the production of coins constitutes an inherently governmental function . in other cases not involving the fair act or specific provisions of procurement law or policy , the courts use a test of inherently governmental functions much like that used by gao , focusing upon the degree to which a private party exercises substantial discretion , or makes judgments , on the government's behalf . functions classified as inherently governmental under the constitutional test include: conducting elections ; exercising the power of eminent domain ; providing police services ; investigating allegations of child abuse ; exercising prosecutorial discretion ; chartering , oversight , and regulation of companies ; creation of public monopolies ; holding the personal property of prisoners ; limiting the first amendment rights of prisoners ; taxing and paying governmental indebtedness or obligations ; devising tariff regimes ; and hiring diplomatic staff or civil servants . functions categorized as commercial , in contrast , include providing transportation services to citizens , and selling government land on the government's behalf . designations of specific functions as inherently governmental in judicial decisions have the force of law , at least within the jurisdictions where the decisions are precedent and for so long as the decisions are not overturned . however , a judicial declaration that a function is inherently governmental under a constitutional test would not necessarily preclude the executive branch from contracting out this function under the fair act , omb circular a - 76 , the far , or ofpp policy letter 11-01 .