currently all 50 states participate . first , the medicaid - participating states were warned from the beginning of the medicaid program that congress reserved the right to make changes to the program , and since that time congress had made numerous amendments to the program . if a state chooses to participate , it must follow federal rules in order to receive federal reimbursement that offsets most of the state's medicaid costs . it should be noted , however , that a number of these requirements may be waived , with approval from the secretary of health and human services ( hhs ) . in general , medicaid expansion under the aca: ( 1 ) increases medicaid eligibility by raising the income criteria for certain people ; ( 2 ) adds both mandatory and optional benefits to medicaid ; ( 3 ) increases the federal matching payments for certain groups of beneficiaries and for particular services provided ; ( 4 ) provides new requirements and incentives for states to improve quality of care and to encourage more use of preventive services ; and ( 5 ) makes a number of other medicaid program changes . the most significant of these changes amends a section of federal law outlining what states must offer in their medicaid coverage plans . starting in 2014 , states were to be required to cover adults under age 65 ( who are not pregnant and not already covered ) with incomes up to 133% of the federal poverty level ( "fpl" ) . this is a significant change because previously the medicaid act did not set a baseline income level for mandatory eligibility . categories 1 , 2 and 4 ( direct , indirect , and unrelated conditions ) are derived principally from prior case law , while category 3 ( new and independent programs ) appears to be the principal focus of nfib . prior case law holds ( and nfib confirms ) that if a grant condition is directly related to the expenditure of federal funds in a state program or activity , then the condition is constitutional under the spending clause . thus the court limited withholding of funds for failure to serve the expanded medicaid population to withholding of those new funds , effectively making state participation in the medicaid expansion voluntary . as noted , the supreme court in dole had identified two important factors in evaluating whether a congressional spending condition should be struck down under the tenth amendment – relatedness and coercion . the nfib decision seemed to have most explicitly focused on the issue of coercion , but strains of relatedness permeate the opinion . this is seen most clearly in the concern expressed by the court as to whether the states , upon entering the original medicaid program , had been given sufficient notice of the possibility that such a significant expansion of the program might be imposed as a condition of participation . the specific question accepted for consideration by the supreme court in nfib was whether the aca "violates basic principles of federalism" by "coerc[ing]" states into accepting "onerous conditions" in violation of dole .