however , section 6 of h.j.res . 1167 gave the president the option to waive the effect of the embargo until december 10 , 1974 . military assistance and sales resumed in july 1976 . no formal finding of "substantial violation" of applicable u.s. - indonesian agreements involving use of u.s. - origin military equipment , conditional or otherwise , was made by the administration or by the congress . this prohibition was lifted by the reagan administration in november 1988 . the president and congress disagreed on whether turkey had "substantially violated" the applicable 1947 agreement with the united states governing the use of u.s. - supplied military equipment during its cyprus operations . the president independently suspended the issuance of new foreign military sales credits and guarantees and major new cash sales for turkey from late july until october 17 , 1974 . the president did permit routine cash sales of spare parts and components for items already purchased by turkey during this same period . the congress imposed an embargo on military sales , credits , assistance , and deliveries to turkey with the enactment of h.j.res . in light of the israeli attack on the iraqi nuclear reactor on june 7 , 1981 , secretary of state alexander m. haig , jr. , reported to congress on june 10 , 1981 , that the israeli use of american - supplied military equipment in this raid "may" have constituted a substantial violation of the applicable 1952 u.s. - israeli agreement . as a consequence — and pending review of the facts of the case — the president chose to exercise the authority set forth in sections 2 ( b ) and 42 ( e ) ( 1 ) of the arms export control act to suspend "for the time being" the shipment of four f - 16 aircraft that had been scheduled for delivery to israel . as the result of this decision , the subsequent delivery of 10 f - 16 and 2 f - 15 aircraft to israel was also suspended . however , on august 17 , 1981 , the reagan administration lifted its suspension on deliveries to israel and all of the planes were transferred . on two other occasions — april 5 , 1978 , and august 7 , 1979 — the carter administration chose to find that the israelis "may" have violated their 1952 agreement with the united states through the use of american - origin military equipment in operations conducted in lebanon . however , the u.s. did not suspend or terminate any israeli arms sales , credits , or deliveries in either of these cases . in two notable instances , questions concerning the improper use by israel of u.s. weapons were raised , but the president expressly concluded that a violation of the agreement regarding use of u.s. supplied equipment did not occur . on october 1 , 1985 , israel used u.s. - supplied aircraft to bomb palestine liberation organization ( plo ) headquarters in tunis , tunisia . the reagan administration subsequently stated that the israeli raid was "understandable as an expression of self - defense," although the bombing itself "cannot be condoned.