the scope of 35 u.s.c . §271 ( e ) ( 1 ) was recently the subject of judicial consideration . by its own terms , this statute does not restrict its infringement safe harbor to activities performed prior to the award of marketing approval by the fda . in the august 31 , 2011 , panel opinion in classen immunotherapies llc v. biogen idec , a three - judge panel of the federal circuit nonetheless concluded that this statute was "directed to premarketing approval of generic counterparts before patent expiration. in view of this holding , activities not associated with the preparation of an nda or anda are not shielded by the safe harbor , even though they lead to information that must be reported to the fda . the classen litigation involved three patents directed towards methods of immunization . the accused infringement consisted in part of the defendants' participation in studies evaluating associations between childhood vaccinations and the risk of developing type 1 diabetes . he believed that the holding in classen was controlling and that the momenta majority had strained to "come out the exact opposite way. in his view , amphastar's testing should not have been shielded by the statutory safe harbor . the holdings in classen and momenta are arguably quite significant in terms of determining the impact of intellectual property law within the health sciences . the classen majority expressed concerns about the potential breadth of the hatch - waxman act's safe harbor provision . via statute and regulation , the fda receives a great deal of information from the pharmaceutical industry at all stages of the life cycles of particular products . §271 ( e ) ( 1 ) were to apply to post - approval activities , then a potentially broad swath of activity could be conducted free of the patent system . the classen majority appeared to doubt that congress intended to limit the value of pharmaceutical patents to this extent . on the other hand , the momenta majority correctly observes that 35 u.s.c . §271 ( e ) ( 1 ) to the accused infringement . in her view , the statute included no language restricting its scope to pre - approval activity . further , in her opinion , the legislative history simply did not speak to whether the statute covered post - approval activity or not . she also observed that the supreme court had consistently construed the safe harbor in an expansive manner . approximately one year after the release of classen , a different three - judge panel of the federal circuit issued the decision of momenta pharmaceuticals , inc. v. amphastar pharmaceuticals , inc . the momenta panel consisted of chief judge rader , who was part of the majority in classen ; judge moore , who had dissented in that case ; and a third jurist , judge dyk . the momenta litigation involved a generic version of lovenox® ( enoxaparin ) , a drug that prevents blood clots . enoxaparin is an artificial version of the naturally occurring molecule heparin .