for each characteristic category , a summary is provided . in some categories , the report provides data on the u.s. population that may be comparable to data available on members of congress , as discussed in more detail below . during the 86 th congress the number of seats increased to its current level of 100 with the admission of alaska and hawaii as states . membership of the house has been fixed at 435 seats since 1911 , except for a temporary enlargement to 437 in the 86 th – 87 th congresses to accommodate representatives from alaska and hawaii . the number of house seats reverted to 435 following the 1960 census and reapportionment . since cq press provides no information on delegates and the resident commissioner from puerto rico , they are excluded from house calculations . table 1 provides the number of members who took seats on the first day of the 79 th - 113 th congress . beyond the basic information necessary to ascertain the qualifications for office of a u.s . senator or representative , the disclosure of details of a member's race , education , previous occupation , or other characteristics over the years has been voluntary , and has not been collected by congressional or other governmental authorities . this report provides data on member characteristics based on sources and methodologies described below . previously , the material that comprises the cq press data was gathered and maintained by congressional quarterly , inc. , through research and reporting capacities that now are a part of cq roll call . cq press and cq roll call are separate entities with different corporate ownership . some of the data have been reported in various forms in products created by congressional quarterly , inc. , cq press , or cq roll call . those products may also rely on data that are not included in the cq congress collection . consequently , there may be differences between data reported here and information reported in some commercial products issued by cq press , cq roll call and other sources of congressional information . according to cq press , their member biographical data are derived from a variety of primary sources , including reporting , surveys administered to congressional offices , and official sources . cq press reports that it "uses multiple sources to confirm this information , including obituaries and excerpts from major newspapers , as sources do not always agree on precise dates. cq press does not indicate whether the data underlying their database have been collected in a consistent manner over time . in the 79 th – 86 th congresses , the senate had 96 seats representing the 48 states admitted to the union as of the day congress convened . at the beginning of the 87 th congress , the number of seats increased to its current level of 100 due to the admission of alaska and hawaii as states . membership of the house has been fixed at 435 seats since 1911 , except for a temporary enlargement to 436 in the 86 th congress ( which occurred after the first day ) and 437 in the 87 th congresses to accommodate representatives from alaska and hawaii .