the senate agreed to h.con.res . 99 on february 15 . 131 under suspension of the rules . it was agreed to in the senate by unanimous consent on july 10 . on june 12 , 2009 , the house administration committee also favorably reported h.con.res . 135 ( 111 th congress ) , which directed the architect to place a marker in emancipation hall acknowledging the role that slave labor played in the construction of the capitol . the report stated that , in developing the marker , the architect was to "consider the recommendations of the slave labor task force working group ; ensure that the marker includes stone quarried by slaves in the construction of the capitol to the greatest extent possible ; and ensure that the marker includes a plaque or inscription that describes the purpose of the marker. on july 7 , 2009 , the house agreed to h.con.res . 135 under suspension of the rules . it was agreed to in the senate by unanimous consent on july 10 . in the 112 th congress , a committee on house administration semiannual report stated that the "design features a bronze plaque mounted above a block of sandstone that was quarried by slaves and originally part of the capitol's east front," and that a location on the "western end of the northern wall of emancipation hall" was selected . 99 ( 112 th congress ) , authorizing the use of emancipation hall to unveil this marker on february 28 , 2012 , was introduced by representative john lewis and agreed to by unanimous consent on february 9 , 2012 . the cost of the center was an estimated $621 million . the footprint of the center covers approximately five acres ( 196,000 square feet ) and is larger than that of the capitol ( 175,000 square feet ) . the square footage of the three levels of the center ( 580,000 square feet ) is nearly two - thirds that of the capitol itself ( 780,000 square feet ) . a number of factors delayed the project's completion date and increased its cost . unusually wet weather in 2003 , the discovery of asbestos in the part of the capitol connected to the center , and an undocumented century - old well under the construction site were unanticipated . added expenses were incurred because of higher - than - expected bids ; several design changes ; security upgrades following the terrorist attacks of september 11 , 2001 ; necessary changes to the air filtration system ; house and senate expansion space costs ; and extra costs associated with working around the capitol , such as security screening for the thousands of construction workers and vehicles that entered the construction site . this report addresses the rationale and planning for the cvc , an overview of construction and funding , and subsequent legislation related to its operations and design . for information on the use of the capitol visitor center space for official events , see crs report rl34619 , use of the capitol rotunda , capitol grounds , and emancipation hall: concurrent resolutions , 101st to 112th congress , by matthew eric glassman and [author name scrubbed] .