defense ; 4 . energy and water development , and related agencies ; 5 . financial services and general government ; 6 . homeland security ; 7 . interior , environment , and related agencies ; 8 . labor , health and human services , education , and related agencies ; 9 . such amendments include those that are: offered on the senate floor , reported by the senate appropriations committee to the house - passed measure , or proposed as a substitute for the house - passed text . in other words , senate rules prohibit legislation in both senate appropriations committee amendments and non - committee amendments . they also prohibit non - germane amendments . these senate rules do not apply to provisions in senate bills or conference reports . recently , the practice of the senate appropriations committee has been either to ( 1 ) report the house - passed bill with a committee substitute , or ( 2 ) report an original senate bill , wait until the senate receives the house - passed bill , and then offer a committee substitute ( comprising the text of the senate bill ) to the house - passed bill . in either case , the senate considers the committee's recommendations in the form of a committee amendment . the power to appropriate is a legislative power . congress has enforced its prerogatives through certain laws . the so - called antideficiency act , for example , strengthened the application of this section by , in part , explicitly prohibiting federal government employees and officers from making contracts or other obligations in advance of or in excess of an appropriation , unless authorized by law , and providing administrative and criminal sanctions for those who violate the act . furthermore , under law , public funds may be used only for the purpose ( s ) for which congress appropriated the funds . the president has an important role in the appropriations process by virtue of the constitutional power to approve or veto entire measures , which congress can override only by two - thirds vote of both chambers . the president also has influence , in part , because of various duties imposed by statute , such as submitting an annual budget to congress . the house and senate committees on appropriations have jurisdiction over the annual appropriations measures . each committee is organized into subcommittees , with each subcommittee having responsibility for developing one regular annual appropriations bill to provide funding for departments and activities within its jurisdiction . each house appropriations subcommittee is paired with a senate appropriations subcommittee and the two subcommittees' jurisdictions are generally identical . the current appropriations subcommittee structure includes the following 12 subcommittees : 1 . agriculture , rural development , food and drug administration , and related agencies ; 2 . commerce , justice , science , and related agencies ; 3 . legislative branch ; 10 . military construction , veterans affairs , and related agencies ; 11 .