this , however , has not been the case . no exception is made for marijuana used in the course of a recommended medical treatment . indeed , by categorizing marijuana as a schedule i drug under the controlled substances act ( csa ) , the federal government has concluded that marijuana has "no currently accepted medical use in treatment in the united states. yet 18 states and the district of columbia have decriminalized medical marijuana by enacting exceptions to their drug laws that permit individuals to grow , possess , or use marijuana for medicinal purposes . in contrast to the complete federal prohibition , these 19 jurisdictions see medicinal value in marijuana and permit the drug's use under certain circumstances . such inconsistencies in federal and state law would generally evoke the constitutional principle of preemption — potentially resulting in a conclusion that because the states permit conduct that the federal government has expressly prohibited , such laws are void as in conflict with the "supreme law of the land. state laws that exempt from state criminal sanctions the cultivation , distribution , or possession of marijuana for medical purposes have generally not been preempted by federal law . this unique interplay between state and federal law has led to a seemingly incongruous situation in which both the federal criminal prohibition on marijuana and state medical marijuana exemptions coexist . accordingly , a resident of california who uses marijuana for medical purposes in compliance with california law is nonetheless simultaneously in violation of federal law and potentially subject to prosecution by federal authorities . such prosecutions , however , are relatively rare . the federal government has limited resources to draw upon in investigating and enforcing federal drug laws . as a consequence , the obama administration has formally suggested that it will not prosecute individuals who use medicinal marijuana in a manner consistent with state laws . the legal anomaly that defines the use of medical marijuana in the united states raises a number of important constitutional questions — some of which have been answered by the u.s. supreme court , but many of which remain unresolved . this report will review the federal government's constitutional authority to enact the federal criminal prohibition on marijuana ; highlight certain principles of federalism that prevent the federal government from mandating that states participate in enforcing the federal prohibition ; consider unresolved questions relating to the extent to which state authorization and regulation of medical marijuana are preempted by federal law ; and assess what obligations , if any , the u.s. department of justice ( doj ) has to investigate and prosecute violations of the federal prohibition on marijuana . prior to considering the significant constitutional questions associated with the interplay between state and federal laws in the context of medical marijuana , the following section provides a description of the csa and a brief discussion of common characteristics found within the wide variety of state medical marijuana laws that have been enacted across the country . the unique inconsistencies between federal and state approaches to medical marijuana give rise to a series of important constitutional questions . first , is it within congress's power to prohibit the production , possession , and distribution of marijuana ?