this is a heavy burden for the government to meet . the decision by congress to deny a deduction for certain business expenses , while allowing a deduction for others , appears to be well within its broad taxing powers and subject to minimal review by a court . congress has broad powers to tax under the constitution . in general , tax distinctions and classifications are constitutionally permissible so long as "they bear a rational relation to a legitimate governmental purpose. the rational basis standard is a low level of review by a court . in the tax context in particular , courts typically show great deference in recognition of "the large area of discretion which is needed by a legislature in formulating sound tax policies. at the same time , not all exercises of congress's taxing power receive such deference . sometimes , tax provisions are subject to higher levels of scrutiny . for example , tax provisions based on the content of speech are , like non - tax provisions , subject to strict scrutiny . a provision subject to this highest level of scrutiny must be necessary to serve a compelling government interest and be narrowly drawn to achieve that end . as the court has explained , deductions of trade or business expenses "may , to be sure , be disallowed by specific legislation , since deductions , are a matter of grace and congress can , of course , disallow them as it chooses. there are exceptions for local legislation and qualifying small amounts . thus , when determining whether an expenditure is deductible , the first question is whether it qualifies as an "ordinary and necessary" business expense . an expense is generally treated as "ordinary" if it is not a capital expenditure and "necessary" if it is appropriate for carrying on a trade or business or in the production of income . if the expenditure meets this criteria , then the question becomes whether section 162 ( e ) disallows the deduction . absent section 162 ( e ) , whether a campaign - related expenditure could qualify as an ordinary and necessary business expense would depend on the facts and circumstances of each case . the following discussion analyzes whether any such expenditure could actually be deducted in light of section 162 ( e ) . some have suggested that the supreme court's analysis in citizens united might raise questions about whether irc section 162 ( e ) is constitutional . the arguments appear to be that the tax laws cannot disallow a deduction for activities that the supreme court has held are protected speech or provide beneficial tax treatment to only some types of speech ( eg , non - political business speech , the expenditures for which may be deductible ) . as discussed below , the supreme court upheld the constitutionality of a provision similar to section 162 ( e ) , and it is not clear citizens united would impact that analysis . it might , nonetheless , be argued that a more rigorous analysis should apply when , as here , a deduction is disallowed for expenditures related to the exercise of a constitutional right .