the tennessee valley authority is a government - owned corporation . the privacy act protects the type of electricity usage data gathered by smart meters , provided that the data pertains to u.s. citizens or permanent residents , is personally identifiable , and is retrievable by the individual's name or another personal identifier . the privacy act "governs the collection , use , and dissemination of a 'record' about an 'individual' maintained by federal agencies in a 'system of records.' under the statute , a "record" is "any item , collection , or grouping of information about an individual that is maintained by an agency ... that contains his name , or the identifying number , symbol , or other identifying particular assigned to the individual , such as a finger or voice print or a photograph. an "individual" is defined as "a citizen of the united states or an alien lawfully admitted for permanent residence. a "system of records" is "a group of any records under the control of any agency from which information is retrieved by the name of the individual" or other personal identifier "assigned to the individual. smart meter data held by an agency certainly fits within the broad definition of a "record" because it is a grouping of information about an individual , namely , data on that individual's electricity usage . the data is typically stored along with a consumer's account information , which usually includes a consumer's name , social security number , or other "identifying particular. thus , smart meter data would constitute a protected "record" under the privacy act , assuming that it pertains to a citizen of the united states or lawful permanent resident and is retrievable by a personal identifier such as a consumer's name or account number . for information on the general safeguards that the privacy act provides for data that is maintained by a federal agency and meets the other requirements for a covered record under the act , see crs report rl34120 , federal information security and data breach notification laws , by [author name scrubbed] . residential smart meters present privacy and cybersecurity issues that are likely to evolve with the technology . in 2010 , the national institute of standards and technology ( nist ) published a report identifying some of these issues , which fall into two main categories: ( 1 ) privacy concerns that smart meters will reveal the activities of people inside of a home by measuring their electricity usage frequently over time ; and ( 2 ) fears that inadequate cybersecurity measures surrounding the digital transmission of smart meter data will expose it to misuse by authorized and unauthorized users of the data . the use of smart meters presents the recurring conflict between law enforcement's need to effectively investigate and combat crime and our desire for privacy while in our homes . with smart meters , police will have access to data that might be used to track residents' daily lives and routines while in their homes , including their eating , sleeping , and showering habits , what appliances they use and when , and whether they prefer the television to the treadmill , among a host of other details .