lending is inherently risky . bank assets , which typically include loans made to borrowers , are risky because borrowers can default on their loans . in addition , banks face funding risk because they must continuously borrow short - term liquidity to fund their assets ( customer loans ) . in other words , banks provide longer - term ( illiquid ) customer loans by borrowing the funds via sequences of shorter - term ( liquid ) loans at relatively lower rates . profits are generated from the spread between the long - term rates lenders charge and the successive sequences of shorter - term rates they pay for liquidity until the longer - term loans are repaid in full . if borrowers default on their loans from the lender , the lender potentially could default on repayment of its liabilities , which are the shorter - term loan obligations to depositors and other financial institutions . a bank's capital is defined as the difference between its assets and liabilities . if a bank maintains sufficient capital , a default on one of its assets is less likely to translate into a subsequent failure to repay some of its shorter - term obligations . a capital buffer , therefore , protects bank creditors from loan defaults by bank customers . a bank is considered solvent as long as it maintains capital above a minimum threshold level , and it is considered undercapitalized and faces the prospect of being shut down by its regulator should its capitalization fall below the threshold . a bank's asset or lending portfolio may grow proportionately with its capital reserves , and guidelines for this proportion have been established by the basel committee on banking supervision ( bcbs ) . the bcbs's work on the first basel capital accord , basel i , provided the international consensus framework for bank safety and soundness regulation . the objective of the first basel capital accord was to promote consistent safety and soundness standards while providing an equitable basis of competition for banking institutions in participating countries . in other words , banks may face a competitive disadvantage with competitors in other countries unless capital reserve requirements are internationally harmonized . basel i established the amount of capital relative to assets , expressed as a capital - to - asset ratio , that financial institutions needed to maintain . capital - asset ratios are generally computed using the total amount of capital in the numerator and the total amount of risk - weighted assets in the denominator . the u.s. banking system currently operates under a safety and soundness framework based upon the first basel accord , which was adopted by the banking regulatory agencies in 1988 . the second basel accord , basel ii , attempts to improve upon the methodology for capturing credit risk , which is explained in the next section . in the united states , the federal banking regulatory agencies placed large "core" banks under the basel ii framework . core banks are banking organizations with at least $250 billion of consolidated total assets or at least $10 billion of on - balance - sheet risk associated with foreign asset holdings .