this section discusses each of these issues in turn . lowering the maximum statutory tax rate on pass - through income would likely stimulate investment in the short - run . the rate reduction , however , may not stimulate as much new investment as other changes that have been discussed as part of tax reform . for example , both the unified framework and the better way propose allowing businesses to expense new investments . expensing may be more stimulative , or at least better targeted , than a rate reduction since expensing would benefit new investments relatively more than rate reductions . a rate reduction would benefit all pass - through income and thus provide a windfall gain for old investments . the longer - run effect on the economy from a rate reduction is less clear . this is particularly true if deficits are predicted to increase . increased deficits may lead to higher future interest rates as the government competes with the private sector for financing . additionally , policymakers in the future may grow concerned over the sustainability of deficits and raise taxes in response . a rise in interest rates or taxes could curtail or offset any positive effect from a tax rate reduction for pass - throughs or tax reform more generally . still , without more details about the overall reform , it is difficult to determine more precisely what the impact would be in the short - run or the long - run from any changes . while lowering the tax burden on pass - through income could potentially stimulate the economy , particularly in the short - run , it may also reduce the progressivity of the tax code . as previously stated , 62% of pass - through income was earned by taxpayers with an agi over $250,000 , and 32% was earned by individuals with an agi in excess of $1 million . the distributions of partnership and s corporation income were more heavily skewed to the upper end of the income distribution . as a result , the benefit from lowering taxes on pass - through income is likely to accrue predominately to upper - income individuals . this would cause the tax system to become less progressive , all else equal . reducing the tax burden on pass - throughs seems to be partly driven by the assumption that pass - throughs and small business are synonymous . the data show that this is not the case ; the majority of all businesses are small . for example , in 2011 , more than 99% of both pass - throughs and c corporations had less than 500 employees , which is the most common employment - based threshold used by the small business administration . additionally , large firms are responsible for a non - trivial share of pass - through employment . about 24% of employees at pass - throughs worked at firms with more than 500 employees in 2011 , which is more than the share who were employed at firms with 10 or fewer employees .