however , the programs also differ . they have different drug - and other crime - related restrictions , with varying levels of federal administration and discretion for state or local administrators . these programs were chosen because they serve many of the same families . the drug - and crime - related restrictions in tanf , snap , and the housing assistance programs were developed at different times in different laws , but it appears they are intended to serve similar purposes . to some extent , they are intended to deter people from engaging in drug - related and other criminal activity . they may also be intended to punish individuals for engaging in undesirable behavior . further , when resources are limited , these policies may be intended to direct assistance to other households who are deemed more worthy of assistance . additionally , particularly for housing assistance programs , drug - and crime - related restrictions may be intended to protect vulnerable communities from the consequences of drug - related and other criminal activity . the report begins by providing a brief overview of the history and evolution of policies establishing drug - and crime - related restrictions in federal assistance programs . it then briefly describes tanf , snap , and the three housing programs , and then discusses the specific policies in those programs related to drug testing and drug - related and other criminal activity . it concludes by comparing and contrasting those policies and highlighting considerations for policymakers . this section of the report describes specific federal tanf , snap , and housing assistance policies on drug testing and pertaining to drug - related and other criminal activity engaged in by applicants and recipients . in some cases , the federal policies are prescriptive ; in other cases , they leave discretion to the state or local administering entity . as is evident in this report , there are similarities and differences in federal policies governing drug - and crime - related restrictions in tanf , snap , and federal housing assistance programs . this report highlights the variations in federal crime - and drug - related restrictions in the tanf , snap , and housing assistance programs . these variations in policy exist across programs , in part , due to the differences in the goals and design of the programs , as well as the laws that govern them . there is also the potential for geographic variation in these policies , attributable to the discretion that federal law leaves to local policymakers . the policy goal behind the devolution of social programs is to allow states and localities to design their programs differently , to reflect their interests , values , and needs . some may reflect the intentions underlying the policies . as noted earlier in this report , those policy goals may include the desire to deter people from engaging in undesirable behavior , to punish people for engaging in undesirable behavior , to direct limited resources to persons deemed most "worthy" of assistance , or to protect vulnerable communities .