there are , however , some exceptions . by comparison , china's largest lender , icbc , has over 16,000 branches in china . below is a short description of each of these four entities . under the terms of its 2001 world trade organization ( wto ) accession agreement , china agreed to gradually open its financial markets over a five year period to foreign competitors . the services schedule of china's wto accession agreement delineates the details of the scope of foreign bank access to china's financial markets . foreign banks generally are to be afforded national treatment for listed banking services , with the ability to provide the same types of services and facing the same legal restrictions as domestic banks . for example , foreign banks are not allowed to provide automobile financing . foreign banks can accept deposits , make loans ( including mortgages , consumer credit , factoring , and commercial financing ) , issue credit and debit cards , provide letters of credit or guaranty , and other financial services . since 2001 , the chinese government has passed laws and regulations to implement its wto obligations . on november 11 , 2006 , china's state council promulgated decree no . 478 , "regulations of the people's republic of china on administration of foreign - funded banks," establishing the general policy of foreign bank operations in china . the regulations differentiated between "foreign - funded banks" ( which includes "wholly foreign - funded banks" and "chinese - foreign joint venture banks" ) and their branches , and a branch of a foreign bank . while the types of financial services the two types of foreign banks were authorized to provide were almost identical , they were subject to different minimum capital requirements . foreign - funded banks had to have a minimum of 1 billion yuan ( $157 million ) in registered capital and have received a minimum of 100 million yuan ( $15.7 million ) in non - callable operating capital . branches of foreign banks operating in china had to have received a minimum of 200 million yuan ( $31.5 million ) in operating capital . in addition , the owners of foreign - funded banks must possess no less than $10 billion in assets at the end of the year prior to the submission of an application to form a foreign - funded bank , and the foreign banks seeking to establish a branch in china must possess no less than $20 billion in assets at the end of the year prior to the submission of an application to open the branch . the approval process for foreign - funded banks and branches of foreign banks is a two - step process . the first step is the submission of application documents to china's banking regulatory agencies , which are to make a decision within six months of submission . the second step involves the submission of additional information within six months of receiving the decision of the regulatory agencies . china's banking regulatory agencies have up to two months to approve or reject the second submission . if the application is approved , the applicant must register with the appropriate administrative department and obtain a business license .