each of the waivers is discussed below . in addition to the package of 10 waivers that ed is offering to states , ed is offering one optional waiver that would provide flexibility in the use of 21 st cclc funds to support expanded learning time programs . the 21 st cclc program , authorized by title iv - b of the esea , supports activities provided during nonschool hours that offer learning opportunities for school - aged children . formula grants are made to states , which subsequently make grants to local entities ( eg , leas , community - based organizations ) on a competitive basis for a period of three to five years . eligible entities are to serve primarily students who attend schools eligible for schoolwide programs under title i - a and the families of these students . eligible entities may use funds for before - and after - school activities that advance student academic achievement . the program's focus , however , is currently on providing after - school activities for children and youth , and literacy - related activities for their families . currently , expanded learning time programs that operate during the school day are not an authorized activity under the 21 st cclc . the definition of a "community learning center" contained in the law specifies that funded activities are to occur: "during non - school hours or periods when school is not in session ( such as before and after school or during summer recess ) . in order to receive the esea flexibility package , seas would have to meet the administration's four "principles for improving student academic achievement and increasing the quality of instruction. the four principles , as stated by ed , are as follows: 1. college - and career - ready expectations for all students ; 2. state - developed differentiated recognition , accountability , and support ; 3. supporting effective instruction and leadership ; and 4. reducing duplication and unnecessary burden . similar to the discussion of the waivers , each of the principles is examined below , including an overview of the condition , relevant requirements in current law , and connections between the principle and the administration's blueprint for esea reauthorization or the race to the top program . the administration has argued that the esea flexibility package is needed because congress has failed to reauthorize the esea . the esea was authorized through fy2008 ; however , esea programs continue to receive annual appropriations . the administration has suggested that this lack of congressional action is particularly an issue as there are requirements contained in the esea , including academic accountability requirements , that have become problematic for state educational agencies , local educational agencies ( leas ) , and schools to implement , and various states have sought waivers of these provisions . a commonly cited problem is that under the performance - based accountability provisions enacted in nclb , all students are expected to perform at a proficient level on state administered reading / language arts and mathematics assessments by the end of the 2013-2014 school year .