the latter approach rarely prevailed . change has now come to several countries in the middle east in the wake of popular uprisings rooted in discrete demands and shared themes ( see textbox below ) . u.s. policy choices are becoming more complicated as unrest , conflict , and transitions alter basic realities in the region . relevant aspects of the new regional environment include public opinion power — the crowds that have taken over squares and ousted dictators also have toppled the assumption that outsiders can adequately understand and effectively deal with the arab world by engaging only with elites . it remains unclear what types of governments will emerge in the states that are undergoing fundamental change , but it seems likely that in both those states and others , rulers now must pay more attention to the demands of public opinion and the competing political and social groups that seek to shape and harness its power . although the united states has not been a key focus of protesters in the arab uprisings , many in the arab world share a belief that some of their leaders have subordinated their national interests to the united states or other external powers in order to receive assistance , arms , and trade benefits . foreign policy choices , particularly with regard to the arab - israeli peace process or foreign assistance , therefore , may be subject to extra scrutiny by emerging leaders and empowered publics . islamist support and success — in the short term , at least , a greater public say in governance may mean electoral support for islamist parties , whether out of religious conviction ; sympathy for those formerly targeted for repression ; lack of competition from other well - organized parties ; a belief that islamist parties will be the least corrupt and most likely to champion social justice ; or some combination of these reasons . initial successes by islamist parties have challenged the viability of the long - standing u.s. preference not to fully engage such parties out of concern about their views on israel , armed conflict , and certain social and political issues , such as the rights and roles of women and religious minorities . uncertain strategic implications — the united states relied on friendly arab regimes and israel as security partners during the cold war and in the struggle against radicalizing forces such as al qaeda , hamas , hezbollah , other violent islamist extremists , and the governments of iran and syria . the ability of the u.s. government to influence events has become more complicated as some friendly regimes have faced upheavals . certain al qaeda figures have embraced the current of change and sought to wrap themselves in the mantle of opposition to regional governments . however , to a large degree , the activism on display in most countries discredits al qaeda's claims that violent resistance is the only or best way to achieve change . some observers contended early on that iran and its allies were the "winners" of the arab unrest , as regimes that had worked with the united states against iran came under internal threat and islamist parties gained traction .