each title of h.r . many of these questions remain unanswered . will such an outcome create efficiency gains ? these are some of the questions that arise in changes proposed by h.r . the remainder of this report provides a brief title - by - title summary of the key provisions and water policy changes proposed in h.r . a legal analysis of the proposed legislation is beyond the scope of this report . 1837 addresses a different aspect of california water policy . title i makes numerous changes to the cvpia: broadening purposes for which water previously dedicated to fish and wildlife can be used ; changing the definitions of fish covered by the act ; broadening purposes for which the central valley project restoration fund ( cvprf ) monies can be used ; reducing revenues into the cvprf , mandating operation per a 1994 interim agreement ; and mandating development and implementation of a plan to increase the water yield of the cvp by october 1 , 2013 . title ii directs the secretary to cease implementation of the san joaquin river restoration settlement agreement , which is the foundation of the san joaquin river restoration settlement act ( sjrrs ) . the title also removes the salmon restoration requirement and makes other changes to the sjrrs . title iii directs the secretary of the interior , upon request from water contractors , to convert utility - type water service contracts to repayment contracts , and then allows accelerated repayment of those outstanding repayment obligations . ( irrigation and municipal & industrial [m&i] repayment obligations for the cvp for 2010 , the last year for which such data are readily available , total approximately $1.2 billion. ) title iv outlines water rights protections for those with water rights senior to the cvp , including sacramento river valley contractors and addresses shortage policy for certain north - of - delta cvp water service contracts . title v declares that the unique circumstances of coordinated operations of the cvp and swp "require assertion of federal supremacy to protect existing water rights throughout the system" and that as such shall not set precedent in any other state . ( there has been concern from some western states that the state and federal preemptions contained in h.r . 1837 might be used as precedent in other western states and threaten their allocation of state water rights. ) 1837 is primarily aimed at addressing decreased water deliveries to california's cvp contractors , particularly those south of the delta , since passage of the cvpia in 1992 . the means would be delivering water to contractors that would become available due to the bill's prohibition on restrictions in environmental and other laws . the bill would primarily accomplish greater water deliveries by preempting federal and state law , including fish - and - wildlife protections and other cvp operational mandates , which are all tied to the coordinated operations of the cvp and swp . it is unclear what impacts such changes would have on other water users in the state . title iv of the bill attempts to provide protections for california's senior water right holders , particularly those in the sacramento valley watershed and in "area - of - origin" areas .