that was true for both products and processes . however , patents were found to be better at protecting products than processes . the novel ideas associated with a product often can be determined through reverse engineering — taking the item apart to assess how it was made . that information then could be used by competitors if not covered by a patent . because it is more difficult to identify the procedures related to a process , other means of appropriation often are seen as preferable to patents , with the attendant disclosure requirements . an analysis of the literature in this area performed for the world intellectual property organization highlights several conclusions concerning the use of patents that mirror much of the above discussion . the research surveyed indicates that "lead time and secrecy seem to be the most relevant appropriability devices for most sectors" and that while patents may not be the most effective means to protect inventions , they are still utilized by firms in all industries . there is a consensus that "disclosure and ease of inventing - around are the most important reasons for not patenting. at the same time , "patents are more relevant as an appropriability mechanism for product than for process innovations and for some sectors such as chemicals ( especially pharmaceuticals ) , some machinery industries and biotechnology. while studies show that the value of patents differs across industries and between firms of different maturation levels within a sector , the pharmaceutical industry perceives patents as critical to protecting innovation . several studies over the years have demonstrated the important role patents play in the pharmaceutical sector . of the 18 major manufacturing industries analyzed by richard levin and his colleagues , only drug companies rated product patents the most effective means of ensuring that firms can capture the profits associated with their innovations . later research by professor wesley cohen and his colleagues demonstrated that patents were considered the most effective method to protect inventions in the drug industry , particularly when biotechnology is included . a recent paper by several professors at the berkeley school of law , university of california , found that there were "substantial differences between the health - related sectors ( biotechnology and medical devices ) , in which patents are more commonly used and considered important , and the software and internet fields , in which patents are reported to be less useful. these studies reinforce earlier work by the late professor edwin mansfield that indicated 65% of pharmaceutical inventions would not have been brought to market without patent protection in contrast to the 8% of innovations made in other industries . patents may be particularly important in the pharmaceutical sector because of the relative ease of replicating the finished product . imitation costs vary among industries . for example , while it is expensive , complicated , and time consuming to duplicate an airplane , it is relatively simple to chemically analyze a pill and reproduce it . the degree to which industry perceives patents as effective has been characterized as "positively correlated with the increase in duplication costs and time associated with patents.