such efforts may modify payment through payment incentives . these incentives may include adjustments to payment ( generally in the form of reductions ) as well as performance - based payments ; in addition , direct payment , generally in the form of a monthly fee , may be made for a desired activity ( eg , care coordination ) that is not itself the actual provision of care . payment incentives may be based on the reporting of , or performance on , a set of quality measures . for this reason , payment incentives may rely integrally on quality measurement . identifying measure gaps is a part of achieving that aim . they also may create incentives that are non - directive ; that is , incentives to modify overall delivery of care that link payment to performance on an outcome ( eg , rates of hospital readmissions or healthcare - associated infections [hais] ) , but that rely on individual providers to implement care delivery changes of their choice to improve performance on these outcomes . this section begins by discussing the role of the medicare program in this area and then summarizes the modification of payment through incentives . this discussion focuses on those payment incentives that have improving quality or value as their primary goal , rather than those aimed solely at altering resource use . in addition , it addresses mechanisms for the modification of payment , as opposed to different models of payment ( eg , capitation , shared savings ) ; many of the payment incentives discussed here could theoretically be applied in the context of different payment models . policymakers have undertaken efforts to enhance provider accountability through the public reporting of performance information ; these efforts have generally occurred in concert with policies that modify payment to incentivize higher quality . public reporting , in this context , may be defined as "the objective measurement and public disclosure of physician and hospital performance. the objectives of public reporting are numerous , but include , among others ( 1 ) increasing the accountability of health care organizations , professionals , and managers ; and ( 2 ) maintaining standards or stimulating improvements in the quality of care provided . in addition , public reports are intended to encourage consumer participation through the facilitation of informed decision making . the impact of public reporting on both consumer decision making , as well as quality improvement efforts by providers , is unclear . regardless , a number of efforts are underway in the medicare program to make performance information publicly available , largely at the direction of congress ; these include websites providing comparative information about hospitals , nursing homes , and physicians , for example . this section discusses the theory underlying public reporting , factors influencing consumers' use of performance information to guide decision making , and the effect of public information on provider quality improvement efforts . theoretically , making information on provider performance public serves to correct an existing information asymmetry ; that is , an imbalance in information between the provider and user of a service , in this case , health care services .