would hezbollah be party to the conflict ? is the syrian uprising weakening hezbollah within lebanon ? what are the potential ramifications of a syrian or hezbollah attack on israel , and what are the possible u.s. responses to such an attack ? will the uprising in syria negatively impact the religions sects / minorities in lebanon , including the christian community ? continued unrest in syria leaves the future of asad's regime uncertain , and the extent of the impact on lebanon is still being determined . this ambiguity raises a wide range of questions for the goals and implementation of u.s. policy priorities in lebanon . as the obama administration and congress review u.s. policy priorities in this shifting landscape , issues that members may encounter include: whether and how u.s. assistance programs in lebanon are being affected by developments in syria and what , if any , changes in assistance program goals or implementation may be necessary in light of changing conditions ; whether events in syria and lebanon create new concerns regarding the protection of religious minorities , particularly in light of proposed h.r . this approach has often led to direct syrian intervention in lebanese affairs . at present , syria continues to exert a great deal of influence in lebanon through its patronage relationships with hezbollah and the hezbollah - affiliated , pro - syrian march 8 governing coalition . the outsized role that syria plays in lebanon's affairs and its role as a lifeline for hezbollah further raises the stakes of the unrest for both lebanon and israel . hezbollah and the asad government have warned that third - party intervention in syria's crisis could lead to regional conflagration , widely interpreted as a message for israel . the unrest in syria and the possibility for spillover into lebanon affect the current policy priorities of the united states , which include preserving regional peace , strengthening lebanon's weak democratic institutions , limiting iranian and syrian influence in lebanon's political process , and countering transnational threats from hezbollah and other militant groups . since 2006 , congress has authorized and appropriated hundreds of millions of dollars for lebanon , with parallel goals of supporting the implementation of united nations security council resolutions ; reducing sectarianism and unifying national institutions ; providing military equipment and basic supplies to the lebanese armed forces ( laf ) ; and providing support to the internal security forces ( isf ) for training , equipment and vehicles , community policing assistance , and communications . these programs began in the wake of the withdrawal of syrian military forces in 2005 and the israel - hezbollah war of july and august 2006 . over the last five years , u.s. programs have steadily improved the capabilities of nonsectarian security forces in lebanon , while lebanese politics have remained deadlocked by competition between rival camps defined in part by their differing perspectives toward the assertive asad government and the future of its hezbollah allies . the prospect of political change in syria is now challenging core assumptions that have guided the decisions of leaders in lebanon , syria , the united states , israel and other regional powers .