these three types can be seen in the following proposals . the president's fy2013 budget proposal would include partial elimination of the tax preference by capping the preference at the 28% marginal tax rate . the simpson - bowles ( sb ) deficit reduction plan proposes complete elimination of the tax preference . the congressional budget office ( cbo ) "revenue options" report proposes changing the tax exclusion for investors to a direct tax subsidy to issuers . one of the cited reasons for the elimination ( or at least modification ) of the tax exclusion for interest on state and local government bonds ( tax - exempt bonds ) is that the preference is a financially and economically inefficient tool for inducing public capital investment . in short , the federal revenue loss is greater than the subsidy to state and local governments . the reduced benefits accruing to issuers and these investors , however , should be weighed against the benefit of a potentially more efficient ( and to some , equitable ) federal income tax . the impact of changes to the tax treatment of the interest on state and local government debt can be assessed from three perspectives to analyze: the size of the tax expenditure , the distribution of the tax - exempt interest income , and the value of the tax - exemption to issuers . as discussed above , three types of proposals are examined here . the current budget situation has prompted congress to examine a variety of revenue raising options . repealing or modifying some or all of the long list of so - called tax expenditures is often included as part of those options . the exclusion from income of the interest paid on state and local government debt is one such tax expenditure . there are three primary types of proposals that include changes to state and local government bonds — capping the preference , eliminating the preference , and changing the preference to a direct issuer subsidy . thus , modifying , eliminating , or reducing the tax preference could generate federal revenue and make the federal tax code more economically efficient . policymakers must weigh a variety of competing concerns when evaluating these proposals to modify tax - exempt bonds . issuers , such as governments and certain private entities , benefit from lower cost of borrowing and relatively high - income investors benefit from the resulting tax - free income . with the proposals presented here , issuers would likely encounter higher borrowing costs and relative wealthy investors would lose a significant tax preference . in particular , the top 10% of all earners realize more than 77% of the total reported tax - exempt interest income . the first , capping the benefit of the tax - exemption to the 28% marginal tax rate , was included in the president's 2013 budget . the second , eliminating the tax - exemption while broadening the income tax base and lowering rates , was included in the simpson - bowles deficit commission report . the third , replacing the tax - exemption for investors with a direct payment to the issuer , was proposed in the congressional budget office publication , "revenue options.