the bills do . the bills would also reach the crimes of a wider range of non - defense department employees , contractors , and attendants than meja . meja reaches the crimes of a few . its limited scope extends to various crimes committed by the employees and contractors of "any other federal agency , or any provisional authority , to the extent such employment relates to supporting the mission of the department of defense overseas. an incident in iraq triggered concerns that contractors assigned to such tasks as traffic control for a state department motorcade may not be engaged in activities relate "to supporting the mission the department of defense. where meja looks to crimes committed by those engaged in activities relating to a defense department mission , the bills would look to crimes committed by those engaged in activities relating to "a program , project , or activity for a department or agency of the united states other than the defense department. the bills would not repeal or amend meja's coverage of non - defense department employees , contractors , and dependants . thus , prosecutors would be free to proceed under either meja or the bill's proposed section , in cases involving employees , dependants , or contractors of such civilian agencies whose activities related to support of a defense department mission . the bills appear limited to the crimes of executive branch employees , contractors , and those accompanying them , because the bills refer to individuals associated with "any department or agency of the united states other than the department of defense. as used in the criminal code , that term "department or agency of the united states" is usually understood not to apply to the legislative and judicial branches of government , unless the context suggests otherwise . meja describes the crimes to which it applies generically: "an offense punishable by imprisonment for more than 1 year if the conduct had been engaged in within the special maritime and territorial jurisdiction of the united states. in the 110 th congress , omb considered comparable coverage for non - defense department contractors too sweeping . perhaps with this in mind , the bills provide a list of specific offenses to which its extraterritorial provisions would apply . the list includes drug trafficking , terrorism offenses , assault , murder , and most of the other common law offenses that would be subject to federal prosecution had they occurred within the united states or its special maritime or territorial jurisdiction . the list is arguably as extensive as the list of offenses covered by meja . past and present administrations have sought an exception for united states intelligence activities abroad . the two bills would create such an exception , although in slightly differently terms . the house bill would exempt authorized intelligence activities conducted in accordance with applicable law ; the senate bill would exempt authorized intelligence activities authorized in accordance with applicable law . both bills disclaim any intent to curtail other grants of extraterritorial jurisdiction or to negate any authority of responsibilities of the various chiefs of mission . meja has a number of procedural provisions designed to minimize the adverse impact of investigating and prosecuting those closely associated with military activities .