suas may also collaborate with usda - fns programs . most suas reported that they also collaborate with snap ( 56% ) and sfmnp ( 62% ) , but collaborate less so with other usda - fns programs , such as csfp , child and adult care food program ( cacfp ) , and the emergency food assistance program ( tefap ) . collaboration activities with snap and sfmnp included promoting older - adult access to these programs , participating in committees and workshops as well as training and assistance programs , and policy planning activities . also , older adults participating in snap can use their benefits as a voluntary contribution toward the oaa meal if the nutrition service provider is authorized by usda to accept snap benefits for this purpose and the older adults choose to do so . congress has reauthorized and amended the oaa numerous times since it was first enacted in 1965 . the last oaa reauthorization occurred in 2016 , when the 114 th congress enacted the older americans act amendments of 2016 ( p.l . 114-144 ) , which extended the act's authorization of appropriations for most programs , including senior nutrition , through fy2019 . the 2016 oaa reauthorization made two changes to the nutrition services programs . obligations for nsip commodity procurement are funded under an agreement between hhs - acl and usda - fns . at the state level , hhs - acl and usda - fns nutrition services programs that target seniors may be jointly administered under state aging and disability agencies , who are primarily responsible at the state level for administering oaa - funded programs . according to findings from an evaluation of the oaa nutrition services programs , 8 in 10 state units on aging ( suas ) — designated state - level agencies — had a nutrition program administrator ( npa ) who plans , develops , administers , implements , and evaluates oaa nutrition services . in 40% of suas with an npa , the npa has program responsibilities for oaa nutrition services as well as usda programs such as snap and sfmnp . whether a state agency has some responsibility for administering hhs - acl and usda - fns programs and services may depend on whether the agency functions as an independent administrative agency or part of an umbrella agency that also has responsibility for other health and human services . first , it required states to "utilize" the expertise of a dietician or other individuals with equivalent education and training in nutrition science , or an individual with comparable expertise ( rather than "solicit" ) . second , where feasible , it added language for states to ensure that the nutrition project encourages the use of locally grown foods in meals programs and identifies potential partnerships and contracts with local producers and providers of locally grown foods . the usda - fns national office works in concert with usda - fns's regional offices and state agencies . with respect to snap ( formerly known as the food stamp program ) , state agencies and legislatures have a number of options and waivers that can affect snap program operations from state to state .