112-25 , sec . these include commercial banks ( about 44% of market share ) , life insurance companies , and individuals , merchants , and dealers . the statutory authority for fsa , fcs , and farmer mac is permanent , but farm bills often make adjustments to eligibility criteria and the scope of operations . for example , the 2008 farm bill increased fsa direct lending limits per farmer , further prioritized lending for beginning and socially disadvantaged farmers , and , among other changes , created individual development accounts for beginning farmers , although the latter have yet to be funded by appropriators . the federal government provides support for u.s. agricultural exports through three types of programs: export market development , export credit guarantees , and direct export subsidies . legislative authorizations for agricultural trade programs are included in title iii of the 2008 farm bill . administered by usda's foreign agricultural service ( fas ) , the programs are funded through the borrowing authority of usda's commodity credit corporation ( ccc ) . one of them , the market access program ( map ) , has been targeted for cuts or elimination in a number of deficit reduction proposals . agricultural conservation began in the 1930s with a focus on soil and water issues associated with production and environmental concerns on the farm . by the 1980s , agricultural conservation policies had broadened to include environmental issues beyond soil and water , especially environmental issues related to production ( off the farm ) . many of the current agricultural conservation programs were enacted as part of the 1985 farm bill ( p.l . 99-198 , food security act of 1985 ) , which also included for the first time a conservation title . these programs have been reauthorized , modified , and expanded , and several new programs have been created , primarily in subsequent omnibus farm bills . while the number of programs has increased and techniques to address the problems are changing , the basic approach has remained unchanged — voluntary farmer participation encouraged by land rental payments , cost - sharing conservation practices , technical assistance , education , and basic and applied research . according to the congressional budget office's march 2011 baseline , domestic nutrition programs make up nearly 80% of spending in the farm bill ( see figure 1 , above ) . domestic nutrition assistance programs reauthorized in the farm bill include the supplemental nutrition assistance program ( snap , formerly food stamps ) , the emergency food assistance program ( tefap ) , the commodity supplemental food program ( csfp ) , the food distribution program on indian reservations ( fdpir ) , and other programs . the snap program accounts for the vast majority of the spending in title iv . at the time of enactment , the nutrition title of the 2008 farm bill had a projected new cost of about $3 billion over five years ( fy2008-fy2012 ) and well over $9 billion over ten years ( fy2008-fy2017 ) . the major share of this new spending was due to changes in the snap program .