we cannot afford that. in construction projects , project labor agreements ( plas ) are arrangements between the contractors and labor organizations arrived at before hiring that establish employment terms and conditions for a specific construction project . plas have been used in public construction projects since the 1930s . in issuing executive order ( e.o. ) 13502 on february 6 , 2009 , president barak obama directed that , under certain circumstances , "in awarding any contract in connection with a large - scale construction project , or obligating funds pursuant to such a contract , executive agencies may , on a project - by - project basis , require the use of a project labor agreement by a contractor .. . later in the e.o. , the president stipulated that this order does not require an executive agency to use a project labor agreement on any construction project , nor does it preclude the use of a project labor agreement in circumstances not covered by this order , including leasehold arrangements and projects receiving federal financial assistance . this order also does not require contractors or subcontractors to enter into a project labor agreement with any particular labor organization . that notwithstanding , section 517 of the house - passed version of the military construction appropriation ( h.r . 5854 ) states none of the funds made available by this act may be used by any government authority or agent thereof awarding a construction contract on behalf of the government , in any solicitations , bid specifications , project agreements , or other controlling documents , to require or prohibit bidders , offerors , contractors , or subcontractors to enter into or adhere to agreements with one or more labor organizations ; nor shall such funds be used to discriminate against or give preference to such bidders , offerors , contractors , or subcontractors based on their entering or refusing to enter into such agreements . the previous sentence does not apply to construction contracts awarded before the date of the enactment of this act . a floor amendment to the house version of the national defense authorization act , 2013 , proposed by representative roscoe g. bartlett ( md / 06 ) , would amend section 2852 of title 10 , united states code to forbid contracting officers of the department of defense or any military department from requiring or prohibiting contractors from entering into or adhering to plas or to discriminate against or give preference to bids or contractors based on such agreements . this provision was adopted by recorded vote , 211-209 , on may 19 , 2012 ( roll no . 267 ) and subsequently precipitated the omb objection in statement of administration policy on the bill . both of the committees on armed services reported versions of the ndaa for 2013 that include a provision ( section 2803 ) that extends for a year the secretary of defense's authority to use up to $200 million in o&m funds from the defense appropriation for the construction of facilities in the geographic areas of responsibility of u.s. central command ( uscentcom ) and those areas on the continent of africa formerly under centcom responsibility .