all of the witnesses agreed that more research is needed . in the first session of the 113 th congress , some members of the senate committee on environment and public works had expressed concern in january 2013 about the pending epa draft report for the pavillion site and the quality of the science upon which it was based . epa's june 20 , 2013 , decision not to finalize the pavillion draft report , and to defer to the state of wyoming to assume the lead role in investigating drinking water quality in the area , has received support from the entire wyoming delegation . on december 14 , 2011 , epa officially issued notice of the public availability of its draft report and initially began a 45-day public comment period with a closing date of january 27 , 2012 . due to heightened interest , epa subsequently extended the public comment period for an additional 45 days through march 12 , 2012 . shortly after this period expired , epa announced on march 29 , 2012 , that the agency would continue to accept public comments through october 16 , 2012 . epa decided to continue accepting public comments for this longer period while the agency collected more data than first examined in the draft report . on march 8 , 2012 , epa had announced its decision to collect additional samples from the deep monitoring wells in response to concerns about the scientific validity of the agency's findings . epa stated that it would partner with the u.s. geological survey ( usgs ) and the state of wyoming to perform the additional sampling and analysis , in collaboration with the tribes . in conjunction with its decision to extend the public comment period , epa delayed the convening of a panel of independent scientists to peer review the findings of its draft report until the additional sampling was completed and the data could be made available to the panel to incorporate into its review . on january 17 , 2012 , epa had published a 30-day notice inviting public nominations of scientific experts to be considered as peer reviewers for the external review of the draft report . epa subsequently extended the public comment period on its draft report to january 15 , 2013 , and again to september 30 , 2013 . on june 20 , 2013 , epa announced that it no longer intends to finalize its draft report or to seek scientific peer review . instead , epa has deferred to the state of wyoming to assume the lead role in investigating drinking water quality in the vicinity of pavillion , but noted that it would continue to provide technical support to the state . the wyoming department of environmental quality and the wyoming oil and gas conservation commission are the two agencies that would lead the continuing investigation on behalf of the state . the scope of the investigation by the state would seek to address water quality concerns by evaluating the water quality of certain domestic water wells , the integrity of certain oil and gas wells , and the historic use of waste disposal pits in the pavillion area .