ch . 109a ( relating to sexual abuse of a child ) 18 u.s.c . ch . 110 ( relating to pornography but not including record - keeping violations ) , or 18 u.s.c . ch . 117 ( relating to sex offenses involving travel ) . each predicate offense need not involve more than one victim nor be committed in concert with three other offenders ; it is enough that the series of predicate offenses , taken in total involve more than one victim and three or more other offenders . the constitution's double jeopardy clause bars punishment for both a violation of subsection 2252a ( g ) and for conspiracy to violate the underlying predicate offenses . child pornography offenses come with their own mandatory restitution provisions , not unlike those covering sex trafficking and sex abuse in federal enclaves . the provision , section 2259 , is much like section 2248 that applies in enclave cases . it adopts the procedures generally applicable in restitution cases . its definition of the term the "victim" suggests that parents must be awarded restitution for expenses incurred on behalf of a victimized child . the examples of qualifying expenses are the same as those used for the victims of sexual abuse in federal enclaves under section 2248 . it references a similar list of specific qualifying expenses , but adds to the list the right to recover the value of the services of the trafficked victim . offenders convicted of a mandatory minimum pornography offense must be sentenced to a term of supervised release for "any term of years not less than 5 , or life. a defendant sentenced to a term of supervised release must ( 1 ) avoid further criminal activity ; ( 2 ) submit to drug testing and the collection of dna samples ; and ( 3 ) obey sex offender registration requirements . in addition , internet use and child contact restrictions are particularly common conditions of supervised release in pornography cases . here too , however , the discretionary conditions of supervised release must be consistent the policies of the sentencing guidelines , must be related to the statutory sentencing factors concerning the circumstances of the offense and the offender , and must not unduly deprive the defendant of his liberty . it punishes attempt and conspiracy in the same manner . it imposes a minimum 15-year term of imprisonment upon recidivists . the offense must be committed knowingly ; inadvertent receipt is not a violation . knowing violation occurs , for instance , when the defendant "intentionally views , acquires , or accepts child pornography on a computer from an outside source. attempted violation requires evidence of an intent to commit the offense and a substantial step beyond mere preparation towards that goal . factual impossibility , such as the absence of a real child in a sting situation , poses no obstacle to conviction for attempt . possession of child pornography under subsection 2252a ( a ) ( 5 ) is a lesser included offense to the crime of receipt of child pornography under subsection 2252a ( a ) ( 2 ) . the constitution's double jeopardy clause thus precludes punishment under both subsections for the same misconduct .