similar to h.r . 2405 , s. 1855 would allow the secretary to issue an eua following the determination that a significant potential for a public health emergency exists . euas would expire when the hhs secretary determines the underlying emergency circumstances no longer exist rather than automatically after one year as under current law . also like h.r . 2405 , s. 1855 would allow the secretary to modify active euas ; waive certain manufacturing process requirements for approved products during an emergency ; and allow pre - positioning of unapproved medical countermeasures by federal , state , or local governments in anticipation of emergencies . however , unlike h.r . 2405 , s. 1855 would also allow the secretary to issue an eua for countermeasures against any agents that dhs has determined pose a material threat to national security . as discussed above , a material threat determination is required for all project bioshield countermeasure acquisitions . thus , under s. 1855 , the hhs secretary would be allowed to issue an eua for all countermeasures acquired through project bioshield , regardless of whether an emergency or potential emergency exists . following senate passage of s. 1855 , the house considered and passed the pandemic and all - hazards preparedness reauthorization act of 2012 ( h.r . 6672 ) on december 19 , 2012 . this bill contains provisions similar to those in h.r . 2405 and s. 1855 that would affect project bioshield implementation , address the use of the special reserve fund for purposes other than acquisition , change the countermeasures development and acquisition process , and modify the emergency use authority . similar to both h.r . 6672 would extend the project bioshield procurement program to fy2018 . it would authorize appropriations of $2.8 billion for five fiscal years ( fy2014-fy2018 ) , the same average annual appropriations as current law . this bill would grant the hhs secretary the authority to use up to $1.4 billion of project bioshield appropriations for barda countermeasure advanced development activities . this is greater than the $840 million that h.r . 2405 would allow for such use . it has three main provisions . the first provision , the one generally referred to as project bioshield , creates a government - market guarantee by permitting the hhs secretary to obligate funds to purchase countermeasures while they still need several more years of development . the second main provision establishes a process through which the hhs secretary may temporarily allow the emergency use of countermeasures that lack food and drug administration ( fda ) approval . the third main provision provides hhs with expedited procedures for cbrn terrorism - related spending , including procuring products , hiring experts , and awarding research grants . this law also requires hhs and the government accountability office ( gao ) to produce certain reports . the project bioshield act did not appropriate any funds . instead , it authorized the appropriation of up to $5.593 billion for procuring countermeasures from fy2004 through fy2013 . the department of homeland security appropriations act , 2004 ( p.l . 108-90 ) had previously appropriated this amount into a special reserve fund and provided explicit time windows during which the money could be obligated .