the motion to commit was rejected . another change that generated a number of remarks was a standing order that initially appeared as a standing order in the house rules resolution for the 112 th congress and in budget resolutions in the two succeeding congresses . ( see , below , " 112th congress " and " 115th congress " under " rules changes affecting budgetary legislation ." president george w. bush served through 2006 with only a republican congress , except for a portion of the 107 th congress when democrats controlled the senate . president obama enjoyed democratic control of both houses of congress for two years , but faced a republican house and narrower democratic senate majority in the next years , before republicans controlled both chambers in the 114 th congress . president trump began his presidency with republican control of both chambers . presidents have succeeded and failed with their major policy initiatives under each arrangement . both parties in the house gave attention to their party rules in the 114 th and 115 th congresses , which were intended to open the parties to more voices and perspectives in party decisionmaking . many members in the democratic caucus are organizing under the "progressive" banner and many members in the republican conference are organizing under the "very conservative" banner , but there are other groups and many viewpoints within both parties . for members and congress watchers alike seeking to understand the congressional environment , being attentive to the parties' organization and decisionmaking is vital . the rules of the house do not exist to achieve a specific legislative result . they are available to all members and to any majority or minority . the standing order included in the 115 th congress rules resolution contained an exemption from the standing order that would affect legislation to repeal or reform the patient protection and affordable care act and the health care and education affordability reconciliation act . democrats attacked the policy implications of the exemption . they argued that this exemption would allow repeal or reform of the health care law to be done without regard to an expected several - trillion - dollar impact on the federal deficit and that repeal would take away health coverage from many people and drive up premiums for all , harm medicare recipients in a number of ways , and adversely affect the solvency of medicare . ranking member slaughter announced during debate that she would offer an amendment to the rules resolution , urging members to defeat the previous question so that she could offer the amendment . the amendment would have added a new paragraph to rule xxi ( "restrictions on certain bills" ) . the amendment would have prohibited the house from considering a bill , joint resolution , amendment , or conference report that adversely affected health benefits in one of seven ways or that reduced taxes for very wealthy taxpayers or increased taxes for 80% of the population that was comparatively the least wealthy .