115 stat . there can be no doubt that individuals who fought against the united states in afghanistan as part of the taliban , an organization known to have supported the al qaeda terrorist network responsible for those attacks , are individuals congress sought to target in passing the aumf . we conclude that detention of individuals falling into the limited category we are considering , for the duration of the particular conflict in which they were captured , is so fundamental and accepted an incident to war as to be an exercise of the "necessary and appropriate force" congress has authorized the president to use . the plurality went on to describe the kind of detention it had in mind was the traditional practice of detaining prisoners of war under long - standing law of war principles: further , we understand congress' grant of authority for the use of "necessary and appropriate force" to include the authority to detain for the duration of the relevant conflict , and our understanding is based on longstanding law - of - war principles . if the practical circumstances of a given conflict are entirely unlike those of the conflicts that informed the development of the law of war , that understanding may unravel . but that is not the situation we face as of this date . active combat operations against taliban fighters apparently are ongoing in afghanistan . the united states may detain , for the duration of these hostilities , individuals legitimately determined to be taliban combatants who "engaged in an armed conflict against the united states. if the record establishes that united states troops are still involved in active combat in afghanistan , those detentions are part of the exercise of "necessary and appropriate force," and therefore are authorized by the aumf . justice souter , joined by justice ginsburg joined the plurality opinion to provide sufficient votes to vacate the decision below and remand the case to give hamdi an opportunity to contest his detention . however , finding no explicit authority in the aumf ( or other statutes ) to detain persons as enemy combatants , they would have determined that 18 u.s.c . section 4001 ( a ) precludes the detention of american citizens as enemy combatants altogether . they rejected the theory that the detention was authorized as a necessary incident to the use of military force because "the government's stated legal position in its campaign against the taliban ... is apparently at odds with its claim here to be acting in accordance with customary law of war and hence to be within the terms of the force resolution in its detention of hamdi. in other words , the two justices appeared to agree in principle that the aumf could authorize the detention of prisoners of war , but took the view that the government's failure to accord the taliban detainees rights under the geneva convention vitiated that authority . justice scalia , joined by justice stevens , dissented , arguing that "our constitutional tradition has been to prosecute [u.s. citizens accused of waging war against the government] in federal court for treason or some other crime" unless congress has suspended the writ of habeas corpus pursuant to the constitution's suspension clause , art .