drug tests historically have been considered searches for the purposes of the fourth amendment . whether a search is reasonable depends on the nature of the search and its underlying governmental purpose . reasonableness under the fourth amendment generally requires individualized suspicion , which frequently takes the form of a warrant that is based on probable cause . however , the supreme court has recognized an exception to these general requirements "when special needs , beyond the normal need for law enforcement , make the warrant and probable - cause requirement impracticable," and the government's needs outweigh any "diminished expectation" of privacy invaded by a search . in instances where the government argues that there are special needs to support suspicionless searches , courts determine whether such searches are reasonable under the circumstances by assessing the competing interests of the government conducting the search and the private individuals who are subject to the search . the supreme court has assessed the constitutionality of governmental drug testing programs in a number of contexts . five opinions are especially relevant to the question of whether a mandatory , suspicionless drug test for the receipt of governmental benefits would be considered an unreasonable search in violation of the fourth amendment . each of these decisions , skinner v. railway labor executives association , national treasury employees union v. von raab , vernonia school district v. acton , board of education of independent school district no . 92 of pottawatomie county v. earls , and chandler v. miller , is analyzed in turn . two state laws that established mandatory , suspicionless drug testing programs as a condition to receiving tanf benefits have been challenged on fourth amendment grounds . the federal district court ruling in marchwinski v. howard , which was affirmed by the u.s. court of appeals for the sixth circuit ( sixth circuit ) as a result of an evenly divided en banc panel , involved a michigan program that began in the late 1990s . this decision was delivered at the preliminary stages of litigation and was not based on a complete evidentiary record . additionally , the way drug testing programs are implemented can affect a court's constitutional analysis of the program . for instance , until a subsequent administrative rulemaking promulgated in response to issues raised in the district court's preliminary injunction order , florida's section 414.0652 program required positive drug test results to be shared with government officials outside of the tanf program , such that the information ultimately could be made available to law enforcement officials . as a result , prior to the administrative rulemaking , applicants who failed drug tests under the florida program also could have been subject to criminal drug investigations or investigations of child abuse , in addition to losing their tanf benefits . this information sharing increased the level of intrusion into the privacy interests of tanf applicants more than if the results were kept confidential to all but the administrators of the tanf program , who had a legitimate need to know the information .