some support land protection from development . by contrast , the nps has no general authority to acquire land to create new park units . condemnation for acquiring land is feasible , but rarely is used by any of the agencies and its potential use has been controversial . the primary funding mechanism for federal land acquisition , for the four major federal land management agencies , has been appropriations from the land and water conservation fund ( lwcf ) . for the fws , the migratory bird conservation fund ( supported by sales of duck stamps and import taxes on arms and ammunition ) provides a significant additional source of mandatory spending for land acquisition . funding for acquisitions by dod is provided in department of defense appropriations laws . with regard to disposal , the nps and fws have no general authority to dispose of the lands they administer , and the fs disposal authorities are restricted . the extent of ownership continues to be debated . some advocate disposing of federal lands to state or private ownership ; others favor retaining currently owned lands ; still others promote land acquisition by the federal government , including through increased or more stable funding sources . another focus is on the condition of federal lands and related infrastructure . some assert that lands and infrastructure have deteriorated and that agency activities and funding should focus on restoration and maintenance , whereas others advocate expanding federal protection to additional lands . debates also encompass the extent to which federal lands should be developed , preserved , and open to recreation and whether federal lands should be managed primarily to produce national benefits or benefits primarily for the localities and states in which the lands are located . finally , management of , and access to , federal lands along and near the southwestern border raise questions about border security and the role of law enforcement . these issues are discussed below ( see " border security " ) . the optimal extent of federal land ownership is an enduring issue for congress . current debates encompass the extent to which the federal government should dispose of , retain , or acquire lands in general and in particular areas . advocates of retention of federal lands , and federal acquisition of additional lands , assert a variety of benefits to the public of federal land ownership . they include protection and preservation of unique natural and other resources ; open space ; and public access , especially for recreation . disposal advocates have expressed concerns about the efficacy and efficiency of federal land management , accessibility of federal lands for certain types of recreation , and limitations on development of federal lands . some support selling federal land for financial reasons , such as to help lower federal expenditures , reduce the deficit , or balance the budget . others assert that limited federal resources constrain agencies' abilities to protect and manage the lands and resources . other concerns involve the potential influence of federal land protection on private property , development , and local economic activity . some seek disposal to states or private landowners to foster state , local , and private control over lands and resources .