this combined workforce is known as a blended workforce . determining which sector will perform which functions , including determining when federal employee performance is , or should be , required can be challenging , however . efforts to address this issue , and related questions , have been the subject of the federal government's sourcing policy since at least the 1950s . sourcing policy is not so much a product of coordinated planning and implementation as it is an amalgamation of statutory provisions , policy letters , administrative directives , and guidance issued by various presidential administrations . sourcing policy has been at the root of contentious debates , which may complicate the somewhat murky picture . this brief overview of the report is provided to assist in navigating the subject of sourcing policy . sourcing policy encompasses two major strains . delving into the history of sourcing policy is necessary for understanding the strain that emerged in the 1950s , and for providing context for the strain that emerged during president barack obama's administration . the latter strain has not necessarily displaced , or replaced , the former strain , though it might not always be clear to outside observers what actions agencies are taking , or are expected to take . the complexity might be due , at least in part , to the ad hoc fashion in which sourcing policy has evolved and the mix of government documents involved . the strain that emerged first , with the issuance of three bureau of the budget ( bob ) bulletins in the 1950s , emphasizes governmental reliance on the private sector for the provision of goods and services . an unwritten corollary of this strain of sourcing policy has been that certain functions performed by federal employees may be subjected to public - private competition . a competition determines whether the incumbent workforce would continue to perform the work , or the agency would award a contract to a private company to perform the work . circular a - 76 , which was issued initially in 1966 , continued this policy of governmental reliance on the private sector and provides guidance and procedures for carrying out public - private competitions . the office of management and budget has published five revisions to the circular . the current circular ( or revision ) was released in may 2003 . generally , the term introduced by the administration of president george w. bush — competitive sourcing — is associated with this strain of sourcing policy . throughout the history of sourcing policy , only certain functions have been eligible for public - private competitions . beginning with the bureau of the budget bulletins published during the eisenhower administration , only agency functions identified as commercial may be subjected to public - private competitions . any agency function designated as governmental ( or , later , inherently governmental ) must be performed by federal employees . with the continued emphasis on governmental reliance on the private sector finding expression in a "[g]overnment policy [that] has favored contracting for goods and services rather than providing them in - house," the commercial / inherently governmental dichotomy and the focus on public - private competitions sufficed for a number of years .