the sba has promulgated regulations implementing the small business act . the report begins with the statutory authorities , then discusses the regulations implementing these statutes , and concludes by discussing the various judicial and other tribunals whose decisions regularly construe small business statutes and regulations . gao is a legislative branch agency , and the "separation of powers" doctrine precludes it from dictating the conduct of executive branch agencies . gao can only make "recommendations" in its bid protest decisions , although these recommendations are highly influential and typically adopted by the procuring agencies . the federal district courts currently do not have jurisdiction to hear bid protests . however , they may hear certain questions related to small business contracting and subcontracting that do not arise in connection with a procurement or proposed procurement . thus , the federal district and appellate courts have heard suits ( 1 ) seeking to compel disclosure under the freedom of information act ( foia ) of forms tracking prime contractors' compliance with their subcontracting plans ; ( 2 ) asserting that particular agency actions are contrary to federal law and , thus , violate the administrative procedure act ( apa ) ; and ( 3 ) alleging liability under the false claims act for fraudulent subcontracting plans or reports . in addition , at least one federal district court has found that it has jurisdiction to hear challenges to agency insourcing determinations brought by small businesses . because most small business statutes leave at least something to the discretion of the agency tasked with implementing them , regulations promulgated by agencies also play a significant role in federal contracting and subcontracting with small businesses . sba regulations , which implement the small business act , generally apply . however , depending upon circumstances , the federal acquisition regulation ( far ) and / or various agency - specific regulations may also apply . agencies' power to promulgate regulations intended to promote contracting or subcontracting with small businesses is more limited than congress's authority in this regard , although it can still be quite broad depending upon the context . the agency must have been delegated authority to promulgate the regulation by congress , and the regulation itself must correspond to the statute if "congress has directly spoken to the precise question at issue. if congress has not directly spoken to the precise question , the agency can have considerable discretion , and a regulation implementing the agency's governing statute will generally be upheld by judicial or other tribunals so long as it is "based upon a permissible construction of the statute. ' however , there are certain things that congress has effectively prohibited agencies from doing , by regulation or otherwise , where contracting is concerned . arguably the foremost among these is establishing a new set - aside program for small or other businesses . a key obstacle to the creation of such programs by regulation is the competition in contracting act ( cica ) of 1984 , which generally requires that agencies obtain "full and open competition through the use of competitive procedures" unless other procedures are expressly authorized by statute .