currently , there are 171 members and 35 observers . the gac chair is currently held by switzerland , with vice chairs held by egypt , peru , france , the united kingdom , and china . membership in the gac is open to all national governments who wish to participate . internet governance forum ( igf ) — the igf was established in 2006 by the united nations' world summit on the information society ( wsis ) . the purpose of the igf is to provide a multistakeholder forum which provides an open discussion ( in yearly meetings ) on public policies related to the internet . open to all stakeholders and interested parties ( governments , industry , academia , civil society ) , the igf serves as an open discussion forum and does not have negotiated outcomes , nor does it make formal recommendations to the u.n . since 1997 , congressional committees have held over 40 hearings on the dns and icann . the 114 th congress closely examined ntia's proposal to relinquish its authority over icann and the dns , thereby transitioning icann to a wholly multistakeholder - driven entity . with the transition now complete , congress may continue assessing how effectively ntia is advancing u.s. government positions within the governmental advisory committee . of particular interest may be to what extent ongoing and future intergovernmental telecommunications conferences constitute an opportunity for some nations to increase intergovernmental control over the internet — at the expense of the multistakeholder system of internet governance — and how effectively ntia and other government agencies ( such as the state department ) are working to counteract that threat . finally , the ongoing debate over internet governance will likely have a significant impact on how other aspects of the internet may be governed in the future , especially in such areas as intellectual property , privacy , law enforcement , internet free speech , and cybersecurity . looking forward , the institutional nature of internet governance could have far - reaching implications on important policy decisions that will likely shape the future evolution of the internet . icann is a not - for - profit public benefit corporation headquartered in los angeles , ca , and incorporated under the laws of the state of california . icann is organized under the california nonprofit public benefit law for charitable and public purposes , and as such , is subject to legal oversight by the california attorney general . icann has been granted tax - exempt status by the federal government and the state of california . icann's organizational structure consists of a board of directors ( bod ) advised by a network of supporting organizations and advisory committees that represent various internet constituencies and interests ( see figure a - 1 ) . policies are developed and issues are researched by these subgroups , who in turn advise the board of directors , which is responsible for making all final policy and operational decisions .