the credit has not been in effect over the past several years . elimination of this credit would likely not have any effect on current , or expected , oil production , as oil prices are generally expected to remain high . periods of low oil prices are usually associated with excess supply in the market . during periods of excess supply , it is unlikely that keeping older , higher - cost , low - production wells producing is an effective strategy for oil companies . revenues from these wells are unlikely to cover operating costs in periods of low prices , although the credit could provide the margin that keeps some of these wells in production . however , with the october 2013 price of oil around $100 per barrel , reflecting political unrest in the middle east as well as other factors , the additional tax expense is likely to have a smaller effect on reducing oil development activity . tertiary injection expenses , including the injectant cost , can be fully deducted in the current tax year . supporters of the favorable current treatment of these expenses point to the importance of tertiary recovery methods in maintaining the output of older wells , as well as the environmental advantages of injecting carbon dioxide , a primary tertiary injectant , into wells . repeal of the deduction , or less favorable tax treatment of the expenses , would be likely to reduce oil output from older producing fields during periods when the profit margin , and the price of oil , is low . during a period of high oil prices , the repeal is likely to have a smaller effect on production levels . repeal of the passive loss exception for working interests in oil and natural gas properties is a relatively small item in terms of tax revenues , estimated at $74 million from fy2014 to fy2023 . the provision exempts working interests , investments , in gas and oil exploration and development from being categorized as "passive income ( or loss ) " with respect to the tax reform act of 1986 . this categorization permits the deduction of losses accrued in oil and gas projects against other active income earned without limitation , and is believed to act as an incentive to induce investors to finance oil and gas projects . percentage depletion is the practice of deducting from an oil company's gross income a percentage value , in the current law 15% , which represents , for accounting and tax purposes , the total value of the oil deposit that was extracted in the tax year . percentage depletion has a long history in the tax treatment of the oil industry , dating back to 1926 . the purpose of the percentage depletion allowance is to provide an analog to normal business depreciation of assets for the oil industry , in effect equating the tax treatment of oil deposits to the tax treatment of capital equipment in more traditional manufacturing industries .