hence , the most comprehensive examination is on merchandise trade . congress has a major role in the negotiation and implementation of ftas . throughout the negotiating process , congress may conduct oversight hearings and consultations with u.s. trade negotiators , providing members an opportunity to oversee and influence the development of the final tpp . congress may also establish u.s. trade negotiating objectives as part of its granting of trade promotion authority ( tpa ) to the executive branch . congress would also have to consider and approve implementing legislation before a final fta could enter into force . the united states has a number of objectives in the proposed tpp agreement . these include achieving a comprehensive and high standard regional fta that eliminates and reduces trade barriers and increases opportunities for u.s. trade and investment ; allowing the united states to play a role in developing a broader platform for trade liberalization , particularly throughout the asia - pacific region ; and providing the united states with an opportunity to establish new rules on emerging trade issues , such as regulatory coherence , supply chain management , state - owned enterprises , and increasing trade opportunities for small - and medium - sized businesses . this report focuses primarily on u.s. economic interests in the tpp agreement . it provides a comparative economic analysis of the countries currently negotiating the tpp and describes the u.s. trade flows with these countries at the bilateral level and in relation to the countries' economic linkages with the rest of the world . it also provides information on the existing trade agreements of tpp countries . as such , this report aims to serve as an introduction to the economic relationship these countries have , both individually and collectively , with the united states . tpp participants belong to various multilateral , regional , and bilateral trade and economic agreements . for example , all tpp countries are members of the world trade organization ( wto ) , with vietnam joining most recently in 2007 . in addition , tpp countries have a number of bilateral and regional ftas in effect , of varying degrees , some of which include other tpp negotiating partners . the united states , for example , has ftas with 20 countries including 6 tpp participants ( australia , canada , chile , mexico , peru , and singapore ) . in total , there are more than 180 preferential trade agreements among asia - pacific countries , most of which do not include the united states . the united states trade representative ( ustr ) , as well as certain stakeholder groups , view the proposed tpp fta as an opportunity for the united states to address this rapid rise in preferential trade agreements , with a goal of ensuring that u.s. goods and services remain competitive in the region and that the united states plays a central role in developing a framework for future regional free trade negotiations . given the potential for future expansion in tpp membership , supporters contend that the ability to influence the strength and coverage of the agreement at the beginning stage may be particularly advantageous .