the economic crisis has also become a political crisis . the economic crisis has also turned into a political crisis . for eurozone countries under the most market pressure , the crisis has provoked protests and backlash against austerity measures . in the economically stronger economies that have been providing financial assistance , there has been resentment against what is perceived as "bailing out" other countries that have failed to implement "responsible" policy choices . governments in many european countries have fallen as a direct or indirect result of the crisis . additionally , disagreements among germany , france , and the ecb over the appropriate crisis response , and complex eu policy - making processes , are seen as having exacerbated anxiety in markets . more broadly , the crisis has exposed problems in the structure of the eurozone , which many economists have long debated . the eurozone has a common monetary policy and currency , without creating a fiscal union , and therefore it does not have a centralized budget authority or system of fiscal transfers across member states . possibly , under a tight fiscal union , a central budget authority could control spending in different eurozone member states , and use fiscal transfers to smooth out asymmetric shocks within the eurozone . such measures are currently being debated in europe , but are politically contentious . additionally , the crisis has illustrated the policy constraints facing the governments of struggling eurozone countries in responding to the crisis: as members of the eurozone , they cannot use currency depreciation to promote export - led growth , which some argue has been helpful for other countries , such as iceland , in reviving economic growth following financial crises . the united states has found , however , that it has limited ability to affect european policy decisions on this issue . the crisis has bolstered interest in trade and investment liberalization between the united states and the eu , as a way of promoting economic recovery in both economies . in february 2013 , the obama administration and eu officials announced plans to launch talks on a transatlantic trade and investment partnership ( ttip ) . some members of congress have expressed concern about the possible effects of the crisis on the u.s. economy , the appropriate role of the international monetary fund ( imf ) in the crisis , and the implications of the crisis for future u.s. - eu cooperation on foreign policy issues . committees in both the house and the senate have held hearings on the crisis and issues relating to its impact on the u.s. economy , and have exercised congressional oversight of u.s. policy responses . this report provides a brief analysis of the eurozone crisis and issues of particular congressional interest . for discussion about sovereign debt in advanced economies , including a comparison of the eurozone and the united states , see crs report r41838 , sovereign debt in advanced economies: overview and issues for congress , by [author name scrubbed] . the eurozone crisis broke in late 2009 , when a new greek government revealed that previous governments had been misreporting government budget data .