1506 ) in the 112 th congress . this report examines potential policy issues that could arise under the terror gap proposal . for context , a basic overview of the u.s. government's post - 9 / 11 terrorist watchlist procedures is provided , as well as an analysis of the terror gap proposal , which has been reintroduced in the 113 th congress ( s. 34 and h.r . possible issues could include the following: should u.s. persons — citizens and legal permanent residents — be notified when the attorney general makes a "dangerous terrorist" determination about them for the purposes of gun control following a terrorist watchlist match ? what form of redress and remedy would be provided for misidentifications , improper watch - listing , and wrongful denial ? if enacted , moreover , would these redress and remedy provisions serve as a precedent for other terrorist screening procedures for which congress has not provided similar avenues of relief ? would the terror gap proposal draw unwanted public attention to terrorist watchlists and related screening procedures , possibly undermining the effectiveness of those measures by making terrorists and other adversaries aware of them , and possibly setting a judicial review precedent for other terrorist watchlist screening processes ? as noted above , the terror gap proposal would grant the attorney general the authority to deny firearms transfers and state - issued firearms permits , as well as federal licenses to deal in firearms , to watchlisted persons if he deemed them to be "dangerous terrorists. the proposal would also grant the attorney general similar authority to deny federal licenses to deal in explosives or federal permits to handle explosives . however , the gravity of a denial of a federal license to deal in either firearms or explosives , or a federal permit to handle explosives — which is arguably the denial of a privilege as opposed to a constitutionally enumerated right — would not be as compelling as the denial of a firearms transfer or state - issued permit to an individual . hence , the principal focus of this report is on the potential policy issues that could be generated by the denial of a firearms transfer or a state - issued permit to an individual under the terror gap proposal . although the due process issues raised by the terror gap proposal are not addressed in this report , the arguably parallel policy issues are examined in detail . to further this examination , this report provides ( 1 ) an overview of the post - 9 / 11 reforms that led to the incorporation of terrorist watchlist checks into the brady background check process , ( 2 ) an analysis of key provisions of the terror gap proposal , and ( 3 ) a summation of possible issues for congress . under the brady handgun violence prevention act ( brady act ) , congress required the attorney general to establish a computerized system to facilitate background checks on individuals seeking to acquire a firearm from federally licensed gun dealers . both the tide and tsdb are described in greater detail below .