the report will not be updated . a separate report will address issues pertaining to small business contracting and subcontracting in the 113 th congress . the small business act currently gives the administrator of small business considerable discretion as to what firms qualify as small for purposes of the act , or for certain other purposes of federal law . the act requires only that small businesses be "independently owned and operated," be "not dominant in their field of operations," and meet any size standards established by the administrator . the administrator first promulgated regulations specifying standards for size in various industries in 1956 under the authority of the small business act of 1953 , which established sba on a temporary basis . between the early 1980s and 2007 , sba conducted no comprehensive reviews of the size standards , instead making only intermittent changes to the standards for particular industries . its failure to do so prompted some members of congress and commentators to question whether the standards adequately reflected recent trends in industry or government procurement . partly in response to such concerns , the 111 th congress enacted legislation that requires sba to conduct a "detailed review" of at least one - third of the size standards every 18 months , and make "appropriate adjustments" to them to reflect market conditions . the legislation also includes certain provisions regarding "small business size and status integrity" intended to combat fraud in the small business programs that are discussed below . following the enactment of this legislation , sba completed its first "comprehensive" review of the size standards since the 1980s , and has promulgated or proposed regulations that could reportedly result in thousands of additional firms becoming eligible for small business programs . some increases to the size standards took effect in march 2012 ; other increases are pending . concerns about the size standards and , in particular , sba's discretion in crafting them persisted , however , notwithstanding the legislation enacted by the 111 th congress and the changes made or proposed by sba . partly in response to these concerns , the 112 th congress enacted legislation that requires sba to consider and publicly address certain factors ( eg , the industry for which the new size standard is proposed , and its competitive environment ) when conducting any rulemaking to "revise , modify or establish" size standards pursuant to section 3 of the small business act . this legislation also prohibits sba from limiting the number of size standards , and from establishing or approving a single size standard for a grouping of 4-digit north american industry classification system ( naics ) codes unless sba justifies that such a standard is appropriate for each industry classification included within the grouping .