the president's actions have proven to be contentious . in addition to their impact on relations between the executive and legislative branches , these appointments also raise a number of significant legal questions regarding the scope of the president's authority under the recess appointments clause and the statutory authorities these individuals may exercise — questions that may spark litigation . this report analyzes the legal issues associated with the president's exercise of his recess appointments clause power on january 4 , 2012 . to set the framework of our discussion , the report begins with a general legal overview of the recess appointments clause . this is followed by an analysis of two legal principles , standing and the political question doctrine , which may impede a reviewing court from reaching the merits of a potential legal challenge to the appointments . the examination of these justiciability issues is followed by an analysis of the constitutional validity of the appointments ; potential statutory restrictions on a recess appointee's authority to exercise the powers of the cfpb ; and how actions taken by the recess appointees may be impacted by a court ruling that the appointments are unlawful . although the supreme court has established a number of "justiciability" doctrines to ensure that a claim is properly before a court , concerns relating to standing and the political question doctrine appear to present the most likely hurdles to judicial resolution of any challenge to the president's appointments . the standing doctrine asks whether the particular plaintiff has a legal right to a judicial determination on the merits before the court , while the political question doctrine asks whether the claim presented is inappropriate for judicial review . if a court determines that a plaintiff lacks standing or that the nature of the questions presented precludes review , the court will dismiss the claim , leaving the status quo undisturbed . if a reviewing court determines that a plaintiff challenging the appointments of cordray , flynn , block , or griffin jr. has met all elements of justiciability , the court may proceed to assess the merits of the suit . the primary issue before a court would be whether the appointments were made in compliance with the strictures of the recess appointments clause , which provides the president with the "power to fill up all vacancies that may happen during the recess of the senate. prior to proceeding to a consideration of this question , a brief recitation of the unique factual circumstances underlying the president's january 4 recess appointments may be helpful . the senate , on december 17 , 2011 , adopted a unanimous consent agreement that scheduled a series of pro forma sessions to occur every few days from december 20 , 2011 , until january 23 , 2012 . the unanimous consent agreement expressly established that "no business" would be conducted during the pro forma sessions . the agreement also provided that the second session of the 112 th congress would commence with a pro forma session at 12:00 p.m. on january 3 , 2012 , and that a subsequent pro forma session would be held on january 6 , 2012 .