a quarter of children who do not live with a parent are uninsured . family characteristics can also affect the source of coverage among children with health insurance , as discussed below . for example , whether a child qualifies for a program such as medicaid is in part dependent on family income . generally , states with the lowest uninsured rates for children are located in the midwest and northeast ; states with the highest uninsured rates are located in the south and west . table 3 provides estimates of private insurance , public coverage , and the uninsured for children , with percentage rankings by state . approximately 100,000 addresses constitute the sample households to be interviewed . the cps sample is designed to represent the nation , states , and other specified geographies ( eg , regions ) . all estimates in this report at the national level are created using the most recent annual cps data ( representing data from 2010 ) , as well as historical annual data from previous years . all estimates in this report at the state level are created using three - year averages of the three most recent years of cps data ( representing data from 2010 , 2009 , and 2008 ) . the u.s. census bureau recommends using three - year averages of cps data to examine state - level estimates because of the survey's small sample sizes in many states . insurance status differs according to children's demographic characteristics ( age , race , ethnicity , and citizenship status ) . a child's likelihood of being uninsured varies by these demographic characteristics . for example , older children are more likely to be uninsured compared with younger children . as shown in table 1 , while 11.8% of children aged 13 to 18 years were without insurance , 9.1% of children under six years old lacked any source of health insurance . further , insurance status varies among children of different races , with children who report their race as only black being the most likely to be uninsured , and children who report two or more races the least likely to be uninsured . hispanics are twice as likely to be uninsured compared with non - hispanic children , and non - citizen children are almost four times more likely to be uninsured compared with citizen children . for those children who have insurance , the source of coverage also varies by demographic characteristics , as discussed below . whether or not children have insurance is also affected by family characteristics . table 2 shows health insurance coverage of children by family characteristics at the national level in 2010 . generally , as family income increases , the percentage of uninsured children decreases — the uninsured rate for children in families with income below 100% fpl is over four times the rate for children in families with income equal to or greater than 400% fpl . looking at family composition , children who live in families with two parents have the lowest uninsured rate ( 8.1% ) , followed by children who live with a single mother ( 10.9% ) and children who live with a single father ( 16.0% ) .