they represent the most direct return on investment . although dividends per share are generally identical for all shares , actual percentage returns to any particular investor or owner of shares vary depending on the actual share price paid by the actual owner . stock repurchase programs enhance shareholder value by reducing the number of shares outstanding . these issues are also analyzed in this report . the price of oil is determined in the world market . however , there is not one price of oil , but many . crude oil is quality graded by its specific gravity and its sulfur content . differences in quality of crude oil give rise to different prices for crude oil . two types of crude oil , west texas intermediate ( wti ) and brent , play the role of reference crude oils . their prices are standards against which other grades of crude oil prices are set . although both the spot and futures prices of the reference crude oils are widely publicized , they do not necessarily represent the real prices of crude oil paid by refiners , or received by producers . the delivered price of crude oil also depends on its location . the energy information administration ( eia ) publishes an oil price data set called the refiners acquisition cost of crude oil , which represents the actual cost to refiners of crude oil . table 1 shows these data for the period 2007-2011 . the data in table 1 show the escalating price of oil from 2007 to 2008 , reflecting the tight global market which was characterized by minimal excess capacity availability and rapidly growing demand in the emerging economies , especially china . the price of oil declined in the later months of 2008 , and remained generally lower than 2008 levels through 2010 , reflecting both consumers' response to the high prices of 2008 and the recession which began in december 2007 . the high prices observed in 2011 are related to numerous actual and potential market disruptions on the supply side . the withdrawal of libyan crude oil during the civil war in that country , and the iranian threat to close the key transit point , the strait of hormuz , to oil trade are key examples . table 1 also shows that domestic crude oil is generally purchased at a higher price than imported crude , but this is likely due to quality differences rather than strict nationality characteristics . the reversal of the domestic / foreign price relationship in 2011 is likely related to the effects of the withdrawal of libyan crude oil from the market , as none of the crude from that country typically is exported to the united states , but was used mostly in europe . the total revenues of the five major oil companies followed the pattern of oil price movements set out in table 2 . revenues increased by 24% from 2007 to 2008 , as oil prices increased by 38% . from 2008 to 2009 revenues declined by 36% as oil prices fell by 36% . as the price of oil recovered by 28% from 2009 to 2010 , the five firms' revenues increased by 26% .