pursuant to p.l . 113-146 , the va office of inspector general ( oig ) identified five occupations with the largest shortages: medical officer ( i.e. , physician ) , nurse , physician assistant , physical therapist , and psychologist . the oig report does not specify physician specialties ( eg , psychiatrists ) . a shortage of psychologists might be mitigated by hiring other providers with similar scopes of practice ( i.e. , social workers , mental health counselors , and marriage and family therapists ) ; however , the vha may also have shortages among those occupations as the oig report lists only the top five . the vha has both long - standing and recently established mechanisms available to improve recruitment and retention of providers ( eg , educational debt repayment programs ) . the clay hunt suicide prevention for american veterans act ( p.l . 114-2 ) aims to expand access to care by extending the existing period of enhanced enrollment , requiring a pilot program to conduct community outreach , requiring a pilot program to repay the education loans of qualified psychiatrists , and authorizing collaboration with nonprofit mental health organizations . when veterans gain access to care — within or outside the vha — they may not always receive high - quality care . while the vha has made progress in disseminating knowledge about evidence - based treatment ( eg , through clinical practice guidelines developed jointly with dod ) , that does not guarantee implementation of such treatments . a 2011 evaluation of vha mental health care finds room for improvement in the use of evidence - based treatments . another third - party evaluation of the vha's mental health care system is underway ( to be completed by the end of fy2017 ) , and independent evaluations of vha mental health care and suicide prevention programs are required annually ( with the first to be completed by the end of fy2018 ) . a 2014 report by the rand corporation indicates that only 13% of evaluated mental health providers ( not limited to vha providers ) met study criteria for readiness to provide veteran - friendly , high - quality care . providers working within the vha or a military setting were more likely than others to meet the criteria , which may raise questions for some about increasing the use of non - vha care . the report recommends conducting better assessments of civilian provider capacity , assessing the impact of trainings in cultural competency on provider capacity , expanding access to effective trainings in selected evidence - based approaches , and facilitating providers' use of evidence - based approaches . since operations enduring freedom and iraqi freedom began , five public laws have addressed vha suicide prevention efforts . at the same time , the va released a response to the report , which indicated ( among other things ) that a follow - up report was to be issued in may 2013 . in january 2014 , the va released an update that includes some information about suicides among veterans who do not use va health care services in 23 states . a full accounting of suicides among all veterans in all states has yet to be publicly released .