in announcement no . 1 / 2016 , issued on april 7 , 2016 , aung san suu kyi listed three methods stipulated in the 2008 constitution and burma's laws that the government would use to free the nation's political prisoners . following the release of announcement no . 1 / 2016 , president htin kyaw granted amnesty to 113 people awaiting trial on april 8 and pardoned 83 political prisoners on april 17 . burma's military leadership has a mixed record with regards to political prisoners . on the one hand , top military officers on the ndsc have periodically supported the granting of amnesty for political prisoners as required by the 2008 constitution . should the existence of political prisoners continue to be a factor in determining if restrictions on relations with burma remain in effect ? what kinds of assistance , if any , should the united states provide to facilitate the identification , release , and support of political prisoners in burma ; as well as to prevent or avoid the arrest or detention of new political prisoners ? this report is one of a series of crs reports on burma , including: crs in focus if10352 , u.s. relations with burma: key issues for 2016 ; crs in focus if10417 , burma's peace process: challenges ahead ; crs report r44436 , burma's 2015 parliamentary elections: issues for congress ; and crs report r44465 , energy and water development: fy2017 appropriations . at present , there is no consensus on how many political prisoners there are in burma . one major reason is the lack of transparency of the records of burma's 42 prisons and 109 labor camps . another reason for variation in estimates is the use of different definitions of political prisoners . moreover , reports of new political prisoners being arrested and detained periodically appear in the press suggest that the number of political prisoners is a moving target . one factor complicating the determination of the number of political prisoners in burma is a lack of agreement on the definition of a political prisoner . while the concept of political prisoner has a long history , there is no single international standard for defining political prisoners . prisoners detained for political reasons are afforded some protection by international agreements , such as the universal declaration of human rights and the international covenant on civil and political rights .