appendix a . research on the health needs of certain children and youth formerly in foster care as discussed in the body of this report , health care needs of children in foster care are considerable . research on health care needs of children who age out of foster care and those who leave foster care for adoption are discussed in greater detail in the following section . many of these former foster care children and youth are counted as "foster care" children under the medicaid data reporting system . thus , the type and prevalence of their health care needs affects our understanding of medicaid use by "foster care" children . as of july 1 , 2014 states are required to submit medicaid program data via a revised reporting system . in this new system ( t - msis ) former foster youth who aged out of care are counted separately from children who are in foster care . however , many children who leave foster care for adoption are expected to continue to be included in the medicaid "foster care" children population . young adults who were formerly in foster care the research literature regarding children who age out of foster care shows that physical and mental health problems persist into adulthood . two studies — the northwest foster care alumni study and the midwest evaluation of the adult functioning of former foster youth — have tracked outcomes for a sample of youth across several domains , either prospectively ( following youth in care and as they age out ) or retrospectively ( examining current outcomes for young adults who were previously in care and comparing these outcomes to those of young people in the general population ) . researchers with the northwest foster care alumni study interviewed and reviewed the case files of 479 foster care youth who were in public or private foster care any time from 1988 to 1998 in oregon or washington . the study compared the mental health status and education and employment outcomes for the foster care alumni to those of the general population . over 54% of foster care alumni had at least one mental health problem — depression , social phobia , panic disorder , and post - traumatic stress disorder , among others — compared to 22.1% of the general population . about one - quarter of the alumni experienced post - traumatic stress disorder ( ptsd ) . this figure is greater than the occurrence of ptsd among vietnam or iraq war veterans , which is about 15% . foster care alumni tended to have recovery rates similar to their counterparts in the general population for major depression , panic syndrome , and alcohol dependency , but lower rates of recovery for other disorders such as generalized anxiety disorder , ptsd , social phobia , and bulimia . few foster care alumni studies are prospective , meaning that they follow youth while in care through the time they leave care and beyond . the midwest evaluation is an ongoing study that tracks approximately 600 former foster youth in three states — illinois , iowa , and wisconsin .