the wto appellate body hears appeals of these compliance panel reports . ultimately , when a defending member fails to implement a panel or appellate body report within the established compliance period , the prevailing member may request that the defending member negotiate a compensation agreement . it also requires parties to adopt domestic policies aimed at reducing the production of hazardous waste . an amendment to that convention , which has not yet entered into force , would ban hazardous waste exports from "annex vii" parties — members of the oecd , european union , and liechtenstein — to other convention parties , which are primarily developing countries . there is concern that electronic waste ( e - waste ) producers in the united states are opting to export e - waste containing hazardous materials to developing countries rather than disposing of the waste in the united states . e - waste is one type of hazardous waste , and , as such , its trade is regulated under a series of international agreements . recently , momentum has developed for domestic legislation restricting e - waste exports from the united states . these restrictions could take many forms , including a ban akin to the one proposed by the ban amendment to the basel convention , an e - waste export licensing system , or a quota on e - waste exports . these restrictions may be difficult to reconcile with the general agreement on tariffs and trade ( gatt ) , one of the world trade organization ( wto ) agreements , and could be susceptible to challenge before a wto panel . since the 1980s , the united states has been a party to international agreements governing the transboundary movements of hazardous wastes . these agreements , one among the member countries of the organization for economic cooperation and development ( oecd ) and two bilateral agreements with canada and mexico , condition hazardous waste exports on the notification of both exporting and destination countries and the destination country's consent . however , these agreements cover a broader category of waste — all hazardous waste — than the hazardous electronic waste commonly called e - waste . although the united states has engaged in some international efforts to regulate hazardous waste exports , it is not a party to the primary multilateral agreement governing the international waste trade: the basel convention on the control of transboundary movements of hazardous wastes and their disposal ( basel convention ) . over 170 other countries are parties to the basel convention , which was negotiated under the auspices of the united nations environment programme . duties , taxes , and other charges are the only article xi:1 consistent methods of restricting imports or exports . article i:1 prohibits any rule or formality affecting exportation from conferring a trade "advantage" — such as exemption from export licensing requirements — to exports destined to particular countries unless it "immediately and unconditionally" confers that same advantage to "like" products destined to all other wto members .