these activities are regulated by the states . hydraulic fracturing : hydraulic fracturing does induce new fractures into the marcellus shale , and may lengthen existing fractures . the chances of creating or extending fractures linking the marcellus shale to an overlying aquifer appear remote , however , because the vertical distance separating the marcellus shale from most aquifers is typically much greater than the length of the fractures generally induced during hydraulic fracturing . hydraulically fractured gas production wells are subject to state regulations , but legislation has been introduced to authorize epa to regulate broadly hydraulic fracturing under sdwa , which likely would affect state requirements . flowback of fracking fluids and produced waters : the flowback water pumped back to the surface after fracturing poses a significant environmental management challenge in the marcellus shale region . the flowback and produced water's high content of salts , minerals , and other contaminants must be disposed of or adequately treated before discharged to surface waters . ( see figure 4 . ) however , this drilling technique alone is often insufficient to significantly improve gas production without some means of artificially stimulating flow . in tight formations like shale , inducing fractures can increase flow by orders of magnitude . however , before stimulation can take place , the well must be cased , cemented , and completed ( the well casing perforated ) . in the late 1940s , drilling companies began inducing hydraulic pressure in wells to fracture the producing formation . this fracturing process stimulated further production by effectively increasing the area from which a single well could produce gas . combining hydraulic fracturing with directional drilling has opened up production of tighter ( less permeable ) petroleum and natural gas reservoirs , and in particular , unconventional gas shales like the marcellus . development of natural gas resources in the marcellus shale is subject to regulation under several state and federal environmental laws . in particular , the large volumes of water needed to drill and hydraulically fracture the shale , and the disposal of this water and other wastewater associated with gas extraction , may pose significant water quality and quantity challenges that trigger regulatory attention . usgs noted in a 2009 publication that "concerns about the availability of water supplies needed for gas production , and questions about wastewater disposal have been raised by water - resource agencies and citizens through the marcellus shale gas development region. essentially all permitting , inspection , and enforcement activities related to gas development are conducted by state agencies . in the cases where federal laws may apply , these regulatory requirements also are typically administered by the states . the following sections review key provisions of two relevant federal laws — the safe drinking water act ( sdwa ) and the clean water act ( cwa ) — and related state requirements . the marcellus shale formation represents one of the largest unconventional or conventional natural gas resources in the united states . current and planned projects to develop marcellus shale gas are apparent across the six - state region that overlies the resource .