cara reauthorized this funding through fy2014 . the caa authorizes the secretary to expand , intensify , and coordinate existing asd research activities ; to expand surveillance and epidemiological research ; to increase awareness of asd ; and to provide access to screening and early intervention services . it authorizes expanded research activities at nih , and created the interagency autism coordinating committee ( iacc ) to coordinate all federal autism research efforts ( this expanded the mission of the autism coordinating committee described above ) . at cdc , the caa authorizes surveillance and establishes asd awareness programs . research on access to asd - related services and lifespan issues received the least amount of funding . ( 6 ) what does the future hold , particularly for adults ? ( 7 ) what other infrastructure and surveillance needs must be met ? the vast majority ( 95% ) of asd research aligned with research questions in the iacc strategic plan , with the largest proportion of research focused on the causes and prevention of asd . during caa enactment and reauthorization , several issues were highlighted , some of which are of general interest to congress when deciding whether to support disease - specific legislation . specifically , concerns were raised about barriers to data sharing and confidentiality across state and federal government entities ; the coordination of surveillance and research , across both agencies and diseases ; and the pros and cons of congress directing funding to specific diseases ( or groups of diseases ) . these concerns apply not only to autism research policy , but can be applied broadly to any disease - specific legislation , and the consequent policy decisions may affect access to care and treatment for individuals with autism . coordination of research and sharing of the resulting data is an ongoing interest of congress . researchers call for accurate case estimates in order to study common characteristics of autistic individuals and potential risk factors for autism . federal and state - funded programs provided through health care providers and schools must provide certain services for individuals with asd , and need accurate estimates to anticipate the need for those services . however , enumerating autism cases for researchers , health care providers , and schools has presented an ongoing challenge at the state , local , and federal levels . during the reauthorization process , some members of congress raised the concern that continuing to pass disease - specific legislation allows congress to prioritize one disease ( or group of diseases , in this case developmental disabilities ) over another , and that priority - setting should be left to the agencies that perform the research . the issue of prioritizing one developmental disability over another has also been raised among researchers and families of children with developmental disabilities and other conditions . advocates for cara argued that allowing authorization of these programs to lapse would interrupt the progress made under the caa . autism services research , such as the development and adoption of new screening tools and implementation of best practices in autism therapy , has effects on both health care cost and coverage decisions made at the government and individual level .