other funding mechanisms . the fy2013 request also proposed changes for other funding mechanisms within the nih budget besides those for rpgs and training awards . support for r esearch centers would decrease by $64 million ( - 2.1% ) to $2.966 billion , largely because of the proposed $51 million drop in funding for the idea program mentioned previously . the fy2013 enacted level for the s&t account , including transfers from the superfund account , was $4.2 million above the $761.4 million proposed for fy2013 in h.r . 6091 as reported , but was $65.0 million ( 8% ) below the president's fy2013 request of $830.5 million and $51.2 million ( 6% ) below the $816.7 million provided for fy2012 . the fy2013 $21.7 million transfer from the superfund account for fy2013 was below the $23.2 million requested level , and the $23.0 million proposed for fy2013 in the house committee reported bill and transferred in fy2012 . these reports can be accessed via the crs website at http: / / crs.gov / pages / clis.aspx ? also , the status of each appropriations bill is available on the crs webpage , status table of appropriations , available at http: / / crs.gov / pages / appropriationsstatustable.aspx ? congress supports research and development in the department of defense ( dod ) primarily through its research , development , test , and evaluation ( rdt&e ) appropriation . the appropriation supports the development of the nation's future military hardware and software and the technology base upon which those products rely . nearly all of what dod spends on rdt&e is appropriated in title iv of the defense appropriation bill . ( see table 6 . ) however , rdt&e funds are also appropriated in other parts of the bill . for example , rdt&e funds are appropriated as part of the defense health program , the chemical agents and munitions destruction program , and the national defense sealift fund . the defense health program supports the delivery of health care to dod personnel and their families . program funds are requested through the operations and maintenance appropriation . the program's rdt&e funds support congressionally directed research in such areas as breast , prostate , and ovarian cancer and other medical conditions . congress appropriates funds for this program in title vi ( other department of defense programs ) of the defense appropriations bill . the chemical agents and munitions destruction program supports activities to destroy the u.s. inventory of lethal chemical agents and munitions to avoid future risks and costs associated with storage . funds for this program have been requested through the procurement appropriation . congress appropriates funds for this program also in title vi . the national defense sealift fund supports the procurement , operation and maintenance , and research and development of the nation's naval reserve fleet and supports a u.s. flagged merchant fleet that can serve in time of need . requests for this fund are made as part of the navy's procurement appropriation . congress appropriates funds for this program in title v ( revolving and management funds ) of the defense appropriations bill . the joint improvised explosive device defeat fund ( jieddf ) also contains rdt&e monies .