/ econchiefgov ) . similarly , congress established the position of chief information officer ( cio ) within federal agencies to coordinate and monitor the acquisition and implementation of information technology programs ( p.l . 104-106 , div . e , title li , ยง5125 ( b ) - ( d ) ; 110 stat . 106-554 ; 114 stat . the department of state uses twitter ( http: / / twitter.com / # ! / statedept ) as a tool of public diplomacy . along with online video and other new media , twitter enables the agency to speak directly with foreign audiences . after the april 20 , 2010 , deepwater horizon explosion in the gulf of mexico , a multi - federal agency "unified command" was established . it utilized a website ( deepwaterhorizonresponse.com ) , twitter , facebook , flickr , and youtube to explain how it was responding to the oil spill , and how affected individuals ( eg , fishermen ) could get assistance . the department of veterans affairs ( va ) hired alex horton , a former soldier who has been openly critical of the va , to write for the va blog ( http: / / www.blogs.va.gov / vantage / ) . "alex is not here to flack for the agency," his va supervisor has said . horton serves as an in - house critic of the agency , identifying to the va shortcomings in its services and understanding of veterans' issues . smithsonian museums , such as the museum of natural history and the national postal museum , have allowed the public to vote via the internet on which items it would like to see displayed in particular exhibits . the development and use of new media by agencies has several implications for congress in its oversight and enforcement of agency public communications . ( 1 ) quantity of agency new media communications . the ease of producing new media communications makes it easier for agencies to produce more public communications . the department of state , for example , has more than 15,191 posts ( "tweets" ) from its main twitter account ( http: / / twitter.com / # ! / statedept ) since late 2008 , and this is not its only twitter account . more communications may provide for more opportunities for an agency to transgress ( inadvertently or otherwise ) the statutory prohibitions against unauthorized publicity and propaganda and lobbying with appropriated funds ( 18 u.s.c . ( 2 ) quality of agency new media communications . new media technologies can remove the filters between agency employees and the public . this intimacy and immediacy enables prompt communications between agencies and the public . it also may lead to agency employees making misstatements of fact or comments that violate statutory restrictions . daniel mintz , who served as cio of the department of transportation during the second term of president george w. bush , has further cautioned , "any material a federal employee publishes [online] can be taken as establishing or implying the establishment of a formal policy. ( 3 ) locating agency new media communications . the nature of new media communications could complicate oversight further .