( see table 1 . ) in contrast with the carbon capture technology rd&d , which received nearly all of the $3.4 billion from recovery act funding , carbon sequestration / carbon storage activities received approximately $50 million in recovery act funds . recovery act funds were awarded for 10 projects to conduct site characterization of promising geologic formations for co 2 storage . testimony from scott klara of the national energy technology laboratory sums up a crucial metric for the success of the federal ccs rd&d program , namely , whether ccs technologies are deployed in the commercial marketplace: the success of the clean coal program will ultimately be judged by the extent to which emerging technologies get deployed in domestic and international marketplaces . and " lessons from futuregen: a similar path for other demonstration projects ? " this report aims to provide a snapshot of the doe ccs program , including its current funding levels , together with some discussion of the program's achievements and prospects for success in meeting its stated goals . other crs reports provide substantial detail on the technological and policy aspects of ccs . u.s. environmental protection agency ( epa ) proposed rules and guidelines for reducing greenhouse gas ( ghg ) emissions from new and existing coal - fired power plants have been a focal point of discussion in congress about ccs . how the demise of futuregen will affect that debate is yet to be seen . legislation regarding ccs in the last congress mainly focused on two issues: stopping or slowing implementation of the epa ghg rules and guidelines and providing federal incentives to accelerate the demonstration and development of ccs at commercial scales . although doe has pursued aspects of ccs rd&d since 1997 , the energy policy act of 2005 ( p.l . ( for more details , see sections below on " futuregen — a special case ? 109-58 ) provided a 10-year authorization for the basic framework of ccs research and development at doe . the energy independence and security act of 2007 ( eisa , p.l . ( large - scale demonstration programs and their potential significance are discussed below. ) it can be argued that , since enactment of eisa , the focus and funding within the ccs rd&d program has shifted toward large - scale capture technology development through these and other demonstration projects . in addition to the annual appropriations provided for ccs rd&d , the recovery act ( p.l . 111-5 ) has been the most significant legislation that promotes and supports federal ccs rd&d program activities since passage of eisa . as discussed below , $3.4 billion in funding from the recovery act was intended to expand and accelerate the commercial deployment of ccs technologies to allow for commercial - scale demonstration in both new and retrofitted power plants and industrial facilities by 2020 . the u.s. department of energy states that the mission for the doe office of fossil energy is "to ensure the availability of ultra - clean ( near - zero emissions ) , abundant , low - cost domestic energy from coal to fuel economic prosperity , strengthen energy security , and enhance environmental quality.