circuit ) . an individual member's ability to bring litigation before an article iii court remains severely limited by the supreme court's decision in raines . for member plaintiffs to successfully establish standing , they must assert either a personal injury , like the loss of their congressional seat , or an institutional injury that amounts to vote nullification , which requires that no other legislative remedy exists to redress the alleged injury . considering that legislative remedies are rarely entirely foreclosed , these member plaintiff suits are unlikely to satisfy the standing requirements imposed by raines and its progeny . it appears that more successful suits could be brought by either congress as a whole , a house of congress , or a committee , so long as the entity is acting with the authorization of one or both houses . institutional plaintiffs with authorization to sue have established standing in several cases when seeking judicial enforcement of a subpoena . however , it remains unclear how or if the raines vote nullification standard is supposed to be applied to an institutional plaintiff asserting an institutional injury outside of the subpoena enforcement context . the law with respect to standing is a mix of both constitutional requirements and prudential considerations . article iii of the constitution specifically limits the exercise of federal judicial power to "cases" and "controversies. accordingly , the courts have "consistently declined to exercise any powers other than those which are strictly judicial in nature. as applied to congressional plaintiffs , the doctrine of standing has generally been invoked only in cases involving challenges to executive branch actions or acts of congress . thus , it has been said that "the law of article iii standing is built on a single basic idea — the idea of separation of powers. prior to the supreme court's 1997 decision in raines v. byrd , the case law with respect to the standing of members of congress had been largely , though not exclusively , developed by decisions of the united states court of appeals for the district of columbia circuit ( d.c . this report seeks to provide an overview of congress's ability to participate in litigation before article iii courts . the report is limited to a discussion of congress's participation in litigation as either a plaintiff ( eg , the party initiating the suit alleging some sort of harm or violation of law ) or as a third - party intervener ( eg , a party who is seeking to join litigation already initiated by another plaintiff ) . the report does not address situations where congress or individual members appear as a defendant , or congressional participation in court cases as amicus curiae ( "friend of the court" ) , as those situations do not raise the same legal and constitutional questions at issue when congress or a member is the party plaintiff . congressional plaintiffs , whether they be individual members , committees , houses of congress ( i.e. , the house or senate ) , or legislative branch entities , must demonstrate that they meet the requirements established by article iii of the constitution in order to participate as party litigants .