some materials are available in both tangible and digital forms . the current structure of the fdlp program was established in 1962 . access to government information is provided through a network of depository libraries across the united states . in the past half - century , information creation , distribution , retention , and preservation has expanded from a tangible , paper - based process to include digital processes managed largely through computerized information technologies . a number of issues regarding fdlp and policy related to the transition to digital government information that might be of interest to congress arise as a consequence of digital creation , distribution , and preservation of government information . these issues are in some cases interrelated , and may have been addressed in part in the ithaka report and aserl proposals , or may receive further consideration in gpo's studies . some of the issues may affect fdlp , and extend beyond the program to a variety of contexts related to the management of government information in tangible and digital forms , and include maintenance and availability of the fdlp tangible collection ; retention and preservation of born digital information ; access to fdlp resources ; authenticity and accuracy of digital material ; robustness of the fdlp electronic collection ; and cost of the fdlp and other government information distribution initiatives . the emergence of digital information has had notable effects on the types of information created , including databases , video , audio and web - only materials , and the manner in which that information is distributed beyond tangible , paper copies . a clear consequence of those changes is the emergence of general agreement that the statutes governing fdlp , and last visited by congress before the digital era of information creation , collection , and distribution , are insufficient to regulate contemporary processes carried out by government and depository institutions . a related question is whether existing authorities can support gpo and depository libraries as they address the demands of users of government information and the general public . a particularly complex question is what solutions might create a more robust fdlp that is better equipped to meet the demands of providing government information to american citizens . it appears that a number of social , political , and technical concerns must be addressed more systematically before a policy regarding the future of fdlp can be developed . in moving toward the development of a more contemporary fdlp , congress might consider the following issues: development of methods , materials , and technologies to ensure the long - term preservation of digitized and born digital information ; a more inclusive definition of materials to be included in fdlp collections . under current law , "government publications" are defined as "informational matter which is published as an individual document at government expense. while seemingly broad with regard to tangible materials , the law does not take into account government publishing programs outside gpo authority . the somewhat vague language could also lead to differences by agency in the type of materials that get into fdlp collections .