igra also created the nigc . indian gaming started out small . in the 1980s , when the federal government severely cut funds for indian tribes , indian tribes began to turn to high - stakes bingo and other gaming to raise money to fund tribal government operations . the department of the interior and other federal agencies actively encouraged tribal bingo to raise revenue to fund tribal governments . however , the legality of these operations was uncertain . local and state authorities threatened to shut down these operations , claiming that they violated state law . although federal courts enjoined state enforcement actions , states continued to pursue them . the legality of indian gaming under federal law was also questionable . meanwhile , a number of bills were introduced in congress to regulate the growing indian gaming industry . gaming on land acquired in trust pursuant to the exceptions is controversial . as of june 2010 , 31 applications for land into trust were granted under the exceptions . because of the controversy , however , off - reservation gaming has caught the attention of congress . introduced in the 112 th congress , s. 771 would restrict gaming on newly acquired lands by requiring that tribes demonstrate to the secretary that they have a "substantial , direct , modern connection" and a "substantial , direct , aboriginal connection" to the newly acquired lands . if the secretary determines there is a modern connection to the land , he would have to certify the following: if the tribe has a reservation , the land is within 25 miles of the tribal headquarters or other government facilities on the reservation ; from october 17 , 1988 , the tribe has demonstrated a routine presence on the land ; and the tribe has not been restored to federal recognition or acknowledged within the preceding five years . if the tribe does not have a reservation , the land is located within 25 miles of where a substantial number of members live ; from october 17 , 1988 , the tribe has demonstrated a routine presence on the land ; the land was within the first - submitted request for land since acknowledgment or restoration or the application to take land into trust was within five years of acknowledgment or restoration ; and the tribe is not gaming on other land . in determining that the tribe has an aboriginal connection to the land , the secretary would have to consider the following: the tribe's historical presence on the land ; whether the membership can demonstrate lineal descent or cultural affiliation with the land ; the area in which the tribe's language was spoke ; the proximity of tribal sacred sites ; forcible removal from the land ; and other factors that demonstrate the tribe's presence prior to its fist interactions with non - natives , the federal government , or another sovereign . s. 2676 , introduced in the 110 th congress , would have amended igra in several ways . first , it would have struck all the exceptions to the prohibition on gaming on newly acquired lands , except for the two part determination .