sec . 1331 et seq. ) and the coastal zone management act of 1972 ( p.l . ch . the number of federal producing acres may or may not be a function of how many acres are leased , and the number of acres leased may or may not correlate to production levels , and it is beyond the scope of this report to examine that issue thoroughly . ( table 9 provides data on the amount of federal acreage leased annually for onshore and offshore oil and gas development. ) in recent years , some members of congress have proposed a $4 / acre lease fee for nonproducing leases . this proposal grew out of efforts to promote more oil and gas drilling and development on public land and water ( offshore ) when gasoline prices spiked in 2006-2008 . some in congress noted that there were many leases they believed were not being developed in a timely manner , while at the same time , others in congress were advocating greater access to areas off - limits ( such areas under leasing moratoria offshore ) . higher rents for offshore leases were imposed by the secretary of the interior in 2009 to discourage holding unused leases and to move more leases into production , if possible . rents escalate over time . for more details see crs legal sidebar wslg1799 , trump's executive order on offshore energy: can a withdrawal be withdrawn ? , by [author name scrubbed] . another issue that congress may consider whether to continue addressing ( for onshore federal lands ) is streamlining the processing of applications for permits to drill ( apds ) . some members contend that this would be one way to help boost energy production on federal lands and would be consistent with the trump administration's energy policy of "energy dominance. after an oil and gas lease has been obtained , either competitively or noncompetitively , an application for a permit to drill must be approved for each oil and gas well . as stated in the mineral leasing act , section 226 ( g ) ( for onshore federal lands ) , "no permit to drill on an oil and gas lease issued under this chapter may be granted without the analysis and approval by the secretary concerned of a plan of operations covering proposed surface - disturbing activities within the lease area. the application form ( apd form 3160-3 ) must include , among other things , a drilling plan , a surface use plan , and evidence of bond / surety coverage . the surface use plan should contain information on drillpad location , pad construction , the method for containment and waste disposal , and plans for surface reclamation . this issue was addressed in the energy policy act of 2005 ( epact '05 ) ( p.l . 109-58 ) , providing new timelines and the introduction of a pilot program to streamline the permitting process . epact '05 included a provision to initiate and fund a pilot program at seven blm field offices in an effort to streamline the permitting process for oil and gas leases on federal lands .