refineries. the findings of a 2009 national energy technology laboratory ( netl ) study , which estimates the wtw ghg emissions of producing gasoline from various crudes , is presented in figure 8 . according to the netl study , producing and consuming gasoline from a weighted average of canadian oil sands crudes imported into the united states yields about 17% more ghg gasoline derived from the average mix of crudes used in the united states in 2005 ( "baseline" ) . however , it is comparable to gasoline derived from u.s. imports of some venezuelan and nigerian crudes . across the various published studies analyzed by the department of state , fuel produced from oil sands crudes was found to be 9% to 19% more ghg - intensive than fuel from middle eastern heavy sour crude , 5% to 13% than fuel from mexican maya crude , and 2% to 6% than fuel from venezuelan bachaquero crude on a well - to - wheels basis . in the wake of the arab oil embargo in 1973-1974 , congress created strategic petroleum reserve ( spr ) , a stockpile of crude oil to mitigate the impact of future supply disruptions . the spr currently holds 696 million barrels of oil , 96% of its total storage capacity , in five salt dome caverns located in texas and louisiana . this is equivalent to 83 days' worth of u.s. net oil imports . at its maximum rate , the spr can be draw down at 4.25 mb / d for 90 days ; the rate diminishes thereafter . the president has the authority to release oil from the spr in the event of "severe energy supply interruptions. also in response to the arab oil embargo , the united states joined with other advanced economies to form the international energy agency ( iea ) . iea members have pledged to hold oil stocks equivalent to 90 days' worth of net oil imports ( includes government held and commercial stocks ) . as of january 2012 , iea members held more than 4 billion barrels of oil stocks , of which 1.5 billion were government controlled . iea government held stocks could be brought to market at a maximum rate of 14.4 mb / d in the first month of an iea collective action . the united states has drawn down the spr for emergency reasons in three cases of global supply disruptions , each in coordination with other iea countries: iraq's invasion of kuwait and the subsequent gulf war ( 1990 / 91 ) , hurricanes katrina and rita in the u.s. gulf coast ( 2005 ) , and after prolonged disruption of libyan exports ( 2011 ) . these events reduced global oil supply . as described above , that can affect oil prices around the world , including the cost of u.s. domestic oil and oil imports , even if these imports do not come from the disrupted sources . these releases of strategic stockpiles can help offset the impact of disruptions and may have contributed to oil prices being lower than they might have otherwise been . the spr provides a short term tool to respond to sudden supply disruptions at home or abroad .