it's in the next decade . statements such as those above highlight not only the technical opportunities for energy storage in the grid and in electric transportation , but also the attention being paid to energy storage technologies at the highest levels in the federal government . nonetheless , many new energy storage technologies continue to face significant technological and economic challenges to their commercialization and widespread deployment . the recent bankruptcy of beacon power , one of the leading developers of flywheel energy storage technologies for the grid , is a prominent illustration of commercial barriers to grid storage technology . public concerns about elevated fire risks from chevrolet volt electric car batteries , although shown to be exaggerated , are another . by contrast , increasing investments by aes corporation in utility - scale battery storage for power grids show continuing successful efforts to overcome technical challenges and market barriers to bring new storage technologies into the market . understanding the potential of energy storage in electric applications is complicated by a number of factors . the first is the wide range of storage technologies either commercially available , in development , or being researched . because they are technologically diverse , it is difficult to gain a balanced understanding of the fundamental capabilities , costs , and comparative advantages of these different energy storage options . second , there are multiple applications of energy storage , each with distinct operational requirements . certain storage technologies may suit certain applications better than others . finally , there are many aspects of market structure and economic regulation that affect energy storage deployment . taken together , these factors make the development of an energy storage research and development portfolio challenging . while there is general consensus that storage technology improvements are needed , there are multiple potential pathways to such improvements that cut across different disciplines . this report attempts to summarize the current state of knowledge regarding energy storage technologies for both electric power grid and electric vehicle applications . it is intended to serve as a reference for policymakers interested in understanding the range of technologies and applications associated with energy storage , comparing them , when possible , in a structured way to highlight key characteristics relevant to widespread use . the report also discusses how aspects of policy and market structure affect competition among both mature and emerging technologies . in the united states , there are two major motivations for deploying energy storage technologies . the first is to improve the technical and economic performance of the electric power grid ( "the grid" ) . this includes enabling more efficient utilization of conventional power plants ( eg , coal - and gas - fired ) supplying the grid through load - leveling and providing fast response grid support functions ( "ancillary services" ) , among other services . it also includes enabling greater use of renewable energy sources such as wind and solar generation , which have variable output due to changing weather conditions . electricity storage is a potential source of grid flexibility to ease integration challenges and decrease integration costs for these renewables . the second motivation for energy storage is to enable greater use of electrified transportation .