consultations . are consultations with congress occurring under the gprama process for reexamining reporting requirements ? are the consultations being conducted with sufficient time and depth for a committee or interested members to have input before changes to a reporting requirement are proposed by the president ? would disappearance of a plan or report have implications for power relationships among congress , agencies , the president , non - federal stakeholders , or the public ? would consolidation of several products improve or degrade usefulness ? costs and side effects . what are the workload , costs , and side effects that correspond to a reporting requirement ? would changes in statute or report language that eliminate or consolidate a product have any effect on an agency's costs or priorities ? for example , congress might consider establishing criteria for designations of a plan or report being considered "outdated" or "duplicative" or , alternatively , require omb to do so in its guidance . would any of the topics from the previous sub - section of this report — such as context , consultations with stakeholders , usefulness , and costs ( see " potential issues when considering specific proposals " ) — merit being required as topics for an agency or omb to address in an agency's analysis or a presidential proposal ? coordination within congress . under gprama , large group - repeal - and - modification proposals may become an annual occurrence . in that light , congress might consider strategies for how it wishes to consider proposals for many modifications and eliminations of reporting requirements . in the past , members and committees of congress have used several strategies to manage consideration of ad hoc proposals from agencies , omb , and the president . these proposals typically crossed the jurisdictions of many committees . does a proposal for elimination or consolidation of a plan or report appear to be founded on quality analysis and justification ? when an agency , omb , or the president identifies a plan or report as outdated or duplicative , how did they define these terms ? did the relevant agency , omb , and the president make a credible proposal that justifies a recommendation adequately and acknowledges any trade - offs or disadvantages ? how might any of the perspectives that are discussed below figure into an assessment of a proposal's credibility ? usefulness . how useful is a plan or report to its various audiences — including congress as a whole , congressional recipients , personnel in the federal agency that authors a product , personnel in other government agencies , non - federal stakeholders , and the public ? how do they use the plan or report ? what impact does a plan or report have on the accountability and incentives of an agency , omb , or the president ? coverage . the gprama process covers plans and reports that agencies produce "for congress" but does not cover all reporting requirements . as noted earlier , a statute may require that a plan or report be produced by an entity whose status as an "agency" is ambiguous , like omb .