94-171 program . in november 2001 , the u.s. supreme court affirmed a federal district court opinion upholding the secretary of commerce's decision to not include expatriate u.s. citizens , other than u.s. military and civilian federal government personnel , in the 2000 census data for reapportionment of the house of representatives . u.s. military and federal civilian employees abroad have been included in census data used for apportionment of the house of representatives in 1970 , 1990 , 2000 , and 2010 . the census bureau did not include such persons in the apportionment data for the 1980 census and was apparently not intending to include them in the 1990 apportionment data , but did so in response to pending legislative activity in the late 1980s . in 1992 , in franklin v. massachusetts , the united states supreme court upheld the secretary of commerce's decision to include and allocate overseas federal employees in the 1990 census data for the apportionment of the house of representatives , which resulted in a loss of one congressional seat for massachusetts . the court held that there was no final agency action reviewable under the administrative procedure act ( apa ) and that the allocation of overseas federal employees to their home states was consistent with the "usual residence standard" of other censuses and furthered the constitutional goal of equal representation . however , the issue of distinguishing between overseas federal employees and other expatriate u.s. citizens by including the former in the census and excluding the latter was not before the court and was not decided . this issue was raised in january 2001 , when the state of utah filed suit against the secretary and department of commerce alleging that the defendants had unlawfully excluded overseas missionaries of the church of jesus christ of the latter - day saints ( lds ) in violation of the census clause , the free exercise clause of the first amendment ; of the administrative procedure act ( apa , 5 u.s.c . §§701 et seq .

 ) ; of the religious freedom restoration act ( rifra , 42 u.s.c . §§2000bb et seq .

 ) §2a ; and of the census act ( 13 u.s.c . §§1 et seq .

 ) the inclusion of such overseas missionaries would have meant that utah would have gained a congressional seat which went to north carolina instead . a three - judge panel upheld the secretary of commerce's decision , citing franklin v. massachusetts in finding that the president's report of apportionment data and calculations was the final act in apportionment rather than the secretary's conduct of the census , and that , therefore , the apa did not apply . it further concluded that rifra and the free exercise clause were not violated because there was no evidence that the exclusion of religious missionaries from the apportionment count burdened or in any way affected their right to exercise their religion .