new privacy and security requirements are established . agencies are required to review holdings of all personally identifiable information to ensure that they are accurate , relevant , timely , and complete , and reduced to the minimum necessary amount . agencies must also establish a plan to eliminate the unnecessary collection and use of social security numbers . agencies must implement the following security requirements ( applicable to all federal information ) : encrypt all data on mobile computers / devices carrying agency data ; employ two - factor authentication for remote access ; use a "time - out" function for remote access and mobile devices ; log and verify all computer - readable data extracts from databases holding sensitive information ; and ensure that individuals and supervisors with authorized access to personally identifiable information annually sign a document describing their responsibilities . attachment 2 of the omb memorandum , incident reporting and handling requirements , applies to the breach of personally identifiable information in electronic or paper format . agencies are required to report all incidents involving personally identifiable information within one hour of discovery / detection , and publish a "routine use" under the privacy act applying to the disclosure of information to appropriate persons in the event of a data breach . attachment 3 , external breach notification , identifies the factors agencies should consider in determining when notification outside the agency should be given and the nature of the notification . notification may not be necessary for encrypted information . each agency is directed to establish an agency response team . for other purposes , a covered entity may only use or disclose phi with patient authorization subject to certain exceptions . agencies must assess the likely risk of harm caused by the breach and the level of risk . agencies should provide notification without unreasonable delay following the detection of a breach , but are permitted to delay notification for law enforcement , national security purposes , or agency needs . the hitech act also directed the federal trade commission ( ftc ) to issue breach notification regulations for web - based businesses to notify consumers when the security of their electronic health information is breached . the ftc rule applies to both vendors of personal health records — which provide online repositories that people can use to keep track of their health information — and entities that offer third - party applications for personal health records . it applies to breaches by vendors of phrs , phr - related entities , and third - party service providers that maintain information on u.s. citizens or residents . the office of civil rights ( ocr ) in hhs enforces the privacy rule . the hipaa privacy rule limits the circumstances under which an individual's protected health information may be used or disclosed by covered entities . a covered entity is permitted to use or disclose protected health information without patient authorization for treatment , payment , or health care operations . exceptions permit the use or disclosure of phi without patient authorization or prior agreement for public health , judicial , law enforcement , and other specialized purposes . generally , only written notice need be provided if less than 500 individuals are involved .