1030 , among other things . the innocent owner defense is available to a property owner who can prove that he was unaware of the misconduct that would otherwise require confiscation . yet , it is also available to a property owner who can establish that he "did all reasonably could be expected under the circumstances to terminate such use of the property. for example , a property owner can be said to have done all he reasonably could , when he discloses the misconduct to authorities and in consultation with authorities takes action to prevent further misuse of his property . in addition , section 6 of the bill would adjust the forfeiture provisions to account for the supreme court's interpretation of the word "proceeds" in another forfeiture statute . in united states v. santos , the justices declared that the word "proceeds" in the money laundering statute referred to profits of a money laundering predicate offense rather than the gross receipts generated by the predicate . presumably with santos in mind , the section would amend the forfeiture provisions so that the "gross proceeds" of a cfaa violation would be subject to confiscation . an element of several of the crimes found in subsection 1030 ( a ) is the requirement that the defendant access the computer "without authorization" or that he "exceeds authorized access. by definition , a defendant "exceeds authorized access" when he gains authorized access but uses or alters information he is not authorized to use or alter . the courts have experienced some difficulty applying the definition . there is some support for the proposition that the term allows an employee to use authorized access to his employer's computer for purposes other than those for which it was given , as long as the use was not contrary to explicit employer limitations . in united states v. drew , the government brought a prosecution under section 1030 based on the theory that the defendant exceeded authorized access to a social network , myspace , when she violated the terms of the myspace terms of service agreement by inaccurately identifying herself . the court granted the defendant's motion for acquittal , because it considered the government's theory was too sweeping to avoid a vagueness challenge . section 8 may have been drafted in response to drew . the section would amend the definition of the term "exceeds authorized access" to state: as used in this section ... ( 6 ) the term 'exceeds authorized access' means to access a computer with authorization and to use such access to obtain or alter information in the computer that the accesser is not entitled so to obtain or alter , but does not include access in violation of a contractual obligation or agreement , such as an acceptable use policy or terms of service agreement , with an internet service provider , internet website , or non - government employer , if such violation constitutes the sole basis for determining that access to a protected computer is unauthorized .