these actions are summarized below . the ( 1 ) safe havens for children ( also referred to as supervised visitation ) and ( 2 ) court training and improvements programs were consolidated to form a new program , grants to support families in the justice system . the purpose of this program is to improve the civil and criminal justice system response to families with a history of domestic violence , dating violence , sexual assault , or stalking , or in cases involving allegations of child sexual abuse . the ( 1 ) services to advocate for and respond to youth ( also referred to as youth services ) and ( 2 ) grants to combat domestic violence , dating violence , sexual assault , and stalking in middle and high schools ( also referred to as supporting teens through education and protection or step ) were consolidated to create creating hope through outreach , options , services , and education for children and youth ( choose children & youth ) . the purpose of this program is to enhance the safety of youth and children who are victims of or exposed to domestic violence , dating violence , sexual assault , stalking , or sex trafficking . this program also aims to prevent future violence . the ( 1 ) engaging men and youth in prevention and grants to assist children and ( 2 ) youth exposed to violence programs were consolidated to create saving money and reducing tragedies through prevention ( smart prevention ) . the smart prevention program aims to prevent domestic violence , sexual assault , dating violence , and stalking through awareness and education programs and also through assisting children who have been exposed to violence and abuse . in addition , this program aims to prevent violence by engaging men as leaders and role models . three previously unfunded programs , ( 1 ) interdisciplinary training and education on domestic violence and other types of violence and abuse , ( 2 ) research on effective interventions in the health care setting , and ( 3 ) grants to foster public health responses to domestic violence , dating violence , sexual assault , and stalking , were eliminated and their purpose areas were included in the authorization of a new program called grants to strengthen the healthcare system's response to domestic violence , dating violence , sexual assault , and stalking . the purpose of this program is to improve training and education for health professionals in their prevention of and response to domestic violence , dating violence , sexual assault , and stalking . vawa 2013 established new provisions for all vawa grant programs . it established a nondiscrimination provision to ensure that victims are not denied services and are not subjected to discrimination based on actual or perceived race , color , religion , national origin , sex , gender identity , sexual orientation , or disability . it also enhanced protection of personally identifiable information of victims and specified the type of information that may be shared by grantees and subgrantees . it also required that any grantee or subgrantee that provides legal assistance must comply with certifications required under the legal assistance for victims grant program .