this is unprecedented . there is a historical exception for indian tribes , but only to the limited extent that a member of a tribe consents to be subjected to the jurisdiction of his own tribe. justice kennedy , therefore , seems to believe that congress may not have authority to subject nonmember citizens to the criminal jurisdiction of tribes , extra - constitutional sovereigns , to which they have not consented . further , the supreme court considered the issue of tribal court civil jurisdiction over nonmembers in a case that , although it did not concern criminal jurisdiction , may be informative with regard to jurisdiction generally in tribal courts . in plains commerce bank v. long family land and cattle co. , decided four years after lara , the majority held that the tribal court did not have civil jurisdiction over a non - indian bank that had allegedly discriminated against a tribal member in connection with the sale of a parcel of non - indian land on the reservation . the majority opinion , which cites justice kennedy's concurrence , notes that an exercise of tribal court jurisdiction must be based on the consent of the nonmember: not only is regulation of fee land sale beyond the tribe's sovereign powers , it runs the risk of subjecting nonmembers to tribal regulatory authority without commensurate consent . tribal sovereignty , it should be remembered , is "a sovereignty outside the basic structure of the constitution. united states v. lara , ... ( kennedy , j. , concurring in judgment ) . the bill of rights does not apply to indian tribes . indian courts "differ from traditional courts in a number of significant respects. and nonmembers have no part in tribal government — they have no say in the laws and regulations that govern tribal territory . consequently , those laws and regulations may be fairly imposed on nonmembers only if the nonmember has consented , either expressly or by his actions . even then , the regulation must stem from the tribe's inherent sovereign authority to set conditions on entry , preserve tribal self - government , or control internal relations . although the supreme court stated in lara that congress has authority to relax restrictions on the tribes' inherent authority so that they may try nonmember indians , it is not clear whether today's court would reach the same result . of the five justices signing on to that statement , only justice breyer and ginsburg are on the court today . justice kennedy expressed doubt about whether congress had that authority . justice thomas questioned whether tribes had inherent sovereignty at all and stated that he believed tribes did not have inherent authority to try their own members , but that under existing precedent , he believed congress had the authority to change the contours of the tribes' inherent sovereignty . justice scalia , in signing on to justice souter's dissent , apparently believed congress did not have authority to expand the inherent sovereignty of indian tribes to try nonmember indians . indian law is full of contradictions and confusion , making it difficult to predict how the court will decide .