it is the nation's official measure of income . money income includes wages and salaries , interest , dividends , rent , payments from pensions and retirement savings accounts , and nonmeans - tested cash income ( eg , social security , unemployment compensation , and veterans' payments ) . the historical trend in the united states is one of almost steadily increasing income inequality ( from 0.386 in 1968 to 0.477 in 2011 ) , as depicted in figure 1 . during the 2007-2009 recession , the gini coefficient fell slightly from its previous peak in 2006 of 0.470 . its level since then indicates an income distribution that is much more unequal than in most years since 1968 . other studies have estimated that many jobs possess characteristics which make them susceptible to being offshored and that they are not limited to low - skilled jobs . as it is technological advances ( eg , high - speed telecommunication ) that have made these jobs ( eg , call center workers ) vulnerable to offshore outsourcing , some have suggested that globalization cannot be separated from the technological change argument ( discussed below ) . economists generally have found technological change to be the most persuasive explanation for increased inequality at the top of the earnings distribution . frequently cited evidence underlying this explanation is the comparatively rapid growth in the wage premium paid to more highly skilled ( productive ) workers since 1979 . the increase in the "skill premium" coincided with substantial growth in the percentage of the labor force with a college education . this suggests that the growth in their supply did not keep pace with the increase in employer demand for highly skilled workers . the increased premium paid to high - skilled workers is commonly ascribed to the nature of technological change in recent decades . put another way , the kinds of technological advances that have occurred since the late 1970s have been biased in favor of those jobs that require higher levels of education and training . technological progress seemingly has affected the earnings distribution in two ways . first , information technology ( it ) serves as a substitute for low - skilled workers , which has reduced demand for and the relative wages of these workers . second , it serves as a complement to high - skilled workers , which has raised demand for and the relative wages of these workers . autor , katz , and kearney have refined this explanation . they hypothesize that computerization of tasks has polarized the labor market by increasing employer demand for those high - skilled workers who perform non - routine cognitive tasks ( eg , engineers and lawyers ) ; keeping demand stable for those low - skilled workers who perform non - routine manual tasks ( eg , truck drivers and home health care aides ) ; and decreasing demand for the many medium - skilled workers who perform routine tasks ( eg , administrative support and factory workers ) . they estimated that this pattern of job growth has produced substantial earnings gains among workers in the top quartile ( 25% ) of the distribution .