section 404 does not apply . however , if the court finds jurisdictional wetlands on their land , they must then apply to the corps of engineers for a section 404 permit . if that is denied , or granted with conditions unacceptable to the sacketts , their building prospects will depend on their returning to district court in a new suit , this time against the corps , arguing that the denial or conditions should be invalidated . the following comments speak to the wider implications of the ruling — epa's enforcement options . in response to sackett , epa will have to decide which of at least three enforcement options to pursue under section 404 , and possibly other statutes involving acos . the first , most restrained , option is simply to make sure that acos are backed up by an administrative record that makes legal challenge unlikely . while most of epa's regulatory statutes grant authority to issue acos , a preliminary survey reveals that in at least some instances , the courts already have ruled ( or assumed ) that pre - enforcement review is available . two examples are safe drinking water act emergency orders and clean air act compliance orders . as well , some statutes come replete with their own internal directive that a "final action" by epa is reviewable , obviating resort to the more complex apa standard at issue in sackett . contrariwise , the superfund act expressly states that pre - enforcement review of orders is not available , teeing up the constitutionality argument left unaddressed by sackett . parenthetically , there may be a question as to sackett 's applicability even within the section 404 program . litigation is expensive , and government agencies have the advantage that courts defer to their determinations . joint epa - corps of engineers responsibility under section 404 . within the section 404 permitting program , it may be speculated whether changes will be made after sackett in the current divvying up of enforcement responsibilities between epa and the corps of engineers . under a 1989 memorandum of agreement between the two agencies , epa generally has responsibility for section 404 enforcement where , as in sackett , the landowner fails to apply for a permit — so - called "unpermitted discharges. the corps , by contrast , issues section 404 permits and enforces against noncompliance with permit terms — that is , "permit violations. reviewability of corps jurisdictional determinations . sackett should be contrasted with current case law denying judicial reviewability for corps of engineers formal jurisdictional determinations . such determinations may be made by corps district offices at the request of those contemplating a project on their land and unclear as to whether a corps permitting authority such as cwa section 404 applies . they are separate from and prior to the permit application process . corps regulations declare that these jurisdictional determinations "shall constitute a corps final agency action," suggesting reviewability under the apa . however , the corps' characterization as final is not binding on courts , which uniformly have held that corps regulations notwithstanding , the agency's formal jurisdictional determinations are not final agency action entitled to review .