"it is time for a change. according to nancy birdsall , senior fellow and founding president of the center for global development , "the logic of an american president to ensure sustained u.s. support for the world bank is no longer as clear as it has been. according to birdsall , and others , the trump administration's "america first" rhetoric may make it harder for the united states to coalesce support for the u.s. candidate . others argue that these concerns are overblown and that any serious effort to block the u.s. nominee would backfire . david dollar , a former u.s. treasury and senior world bank official , says that , "it's a very complicated game . my instinct is that there is a very strong likelihood that the u.s. nominee will be approved . the world has an interest in the united states staying engaged with the world bank. devesh kapur , a professor at paul h. nitze school of advanced international studies at johns hopkins university , puts it more bluntly , saying "powerful nations' relationships with the united states matter much more than who heads the world bank. following kim's announcement of his resignation , the bank's executive board met on january 9 , 2019 , and issued a formal statement on the selection process . the nomination period for the next president ends on march 14 , after which the executive board is to decide on a shortlist of three candidates . following interviews , the executive board aims to select the next president before the spring meetings in april 2019 . on february 6 , president trump nominated david malpass , treasury's under secretary for international affairs , to be the next world bank president . reportedly , ivanka trump , president trump's oldest daughter and senior advisor , played a role in selecting the u.s. nominee . this custom has been subject to increasing criticism during the past two decades . the first line of criticism is directed at the current distribution of voting power , which critics contend does not account for the increasing integration of developing countries into the global economy . a second line of criticism is directed at the method of selecting world bank and imf leadership , which critics argue , elevates nationality above merit and undermines the legitimacy and effectiveness of the institutions . this report provides information on the 2019 world bank selection process and discusses efforts to reform the selection process . selecting the leadership at the two major international financial institutions — the imf and the world bank — is guided by a tradition that the world bank president is an american and that the imf managing director is a european . the informal agreement reflects the political and economic balance of power at the end of world war ii . at the time , the united states believed that the world bank should be headed by an american since the united states was the only capital surplus nation , and world bank lending would be dependent on american financial markets . the u.s. secretary of the treasury at the time , fred vinson , believed that if an american representative headed the world bank , the imf must be headed by a non - american .