these include h.r . 1587 , the home foreclosure reduction act of 2011 ( representative john conyers et al .

 ) 3841 , the principal reduction act of 2012 ( representative maxine waters et al .

 ) 4058 , the bankruptcy equity act of 2012 ( representative earl blumenauer et al .

 ) ; and s. 2093 , the preserving american homeownership act of 2012 ( senator robert menendez ) . principal reduction is also a component of a settlement reached between several mortgage servicers and 49 state attorneys general and the federal government . the federal housing finance agency ( fhfa ) , the regulator and conservator of fannie mae and freddie mac , decided against allowing the enterprises to reduce principal for mortgages that they guarantee . all of these initiatives are discussed more fully in " principal reduction " below . a second approach , large - scale refinancing , helps borrowers who are current on their mortgage to refinance into a new mortgage with a lower interest rate . because refinancing generally helps borrowers who are current , it is unlikely to have a major effect on the housing market , but it may prevent some foreclosures that could occur in the absence of a refinance . some argue that refinancing would stimulate consumer spending . for example , a mortgage refinance could lower a borrower's monthly payment , freeing up more income that can be used to pay down debt or for non - housing - related spending . some of the additional spending of borrowers may be offset by reduced income for investors . in a refinance , the previous owner of the mortgage is repaid on the loan earlier than expected and now faces reinvesting in a lower interest rate environment . although some investors ( including banks ) may lose investment income from refinancing , other banks and mortgage originators benefit from the increased business associated with refinancing . similarly , mass refinancing might cause fannie mae and freddie mac , two housing government - sponsored enterprises ( gses ) , to lose investment income but gain from the reduced likelihood of default . it is unclear which effect would be larger . in his 2012 state of the union address , president obama proposed streamlining the existing program to refinance fannie mae and freddie mac loans and establishing a new mass refinancing plan for non - fannie mae and non - freddie mac loans . congressional proposals for large - scale refinancing in the 112 th congress include h.r . 363 , the housing opportunity and mortgage equity act of 2011 ( representative dennis cardoza et al .

 ) ; s. 170 , the helping responsible homeowners act ( senator barbara boxer et al .

 ) ; and s. 3085 , the responsible homeowner refinancing act ( senator robert menendez et al. ) these proposals are discussed more fully in " large - scale refinancing " below . a third proposal , renting out foreclosed homes currently held by banks , gses , and other financial institutions , has the potential to stabilize housing prices by reducing the supply of homes on the "for sale" market . current policy encourages lenders to sell foreclosed property quickly rather than rent out vacant homes .