congress can also use regular ( i.e. the rules that agencies issue pursuant to aca are expected to have a major impact on how the legislation is implemented . for a variety of reasons , however , the cra has been used to disapprove of only one rule in the 16 years since it was enacted . perhaps most notably , it is likely that a president would veto a resolution of disapproval to protect rules developed under his own administration , and it may be difficult for congress to muster the two - thirds vote in both houses needed to overturn the veto . , non - cra ) legislative procedures to disapprove agencies' rules , but such legislation may prove even more difficult to enact than a cra resolution of disapproval ( primarily because of the lack of expedited procedures in the senate ) , and if enacted may also be vetoed by the president . although the cra has been used only once to overturn an agency rule , congress has regularly included provisions in the text of agencies' appropriations bills directing or preventing the development of particular regulations . such provisions include prohibitions on the finalization of particular proposed rules , restrictions on certain types of regulatory activity , and restrictions on implementation or enforcement of certain provisions . appropriations provisions can also be used to prompt agencies to issue certain regulations , or to require that certain procedures be followed before or after their issuance . the january 20 , 2012 , edition of the unified agenda listed 26 aca - related actions in the "proposed rule stage" ( indicating that the agencies expected to issue proposed rules on the topics within the next 12 months , or for which the closing dates of the comment periods are the next step ) . fourteen of the 26 upcoming proposed rules were expected to be issued by components of the department of health and human services ( hhs ) : the health resources and services administration ( hrsa , one action ) ; indian health service ( ihs , three actions ) ; office of the inspector general ( oig , one action ) ; and centers for medicare and medicaid services ( cms , nine actions ) . other proposed rules were expected to be issued by the department of labor's ( dol's ) employee benefits security administration ( ebsa , two actions ) and office of workers' compensation programs ( owcp , one action ) ; the treasury department's internal revenue service ( irs , three actions ) ; the architectural and transportation barriers compliance board ( atbcb , one action ) ; and the office of personnel management ( opm , five actions ) . the january 20 , 2012 , edition of the unified agenda listed 25 aca - related actions in the "final rule stage" section ( indicating that the agencies expected to issue final rules on the subjects within the next 12 months ) .