the number of seats in the local parliaments vary . one - quarter of the seats in each chamber of the union parliament and in each of the local parliaments are appointed by the commander - in - chief of burma's military , the tatmadaw . the april by - elections were to fill 40 vacant seats in people's assembly , 6 seats in the national assembly , 1 seat in ayeyarwady ( irrawaddy ) region , and 1 seat in the bago ( pegu ) region ( see figure 1 ) . however , on march 23 , 2012 , the union election commission ( uec ) postponed voting for three people's assembly seats in the kachin state for security reasons . forty - five of the seats are vacant because the elected member accepted a position in the union government . two seats are vacant because the elected member was removed from office , and the last seat is vacant due to the member's death . all 48 seats were previously held by members of the pro - military union solidarity and development party ( usdp ) . in terms of the overall balance of power in the union parliament , the by - elections will have only a marginal impact . less than 9% of the total seats in the people's assembly and under 3% in the national assembly were contested ( see table 1 ) . the by - elections are largely considered significant because of the participation of the nld , and its chair aung san suu kyi , who is viewed both domestically and internationally as the leader of burma's democracy movement . the election campaign unofficially began in march 2012 , after each party registered its slate of candidates with the union election commission ( uec ) . president thein sein and the union government pledged to make the by - elections free and fair . however , a number of incidents during the campaign period revealed efforts by government officials to undermine the ability of the nld to carry out its campaign , as well as intimidate or coerce people to support the usdp . the exclusion of certain political parties and the campaign irregularities also raised doubts about how free and fair the by - elections were . on march 20 , 2012 , it was reported that the burmese government had notified the association of southeast asian nations ( asean ) that it could send election observers to burma as of march 28 , 2012 . invitations to send election observers soon went out to the european union , the united states , and a number of other nations . in contrast to election day in november 2010 , voting on april 1 went comparatively smoothly . of particular note , there was no repeat of the mysterious appearance of "advance votes" that had marred the previous parliamentary elections . according to the official results released by the uec , the nld won all 37 seats in the people's assembly , 4 seats in the national assembly , and both of the seats in the regional assemblies . the usdp won 1 seat in the national assembly in sagaing region .