the federal procurement process ( i.e. , the process whereby agencies obtain goods and services from the private sector ) requires funding . contractors are generally paid using appropriated funds , and agency personnel — who are generally also paid with appropriated funds — are responsible for entering and administering contracts on the agency's behalf . the use of appropriated funds to finance contract performance and / or administration means that federal contracts may be affected by actual or potential funding gaps or shortfalls , such as could arise from a failure to raise the debt limit , budget cuts , or sequestration , all of which have been topics of wide - spread congressional and public interest during recent years . while these occurrences are distinct in their causes and their effects upon federal procurement , as table 1 illustrates , all prompt similar questions about what the government must or may do when confronted by a lack of funds , and how contractors could be affected by potential government actions . this report provides an overview of the various options that the government has , pursuant to contract law or otherwise , when confronted with actual or potential funding gaps , funding shortfalls , or budget cuts . it begins by considering the legal principles underlying the government's generally broad rights not to incur new obligations ( eg , by canceling solicitations or declining to exercise options ) . the report then addresses the contractual and other rights that the government may exercise under existing contracts ( eg , changing certain terms of the contract or altering the performance period ) . overall , these rights are comparatively well established . however , as the report concludes , the effects of the exercise of these rights upon contractors and , particularly , upon federal spending on procurement contracts are less clear and generally would depend upon the facts and circumstances of individual cases . the report does not address changes in contract policy that could also occur in response to funding shortfalls , nor does it address the effects that exercising certain of the rights noted here might have upon agency programs . in thinking about the government's contractual and other legal rights in this area , it helps to keep in mind the ways in which government contracts are — and are not — like other contracts . in many ways , federal procurement contracts are like other contracts between private parties , notwithstanding the fact that certain terms of these contracts are required by law . like other contracting parties , the government generally has a duty to perform largely as specified in the contract , absent modification , excuse , or discharge of its obligations . also like other contracts , government contracts are construed in light of the parties' intent , and the parties' intent could potentially be found to be contrary to the literal meaning of the contract . finally , government contracts are subject to interpretation by various courts and boards of contract appeals , which have had differing opinions on various questions , such as whether contingent costs may be recovered as part of an adjustment .