create a national infrastructure bank . this federal entity would provide low - interest loans , loan guarantees , and other types of credit assistance to stimulate investments by states , localities , and the private sector in a variety of infrastructure projects . some analysts and stakeholders take issue with such estimates . some say that epa's needs estimates are too low because they do not fully reflect types of projects not currently eligible for federal assistance , such as repair and replacement of aging systems , or needs that currently are not well met by existing programs , such as security - related projects ; on - site treatment systems in small , dispersed communities ; and projects that include mixed elements such as developing and treating new water supply , especially in rural areas . other estimates much larger than epa's have been made by a number of groups . for example , the american water works association estimated that investment needs for "buried drinking water infrastructure" total more than $1 trillion over the next 25 years . however , assessing "need" is complicated by differences in purpose , criteria , and timing , among other issues . one of the major difficulties is defining what constitutes a "need," a relative concept that is likely to generate a good deal of disagreement . in 2014 , bonds issued for water , sewer , and sanitation projects totaled $34 billion , 10.2% higher than the 2013 volume . beyond municipal bonds , federal assistance through grants and loans is available for some projects , but is insufficient to meet all needs . in the infrastructure context , funding needs estimates try to identify the level of investment that is required to meet a defined level of quality or service , but this depiction of need is essentially an engineering concept . it differs from economists' conception that the appropriate level of new infrastructure investment , or the optimal stock of public capital ( infrastructure ) for society , is determined by calculating the amount of infrastructure for which social marginal benefits just equal marginal costs . whether the estimates made by states and epa understate or overstate capital needs , communities face formidable challenges in providing adequate and reliable water infrastructure services . congress has considered ways to help meet those challenges . capital investments in water infrastructure are necessary to maintain high - quality service that protects public health and the environment . capital facilities are a major investment for water and wastewater utilities . almost all capital projects are debt - financed ( i.e. , they are not financed on a pay - as - you - go basis from ongoing revenues to the utility ) . the principal financing tool that local governments use is issuance of tax - exempt municipal bonds — at least 70% of u.s. water utilities rely on municipal bonds and other debt to some degree to finance capital investments . finally , public - private partnerships , or p3s , which are long - term contractual arrangements between a public utility and a private company , provide limited capital financing .