additional details are described further below . like eligibility , under traditional medicaid , states must cover certain benefits , while other services may be offered at state option . examples of benefits that are mandatory for most medicaid groups ( i.e. , categorically needy populations ) include inpatient hospital services , physician services , laboratory and x - ray services , early and periodic screening , diagnostic and treatment services ( epsdt ) for individuals under 21 , nursing facility services for individuals aged 21 and over , and home health care for those entitled to nursing facility care . examples of optional benefits for such medicaid groups include prescribed drugs , physician - directed clinic services , services of other licensed practitioners ( eg , chiropractors , podiatrists , psychologists ) services , nursing facility services for individuals under age 21 , physical therapy , and prosthetic devices . table 2 provides additional information for selected optional benefits covered by most states under the traditional medicaid program . the breadth of coverage for a given benefit can and does vary from state to state , even for mandatory benefits . in general , in defining a covered benefit , federal guidelines require that ( 1 ) services be sufficient in amount , duration and scope to reasonably achieve their purpose ; ( 2 ) the amount , duration , and scope of services must be the same statewide ; and ( 3 ) with some exceptions , beneficiaries must have freedom of choice of providers among health care practitioners or managed care entities participating in medicaid . states can modify these rules via existing waiver authority provided in section 1115 of the social security act . as an alternative to providing all the mandatory and selected optional benefits under traditional medicaid , the deficit reduction act of 2005 ( dra ; p.l . 109-171 ) gave states the option to enroll state - specified groups in benchmark and benchmark - equivalent benefit packages . these plans can exist in sub - state areas and can be limited to specific subpopulations . states can require "full benefit eligibles" ( or specific subgroups of these individuals ) to enroll in medicaid benchmark benefits . a full benefit eligible is someone who is eligible for all the mandatory and optional services that a state covers under its traditional medicaid program . medically needy and certain spend - down populations ( eg , individuals whose medicaid eligibility is based on a reduction of countable income for costs incurred for medical or remedial care ) are excluded from the definition of a full benefit eligible . specific groups are exempt from mandatory enrollment in benchmark benefit packages ( eg , those with special health care needs such as disabling mental disorders or serious and complex medical conditions ) . table 3 provides a description of each of these exempted populations . these exempted groups may get traditional medicaid benefits or may be offered voluntary enrollment in benchmark benefit plans . in such cases , states must describe the differences between traditional medicaid and benchmark plans to these beneficiaries in order to facilitate an informed choice .