intentions. challenges to russia's democratic development have long been of concern to congress as it has considered the course of u.s. - russia cooperation on matters of mutual strategic interest and as it has monitored problematic human rights cases . among these concerns , many members have condemned russia's invasion of georgia in 2008 , the death of lawyer sergey magnitskiy after being detained and tortured in a russian prison in 2009 , and the re - sentencing of businessman / oligarch mikhail khodorkovskiy in 2010 to several more years in prison . recent legislation includes the senate and house versions of the magnitskiy rule of law bills , which would impose a visa ban and an asset freeze on human rights abusers , and a provision in the national defense authorization act of 2012 ( p.l . 112-81 ) , signed into law on december 31 , 2011 , that calls for a plan to provide defensive weaponry to georgia . the administration's foreign assistance budget for fy2013 submitted to congress in february 2012 requests $52 million for russia , most of it aimed to continue support for democratization , and the administration additionally has notified congress of plans to create a $50 million fund to further support these efforts . some observers have suggested that since putin has condemned such aid as interference in russia's internal affairs , he may tighten restrictions on such aid for non - governmental organizations or even ban some aid activities . ongoing congressional concerns about democratization , human rights , and trade will continue and may have been heightened by the russian election outcome . during his trip to russia in late february 2012 to discuss u.s. trade prospects ahead of hearings on russia's accession to the world trade organization ( wto ) , senate finance committee chairman max baucus stressed that the growth of u.s. trade and investment would be facilitated by further democratization . russia's legislature will give approval for the ratification of wto accession by mid - 2012 . congress may consider whether to grant permanent normal trade relations ( pntr ) to russia and to lift the applicability of the so - called jackson - vanik provisions of the trade act of 1974 to russia ( concerning emigration from the former soviet union ) . russia's human rights and democratization record may well be part of the debate . on march 5 , 2012 , representative david dreier , chairman of the house democracy partnership , congratulated putin on his election victory , but objected to putin's election night victory speech which appeared to characterize the united states as interfering in russia's domestic affairs . representative dreier stated that the united states was not seeking to dictate to russia , but suggested that the united states , "a country that has had a 223-year history of democracy , could provide a little bit of advice to a country that is just now beginning to enter its third decade of democracy and obviously has had more than a few challenges. he endorsed an idea that putin not run again after his third term in office , call a new duma election , and hold free and fair gubernatorial elections .