appendix a . family sponsorship and lawful permanent residence family reunification , a central principle of u.s. immigration policy , is reflected in legal provisions that grant lawful permanent residence to foreign national spouses of u.s. citizens without numerical limitation , and to foreign national spouses of lawful permanent residents ( lpr ) according to a numerically limited system of family preferences . these ina provisions highlight the importance of being related to a u.s. citizen or lpr for foreign nationals seeking to become lawful permanent residents of the united states . the first step in this process is to obtain immigration preference status , petitions for which have to be filed with uscis by the beneficiary's u.s. citizen or lpr relative . in addition to an approved petition for lpr status , prospective immigrants sponsored by lprs must have a visa number immediately available to them . spouses and children of lprs are treated differently than spouses and children of u.s. citizens . spouses or children of lprs are subject to the visa allocation system , which sets limits on the number of individuals in the various preference categories who can be granted lawful permanent resident status each year . thus , after their petitions for immigration preference are approved , relatives of lawful permanent residents must wait for the state department to assign them an immigrant visa number . spouses and children of u.s. citizens , on the other hand , are not subject to numerical immigration limits . they do not have to wait for an immigrant visa number to become available and receive a visa number as soon as their petitions are processed and approved . once a visa number is available , a foreign national already in the united states may be eligible to apply to adjust to lpr status without leaving the country . those not eligible to adjust status must apply for an immigrant visa at a u.s. consulate abroad , usually in their home country . upon admission to the united states , the visa holder acquires lpr status . all applicants for lpr status must be found "admissible" to the united states by uscis . under the ina , foreign nationals may be inadmissible for health , security , criminal , financial , or other reasons . appendix b . legislative background of the immigration provisions of vawa domestic violence affects a broad segment of society , yet experts believe that several factors may put noncitizen women married to u.s. citizens or lprs at increased risk of spousal abuse . these factors include poor english language skills , unemployment , poverty , crowded living conditions , and most notably , economic dependence on the sponsoring citizen or lpr spouse . moreover , as described in appendix a , remaining married is essential for foreign national spouses of u.s. citizens or lprs who wish to adjust their immigration status to lawful permanent residence . this requirement , which maintains the family relationship between the foreign national and the u.s. citizen or lpr , tends to discourage foreign national spouses from leaving abusive marriages .