appendix a . number and percentage of enrolled homeless students by state for selected years appendix b . legislation adopted in the 110 th - 111 th congresses that affects the education for homeless children and youth program several bills were passed in the 110 th - 111 th congresses that will potentially increase the programs and / or services available to homeless students . this appendix summarizes the portions of these bills with relevance for homeless students . the homeless emergency and rapid transition to housing act ( hearth act ) was passed as part of the helping families save their home act ( p.l . this legislation amended and reauthorized the housing and urban development ( hud ) homeless programs under the mckinney - vento act , among other things . the hearth act expanded the definition of homeless used by hud and several other agencies . however , the definition of homeless used by ed in administering the ehcy program remains more expansive than the definition included in the hearth act . the amended definition of homeless included in the hearth act does allow children and youth that meet ehcy eligibility criteria ( or eligibility under certain other federal programs ) to be considered eligible under the hearth act in limited circumstances . it requires that youth and families who are defined as homeless under another federal program meet each of the following criteria: they have experienced a long - term period without living independently in permanent housing . in its final regulation , hud defined "long - term period" to mean at least 60 days . they have experienced instability as evidenced by frequent moves during this long - term period , defined by hud to mean at least two moves during the 60 days prior to applying for assistance . the youth or families with children can be expected to continue in unstable housing due to factors such as chronic disabilities , chronic physical health or mental health conditions , substance addiction , histories of domestic violence or childhood abuse , the presence of a child or youth with a disability , or multiple barriers to employment . under the final regulation , barriers to employment may include the lack of a high school degree , illiteracy , lack of english proficiency , a history of incarceration , or a history of unstable employment . the hearth act includes additional provisions relevant for ehcy . the most important are the new requirements that in order to receive funds: continuum of care ( coc ) applicants must show that they have collaborated with leas in identifying homeless families , and in informing families and homeless youth of eligibility for ehcy services . coc applicants must also show that they have considered the educational needs of homeless students when determining shelter placements , including placing families with children in shelters as close to the school of origin as possible . cocs must obtain certification from each project applicant that provides housing or services that they have designated a staff person to ensure that children are enrolled in school and are connected to appropriate community services , and that these services are consistent with the provisions of title vii of mckinney - vento , as well as other relevant laws .