this section briefly summarizes this policy context . few analysts dispute the contention that the path to global competitiveness in the 21 st century runs through the twin pillars of scientific and technological advancement . the policy question , then , is what should the federal government do ( if anything ) to encourage scientific and technological innovation and ( thereby ) national competitiveness ? a broad coalition of business , academic , and government leaders has concluded that at least part of the answer to this question is that the federal government should encourage innovation by increasing support for physical sciences and engineering research and by increasing the number of u.s. students graduating with stem degrees and skills . supporters of this general consensus assert that a combination of external pressures and internal weaknesses threatens the united states' innovation advantage . for example , supporters note that changes in the industrial bases and educational attainment rates of rapidly developing countries like china and india mean that these countries are able to compete for a growing percentage of the world's high - value jobs and industry . further , these advocates assert that signs of potential weakness in areas that have long been u.s. strengths — such as the u.s . stem workforce and leading - edge research — appear to accompany these global changes . in particular , competes acts proponents raise concerns about funding for research in the physical sciences and engineering and the u.s. supply of scientists , engineers , and technicians . it also authorized new technology transfer and commercialization activities at these agencies . in addition , competes 2010 authorized inducement prizes at federal agencies , established a loan guarantee program for manufacturers , and established a regional innovation program ( rip ) . in stem education , competes 2010 sought to provide greater coordination of federal stem education programs , authorized support for academic programs that provide teacher certification concurrent with a bachelor's degree in a stem field , and repealed certain unfunded stem education programs authorized by competes 2007 . like its predecessor , competes 2007 , the central policy contributions of competes 2010 were the "doubling path" policy for the nsf , nist core laboratories and construction accounts , and the doe office of science , as well as the authorization of stem education activities at various federal agencies . the president's fy2013 budget requested increased funding for the doubling path accounts ( albeit at levels below those authorized ) but included support for few competes 2010 authorized stem education programs . in this regard the president's fy2013 budget request was generally consistent with prior year obama administration requests and appropriations activity for both competes acts . of the new programs with defined funding authorizations in competes 2010 , only the regional innovation program ( rip ) at the department of commerce ( doc ) was specifically included in the administration's fy2013 budget request . the administration's budget request did not seek funding for the nist green jobs act , federal loan guarantees for innovative technologies in manufacturing , or the stem - training grant program . competes 2010 also authorized new programs without providing a defined funding amount .