military and civil ( i.e. , non - military government ) space programs provide economies of scale and scope to companies that are federal contractors . during the post - cold war period , numerous mergers resulted in industry consolidation , with fewer firms spanning multiple sectors . ( see figure 1 . ) the u.s. government is by far the largest consumer of space products and services , accounting for 23% of global spending . the commercial space sector overlaps the government ( civil and military ) space sector in a number of different ways . many manufacturers sell to both commercial and government customers , making use of common systems ( for instance , satellites use standard buses ) , common launch vehicles , and interdependent supply chains . many of the largest commercial aerospace companies play a major role in the space industry , and some are almost entirely dependent on government space programs for their space - related work . because of the size of government space programs , some of the largest u.s. space companies , especially those engaged in launch activities , withdrew from the commercial space sector to focus nearly exclusively on government contracts that are not open to foreign competitors . nevertheless , the international commercial launch industry has continued to develop even as some of the largest u.s. space companies ceased to compete for those launches . during the last decade , the united states increasingly offered opportunities to smaller private companies to encourage entrepreneurial approaches to space activities as a means of spurring innovation , reducing costs , and promoting commercial engagement in space manufacturing and service provision . orbital sciences corporation and space exploration technologies corporation ( spacex ) are two newer american companies that have successfully competed for commercial and government contracts . launch vehicle , spacecraft , and satellite manufacturing is highly competitive internationally , with european , russian , chinese , indian , and japanese companies vying with u.s. firms for contracts to provide launch vehicles , spacecraft , and satellites to commercial customers . some manufacturers of launch vehicles specialize in the manufacture and launch of those vehicles , while others also make spacecraft , satellites , and civil and defense aviation products , in addition to building and launching rockets . the supply chain for launch vehicles is moderately globalized , while satellites vary according to customer: military ( low level of globalization ) , civil ( moderate level of globalization ) , commercial ( moderate to high level of globalized components ) . the major policy issues discussed in this report are limited to those that appear to have large effects on the competitiveness of the u.s. space manufacturing sector: classification of commercial satellites as munitions subject to stringent u.s. export controls laws and regulations ; domestic and international spectrum regulations that may not have kept pace with the emergence of new technologies that appear to require much greater flexibility in terms of spectrum use ; and the dramatically increased use of commercial satellites for department of defense communications needs . futron corporation's data , in particular , are used by government agencies , the government accountability office ( gao ) , and others as a basis for analyzing the space industry .