no such increase has been introduced . assuming that duck stamp prices will be unchanged , a more reliable estimate might be that $47.0 million would be available for fws land acquisition from the account . the national wildlife refuge fund ( nwrf , also called the refuge revenue sharing fund ) compensates counties for the presence of the non - taxable federal lands under the primary jurisdiction of fws . a portion of the fund is supported by the permanent appropriation of receipts from various activities carried out on the national wildlife refuge system . however , these receipts are sufficient for funding only a small fraction of the authorized formula , and county governments have long urged additional appropriations to make up the difference . the committee approved $12.0 million for the fund ; if this level is approved , counties would receive 22.8% of the authorized level . the administration requested no funding for nwrf in fy2013 ; based on receipts alone , counties would then receive 6.6% of the authorized level . the administration argues that the savings are justified based on low costs of refuges to county infrastructure and economic benefits to local economies from increased tourism . fws has long had a role in conserving species across international boundaries , beginning with species such as migratory birds , which spend some part of their life cycle within u.s. boundaries , and more recently including selected species of broader international interest . one of the programs , the multinational species conservation fund ( mscf ) , generates considerable constituent interest despite the small size of the program . it benefits asian and african elephants , tigers , rhinoceroses , great apes , and marine turtles . the house committee reduced all of the mscf programs by 50.0% relative to fy2012 , emphasizing that all of the authorizations in this account have expired , or will expire in fy2012 . the administration requested $10.0 million , up 5.4% . ( see table 3 . ) similarly , the committee reduced the neotropical migratory bird conservation fund by 50.0% relative to the fy2012 level . the administration had requested $3.8 million , unchanged from fy2012 . the program provides grants for the conservation of hundreds of bird species that migrate among north and south america and the caribbean . the act requires spending 75% of the funds on projects outside of the united states . state and tribal wildlife grants help fund efforts to conserve species ( including nongame species ) of concern to states , territories , and tribes . the program was created in the fy2001 interior appropriations law ( p.l . 106-291 ) and further detailed in subsequent interior appropriations laws . ( it has no separate authorizing statute. ) the largest portion of the program is for formula grants to states and territories . funds may be used to develop state conservation plans as well as to support specific practical conservation projects . a portion of the funding is set aside for competitive grants to tribal governments or tribal wildlife agencies , and another portion for competitive grants to states . the two programs for competitive grants have no specific matching requirements . this grant program has generated considerable support from state and tribal governments .