appendix a . details on state and local taxation as described briefly in the text , there are several types of state and local taxes imposed in the various states . these are discussed in more depth below . property taxes property taxes are one of the few taxes based on wealth — the value of assets at a given point in time . other taxes are almost always linked to a flow of income or are triggered by a market transaction within a given time frame , usually one year . many observers suggest that property taxes are intended to reflect the property owner's benefit received from government services . the question is: does the federal government have a responsibility to compensate state and local governments for the tax - exempt status of its lands and resources ? this report describes existing state and local taxation , presents basic information on issues of fairness and consistency for possible federal compensation , and summarizes existing federal payment programs . beginning more than a century ago , congress has created numerous programs to provide funds to state and local governments because of the tax - exempt status of federal lands and resources . impact aid payments are made to local educational agencies because of the financial burdens resulting from federal activities ( eg , educating children residing on tax - exempt federal lands ) . many programs were funded with receipts from the sale or lease of federal resources . others have been based on the acreage of federal lands , on some tax - like arrangement , or some combination of options . when established , most of the federal payment programs were justified as compensation for the tax - exempt status of federal lands . however , comparing existing payment programs with state and local taxation is a difficult task , at best . one difficulty is deciding whether the comparison should assess tax equivalency or cost recovery . as discussed above , each approach has advantages and limitations . each has theoretical justifications and advocates , but neither is clearly superior or preferable . the plethora of federal payment programs were enacted by various congressional committees over the past century . the differences and distinctions among the programs , as well as the complicated formulae used in some programs , has led to confusion , inconsistency , and probably inequality , among recipients . as shown in the few comparative studies over the years , some counties have probably been "compensated" at levels greater than private taxation would have yielded , while others doubtless have received less than would have been paid by private landowners . the perpetuation of these inconsistent and probably inequitable programs is likely the result of two factors . one is differences in committees of jurisdiction over the various programs . many of the programs were reported by the house committee on natural resources and senate committee on energy and natural resources , or their predecessors , the committees on interior and insular affairs ( and possibly all the way back to the committees on public lands ) . however , programs enacted at any particular point are likely a reflection of the leadership and membership of these committees , which has shifted over time .