in 2016 , the daily snf copayment is $161 . the following sections explain in greater detail the snf pps formula depicted in figure 1 , including the calculation of and update to ( 1 ) urban and rural base rates , ( 2 ) the case - mix classification system — resource utilization groups ( rugs ) — and ( 3 ) the wage index that is used to adjust payments for differences in area wages . medicare snf care has often been discussed in the context of other medicare - covered post - acute care benefits . the copayment is not adjusted geographically or based on the amount of medicare snf reimbursement . incentive payments under gainsharing agreements can be available for reducing medicare ffs spending for certain beneficiaries below a medicare episode spending benchmark . for example , model 3 of the bundled payment for care improvement initiative allows post - acute care providers and other providers to collaborate and choose certain episodes ( eg , post - acute care following a pneumonia hospitalization ) and certain episode lengths ( eg , 90 days of medicare ffs spending after hospital discharge ) to achieve such incentive payments . a similar payment model being tested at cmmi — the comprehensive care joint replacement ( cjr ) model — provides a 90-day medicare episode spending benchmark to participants who provide a lower - extremity joint replacement procedure to beneficiaries . the balanced budget act of 1997 ( bba 97 ; p.l . 105-33 ) required most snfs to be reimbursed under a prospective payment system ( pps ) beginning on july 1 , 1998 . 113-185 ) on october 6 , 2014 , and the center for medicare & medicaid innovation ( cmmi ) , established under the aca , has tested alternative payment models for reimbursing post - acute care . the impact act attempts to improve medicare quality comparison and payment accuracy for post - acute care settings — ltchs , irfs , snfs , and home health care — by gradually eliminating certain differences in post - acute care assessment instruments beginning on or after october 1 , 2016 . for snfs , the impact act will result in changes to the mds . the impact act will require the secretary to provide feedback to post - acute care providers on quality measure and resource use measure performance beginning october 1 , 2017 . the secretary will then create procedures for making quality measure performance and resource use measure performance publicly available beginning october 1 , 2018 . following the public reporting stage , the secretary will submit a report to congress regarding alternative models for a post - acute care provider payment system that unifies payment across post - acute care settings including snfs . this report will include recommendations on ( 1 ) a technical prototype of a post - acute care pps , ( 2 ) methods to incorporate standardized patent assessment data , and ( 3 ) further clinical integration , among other recommendations . the report will be submitted no later than two years after the secretary has collected two years of data on quality measures .