, total need ) . the rule also states that the budget authority for the program will be based on the maximum appropriated award amount and any changes to the eligibility criteria . prior to the implementation of the fy2006 scoring rule , cbo accounted for budget authority in the pell grant program according to the level provided in each appropriation bill . changes that were specific to the eligibility criteria and award rules for the pell grant program included the following: for ay2012-2013 and future years , the qualifying minimum pell grant award was set to 10% of the total maximum pell grant . how well does the pell grant currently function as the foundation aid ? this section explores this question by analyzing the purchasing power of the pell grant and the distribution of other federal aid to pell recipients . costs for the pell grant program are award year - specific and are primarily affected by the number of students who apply for and receive aid under the program's eligibility parameters and award rules . from ay2008-2009 to ay2010-2011 , the program experienced both anticipated and unanticipated increases in program costs in each award year . beginning in ay2011-2012 , program costs have declined or stabilized when compared to original estimates as a result of ( 1 ) the changes enacted in the fy2011 continuing appropriations act and the fy2012 consolidated appropriations act ; and ( 2 ) declines in enrollment , particularly at public and private for - profit institutions . this section reviews recent trends in program costs and also presents some of the possible causes behind the changes in program costs since ay2007-2008 . this section reviews the latest program funding trends . although the program is currently operating with a surplus , addressing periodic funding shortfalls contributes significantly to changes regarding eligibility and award rules , and to appropriations decisions . this section explores the concepts of and provides a historic look at discretionary funding surpluses and shortfalls in the program . additionally , this section provides insight into how funding shortfalls in the program have been addressed in the past . annual discretionary appropriation bills provide the largest portion of funding for the pell grant program , and this funding typically remains available for use for two fiscal years . an annual appropriation is usually available for obligation on october 1 of the fiscal year in which the appropriation is made and remains available for obligation through september 30 of the following fiscal year . thus , while fy2016 funds are provided with the purpose of supporting awards made from july 1 , 2016 , to june 30 , 2017 , these funds are available for obligation from october 1 , 2015 , to september 30 , 2017 , and may support multiple award years . as mentioned earlier , annual discretionary appropriation bills also establish the base discretionary maximum grant for each applicable award year . the safra act , the fy2011 continuing appropriations act , the budget control act of fy2011 , and most recently the fy2012 consolidated appropriations act amended the hea to provide specified mandatory appropriations for the pell grant program to augment current and future discretionary appropriations .