the implementation of h.r . 4019 also raises a number of possible issues . some issues may appear to be relatively minor ; for example , grazing fees are charged for actual use , not for permits ( as implied in section 105 ( b ) ( 2 ) ) , and chargeable volume ( section 101 ( 4 ) ) in some national forests is calculated in growing stock ( cubic feet ) , not in merchantable sawtimber ( board feet ) , making the minimum sale level calculation ( section 104 ( 2 ) from the definition in section 101 ( 8 ) ) difficult , at best . six implementation provisions could raise more complicated issues and warrant some additional discussion: the provision on state education funding ; inclusion of the o&c lands ; implementation in parts of national forests ; directions on timber sale practices and procedures ; the need for regulations for implementation ; and impacts on usfs staffing and funding . section 102 ( c ) ( 3 ) would direct that the "assets of the trust shall not ... be used in lieu of or to otherwise offset state funding sources for local schools , facilities , or educational purposes. this provision appears to be intended to prevent states from adjusting their allocation of state educational funds in response to usfs state payments , as is currently done in washington and other states . some might view this as federal interference in state prerogatives to allocate state funding as the state sees fit , which would violate the spending clause / tenth amendment of the u.s. constitution . others would likely argue that this is a legitimate condition of the federal trust payments . while the language of section 102 ( c ) ( 3 ) appears to make this a requirement only for counties choosing the trust payments , the automatic opt - in provision ( §103 ) and the allocation and distribution provisions ( §§106 and 107 ) make this appear less of a voluntary grant program . the bill would include payments for the o&c lands in western oregon through the definition of federal land ( §101 ( 7 ) ( b ) ) . however , some of the actions required by the bill would not be applied to the o&c lands . the provisions of section 105 , implementing the trust projects , direct the secretary of agriculture to identify trust projects on national forest system lands . there are no directions for the secretary of the interior to identify trust projects on o&c lands , and no authorization for the trust project designation , public involvement , or environmental review provisions to be implemented on the o&c lands . section 106 would direct that trust project revenues be deposited in the u.s. treasury to be available for appropriation to the usfs . finally , section 107 would direct use of the funds consistent with srs section 102 ( c ) , which refers to the usfs 25% payments to states act requiring use of funds for roads and schools ; under the 1937 o&c act , the o&c payments have been available for any local governmental purpose .