provide authority to assign observers . the legislation would amend section 8 ( a ) ( 2 ) ( b ) of the vra to provide that observers could be assigned if , in the attorney general's judgment , the assignment is necessary to enforce , in addition to the 14 th or 15 th amendment , any provision of the vra or any other federal law protecting the right of citizens to vote . a ruling is expected by june 2015 . the following provides an overview of selected legislation that would establish additional requirements and standards for congressional redistricting . the following provides an overview of selected legislation that would amend the voting rights act . 885 , the "voting rights amendment act of 2015" would: modify the current "bail in" provision in section 3 ( c ) of the vra . under current law , section 3 ( c ) generally provides that if a court finds that violations of the 14 th or 15 th amendment justifying equitable relief have occurred in a state or political subdivision , the court shall retain jurisdiction for a period of time that it deems appropriate and during that period , no electoral change can be made until the court determines that the change neither has the purpose , nor will it have the effect , of denying or abridging the right to vote based on race , color , or language minority status ; in addition , if the state or political subdivision submits a proposed electoral change to the attorney general , and the attorney general has not issued an objection within 60 days , the new electoral procedure may be enforced . the legislation would add to the types of violations that would qualify for "bail in. under the legislation , violations of the following would qualify for "bail in": the 14 th or 15 th amendment ; the vra , with the exception of violations of section 2 ( a ) that are based on a requirement that an individual provide photo identification as a condition of receiving a ballot ; or any federal voting rights law that prohibits discrimination on the basis of race , color , or membership in a language minority group . establish a new coverage formula for section 5 preclearance . the formula would cover any state , and all its political subdivisions , that during the past 15 years had five or more voting rights violations , at least one of which was committed by the state itself ( as opposed to a political subdivision within the state ) . it would also cover specific political subdivisions that during the past 15 years had three or more voting rights violations , or one or more voting rights violations and "persistent , extremely low minority turnout," to be determined by specified voter turnout data from the past 15 years . each calendar year , the attorney general would be required to update the list of voting rights violations attributable to each state and political subdivision for the previous calendar year .