the stated goal of turkish stream is to supply natural gas to europe , not turkey . the main issue for this region is whether the mena nations , with existing reserves and infrastructure , can increase production and delivery of additional supplies to europe . there has been tremendous growth in lng liquefaction over the last few years , mainly in qatar , and more capacity is projected to be added by industry . even the united states has multiple proposed lng liquefaction projects at various stages of regulatory approval . the addition of more liquefaction capacity could provide the eu with other alternative suppliers even though their ability to use lng is currently constrained by a lack of infrastructure . there are alternatives to russian natural gas for europe to choose from , but it would be difficult , if not impractical , for europe to consider replacing all russian natural gas imports . some eu countries and companies also appear reluctant to shift significantly from the status quo . some of europe's larger natural gas companies have major financial interests in maintaining russian supplies and do not see a problem in depending so much on russia . russia not only holds the largest supplies of natural gas globally , but already has significant infrastructure connecting its resources to europe , while some of the alternatives remain constrained . a major test for the eu in developing a more coherent energy policy could be how to balance these views with those of member states that are highly dependent on russian energy and are concerned by the leverage russia could exert on parts of europe if no alternatives are found to alleviate at least some of that dependence . the opening of nord stream in 2012 and the proposal for turkish stream highlight challenges europe faces in diversifying its natural gas supplies: russia has demonstrated a willingness to go to great lengths to maintain its hold on european market share of natural gas . however , while some european countries , germany included , maintain that projects such as nord stream enhance european energy security by providing alternate routes for russian supplies , a number of eu member states , including poland and lithuania , opposed nord stream and have questioned russia's reliability as an energy supplier . critics tend to argue , for example , that projects like nord stream could give moscow additional political and economic leverage in its dealings with countries that have been bypassed by the pipeline . gazprom and a consortium of european companies , including e.on of germany , shell , omv of austria , basf / wintershall of germany , and engie of france , have proposed an expansion of nord stream . despite its dependence on russian natural gas , some analysts argue that europe is well positioned geographically to benefit from recent changes in global natural gas development . since the advent of shale gas in the united states , the world appears to be potentially awash in natural gas . a 2011 study commissioned by the u.s. energy information administration ( eia ) showed that technically recoverable shale gas resources worldwide may exceed current global natural gas reserves .