guest worker programs remain controversial . some view them as a necessary source of legal workers and call for their reform and expansion . others view them , in their current form , as "inherently abusive" and argue that if they are to be allowed to continue operating , they must be thoroughly overhauled . this report discusses existing visa programs for temporary lower - skilled workers , including regulatory changes since 2008 . it covers legislative efforts to reform current programs and to create new guest worker visas . alternatively , would there be an adequate supply of authorized u.s. farm workers if new technologies were developed and implemented ? in the past , guest workers have been imported to address u.s. worker shortages during times of war . during world war i , for example , tens of thousands of mexican workers performed mainly agricultural labor as part of a temporary worker program . the controversial bracero program , which began during world war ii and lasted until 1964 , brought several million mexican agricultural workers into the united states . at its peak in the late 1950s , the bracero program employed more than 400,000 mexican workers annually . today , the united states imports guest workers in much smaller numbers to perform temporary agricultural and nonagricultural labor . in current guest worker programs , issues of need for foreign workers are addressed on an individual basis through a process of labor certification . it further identifies and explores key policy considerations to help inform congressional action on guest worker programs . the immigration and nationality act ( ina ) of 1952 , as amended , enumerates categories of aliens , known as nonimmigrants , who are admitted to the united states for a temporary period of time and a specific purpose . nonimmigrant visa categories are identified by letters and numbers , based on the sections of the ina that established them . among the major nonimmigrant visa categories is the "h" category for temporary workers . the h category includes h - 2a and h - 2b visas for guest workers , as well as visas for higher - skilled temporary workers . foreign nationals can also perform lower - skilled temporary work on certain other nonimmigrant visas . policy discussions about guest worker programs necessarily involve consideration of unauthorized workers , who have traditionally performed lower - skilled work in a variety of industries . it is widely believed that most unauthorized aliens enter and remain in the united states in order to work . generally speaking , as discussed above , guest worker programs try to achieve two goals simultaneously: to be responsive to legitimate employer needs for labor and to provide adequate protections for u.s. and foreign temporary workers . dol explicitly addressed the idea of balancing the needs of employers and workers in its 2011 proposed rule on the h - 2b visa ( the precursor to the 2012 final rule ) . supplementary information accompanying the 2011 proposal stated: although the department still seeks to maintain an efficient system , it has in this new rule struck a balance between reducing processing times and protecting u.s. worker access to these job opportunities .