appendix a . other federal programs that may provide primary care to the underserved the federal government supports facilities that provide primary care to low - income or otherwise medically underserved populations through a number of facilities that are similar to health centers , but are not authorized in phsa section 330 . for example , the aca authorized funding for school - based health centers and nurse - managed health clinics . both of these facilities serve underserved populations , but have different requirements than facilities authorized in phsa section 330 . the federal government also provides support for facilities that provide care to targeted populations such as american indians , alaska natives , and native hawaiians , facilities located in rural areas , facilities that provide mental health services , and facilities that provide free care . this appendix describes these types of facilities , their authorization , and program requirements . school - based health centers school - based health centers ( sbhcs ) are facilities located on or near school grounds that provide age - appropriate comprehensive primary health care services to students regardless of their ability to pay . sbhcs may be located at public , private , charter , or parochial schools and must open , at a minimum , during school hours . prior to the aca , hrsa funded sbhcs through its section 330 appropriation . the aca authorized separate sbhc grants in section 339z - 1 of the phsa and appropriated $200 million ( $50 million annually ) from fy2010 to fy2013 to support grants for sbhc construction and renovation . although the aca authorized grants for sbhc operation , funding has not yet been appropriated for these grants . despite the lack of an explicit sbhc operating grant program , some section 330 grantees may operate sbhcs . hrsa estimates that there are 1,152 sbhcs . nurse - managed health clinics nurse - managed health centers ( nmhcs ) are centers that provide comprehensive primary care and wellness services to underserved populations where nurses provide the majority of health services . nmhcs are required to serve the entire population in the area in which they are located and must have an advisory committee similar to those required for section 330 health centers . nhmcs provide wellness services , prenatal care , disease prevention , management of chronic conditions like asthma , hypertension and diabetes , and health education . some also provide dental and mental health services . aca authorized grants to support nmhcs in phsa section 330a - 1 . in fy2010 , hhs awarded $15 million to provide three years of support for 10 nhmcs . grantees were required to submit a sustainability plan for operation after the federal grant period is complete in 2013 . no funding has been awarded since fy2010 . community mental health centers community mental health centers ( cmhc ) are licensed facilities that provide mental health services . these facilities are required to provide mental health services that are tailored to the needs of children and adults ( including the elderly ) who have a serious mental illness . these facilities are also required to provide services to individuals that have been discharged from inpatient treatment at a mental health facility .