however , h.r . 7 ( section 1205 ) and map - 21 ( section 1510 ) , would also limit states' authority to exempt these vehicles if the hov lanes become "degraded" to the point that vehicles fall below minimum average speed — generally 45 mph — over 90% of the time during peak travel hours . under current law , states must limit exemptions if the exempted vehicles cause the degradation , while under both the house and senate bills , actions to address degradation include limits to access regardless of the cause of the degradation . the two bills provide similar levels of funding for truck safety grants to states in fy2013 ( see table 10 and figure a - 11 ) . the revenue section of the house surface transportation reauthorization ( h.r . 7 ) would rename the mass transit account of the highway trust fund as the alternative transportation account . map - 21 and h.r . it would authorize dot to establish and enforce minimum safety standards for rail transit systems that are not otherwise regulated by dot ( eg , commuter rail operations are regulated by fra ) ; direct dot to establish a safety certification program , under which states could receive assistance from fta in overseeing rail transit operations ; and require that state safety oversight agencies be financially independent of the transit system ( s ) they oversee , to avoid the moral hazard of a transit agency having influence over the pay or staffing of its oversight agency . it would authorize "not less than $10 million" for grants to states to carry out this program . the financial resources available to authorizers are more constrained . the highway trust fund ( htf ) has provided most of the funding for surface transportation authorization bills since the fund was created in 1956 , but the revenues from highway taxes ( mostly on gasoline and diesel fuel ) that support the htf have declined in recent years due to the condition of the economy and improvements in vehicle fuel efficiency . consequently , how to pass a multi - year bill without cutting infrastructure spending , raising the gas tax , or increasing the budget deficit is an underlying theme in the ongoing debate . other issues such as alternative finance , tolling , public - private partnerships , acceleration of project delivery , and performance management are also being debated in this fiscal context . in addition , the question of equity in the distribution of federal spending among the states , which has been resolved in the past by providing large increases in funding for all states , cannot be solved so easily given currently forecast revenues . for a detailed review of the underlying issues , see crs report r41512 , surface transportation program reauthorization issues for the 112 th congress , coordinated by [author name scrubbed] . on march 14 , 2012 , the senate passed map - 21 , the moving ahead for progress in the 21 st century act ( map - 21 ) . the budgetary environment has changed since the passage of safetea in 2005 .