summary of chemical disclosure law . appendix a provides a glossary of some of the terms used in this section . at the federal level , a few existing laws require some disclosure of information about the chemicals used in hydraulic fracturing . however , none of these laws requires disclosure of detailed information about the chemical composition of a hydraulic fracturing fluid . blm has proposed disclosure requirements that would be applicable for hydraulic fracturing on all lands managed by the agency . legislation was introduced in the 112 th congress that would have created disclosure requirements for all hydraulic fracturing operations nationally . chemical disclosure laws at the state level vary widely . of the 15 laws examined in this report , fewer than half require direct public disclosure of chemical information by mandating that parties post the information on the fracfocus chemical disclosure website . the level of detail required to be disclosed often depends on how states protect trade secrets , as these protections may allow submitting parties to withhold information from disclosure at their discretion or to submit fewer details about proprietary chemicals , except , perhaps , in emergencies . even if a disclosure law does not protect information from public disclosure , other state laws , such as an exemption in an open records law , may do so . a few states require the submission of msds for certain chemicals . msds may offer a relatively low level of disclosure , as the most specific details that parties currently must include on the data sheets under osha regulations are the chemical or common names of certain hazardous ingredients . with regard to the timing of disclosure , a few state laws require at least some disclosure of information about fracturing fluid chemical composition before fracturing is performed , but these states typically require less detailed information to be provided before fracturing than afterward . appendix a. glossary of terms appendix b . appendix b contains a table summarizing the chemical disclosure requirements discussed in this section . many federal and state legislators and regulatory authorities have adopted or proposed measures that would create new disclosure requirements applicable to the practice of hydraulic fracturing , a natural resource recovery technique that is widely used in the recovery of natural gas from shale formations . the shale gas production subcommittee of the secretary of energy advisory board has recommended the public disclosure , on a well - by - well basis , of all of the chemical ingredients added to fracturing fluids — even those ingredients that do not meet osha's standards for hazardous chemicals requiring msdss . the subcommittee recommended that some protection for trade secrets be provided . the shale gas production subcommittee of the secretary of energy advisory board has made several recommendations intended to address these effects . one recommendation calls for the public disclosure , on a "well - by - well basis," of all of the chemical ingredients — "not just those that appear on material safety data sheets" — added to fracturing fluids , with some protection for trade secrets .