appendix a . classification of tax expenditures by category this appendix lists the particular tax expenditures classified into categories . savings: includes capital gains rates , tax treatment at death and by gift , exclusion on small business stock , deferral for section 1256 contracts , exclusion of investment income on life insurance and annuities , deferral of tax on non - dealer installment sales , deferral of tax on like - kind exchanges , the new markets tax credit , tax treatment of employee stock ownership plans and stock options , exclusion of stock redemptions to pay estate taxes , tax benefits for pensions ( both employer and self employed ) , and individual retirement accounts . or do they affect consumption choices ? table 1 , therefore , divides tax expenditures into seven major categories: saving , business investment , consumption , owner - occupied housing ( which is a combination of an investment choice and a consumption choice ) , labor supply , government programs ( which in many cases would have no behavioral effects but are simply income transfers ) , and a category termed structural ( which provides benefits based on family circumstances rather than affecting behavior ) . most of the consumption - related provisions fall into three major categories: health , education , and charity . jct's revenue loss estimates were made under a current law baseline , which assumes that the bush tax cuts and the 2009 tax cuts expire as scheduled at the end of 2012 . for each category , the estimated revenue loss of the provisions in the category is reported in the second column of table 1 , followed by the share of the total revenue loss of all tax expenditures . the last column provides an approximate adjustment for provisions that would be reinstated if the bush tax cuts , plus provisions enacted in 2009 , were extended , although it does not account for the change in tax rates . these calculations add back provisions in four areas: the larger and largely refundable child credit ( structural ) , education provisions , earned income credit provisions ( labor supply ) , and lower rates on dividends ( saving ) . allocating provisions to these seven basic categories is not entirely straightforward . for example , since owner - occupied housing is both an investment and consumption good , owner - occupied housing subsidies increase the return on investment in housing and reduce the cost of the consumption of housing . many of the provisions relating to saving and consumption are in the form of an exclusion of employer provided benefits ( pensions and health insurance ) and thus affect labor supply as well as the return to savings or the cost of health spending . the exclusion of health insurance , for example , is classified under health rather than labor supply because the provision primarily changes the amount spent on health . the government programs category essentially involves moving money from one pocket to another since direct spending by the government on benefits could replace tax subsidies , although some programs relate to other categories such as savings ( eg , tax exempt bond interest ) and health ( eg , exclusion of medicare ) .