the environmental review process is that single process . highway infrastructure: stakeholders ' views on time to conduct environmental reviews of highway projects , gao - 03-534 , may 23 , 2003 . highway infrastructure: preliminary information on the timely completion of highway construction projects , gao - 02-1067t , september 19 , 2002 . environmental streamlining: a report on delays associated with the categorical exclusion and environmental assessment processes , prepared by transtech management , inc. , for aashto , october 2000 . university and transportation organization studies . what influences the length of time to complete nepa reviews ? an examination of highway projects in oregon and the potential for streamlining , by jennifer dill , center for urban studies , nohad a. toulan school of urban studies & planning , portland state university , submitted for presentation at the 85 th annual meeting of the transportation research board , november 15 , 2005 ( revised ) . causes and extent of environmental delays in transportation projects , prepared by transtech management , inc. , for the american association of state highway and transportation officials ( aashto ) , december 2003 . 7 and map - 21 . discussion of specific legislation is provided separately in crs report r42445 , surface transportation reauthorization legislation in the 112 th congress: map - 21 and h.r . 7 , major provisions , coordinated by [author name scrubbed] . activities that may take place during the environmental review process and how that process is implemented will vary from project to project , from state to state . §4321 et seq. ) by the mid to late 1960s , congress began to enact legislation intended to address the growing public concern over projects implemented under the federal - aid highways program . it involves processes necessary to demonstrate compliance with a potentially wide array of requirements applicable to projects approved under the federal - aid highways program . broadly , for federally funded highway projects , it involves two separate , but related processes — preparing appropriate documentation required under nepa ; and identifying and demonstrating compliance with any additional state , tribal , or federal environmental requirements applicable to that project . for a given project , how nepa and other environmental compliance requirements must be demonstrated will largely depend on the degree to which the proposed project would have adverse effects on communities , natural or cultural resources ( eg , wetlands , endangered species habitat , historic sites , parks , or recreation areas ) , or special status land ( eg , farmland , floodplains , or coastal zones ) . compliance with those requirements may include obtaining a permit , approval , study , or some level of analysis or consultation from an agency outside dot . nepa was intended , in part , to ensure that federal agencies would consider the environmental impacts of an action among other factors ( eg , economic or community benefits ) in the federal decision - making process . nepa has two primary aims — to assure that federal agencies consider the environmental effects of their actions before proceeding with them and to involve the public in the decision - making process .