appendix a . stem education system . what is nsf's role within the federal stem education portfolio ? this would provide the foundation its historical discretion , while congress could continue to guide its activities through the oversight process . what impact might changes in the nsf stem education account have on research activities at nsf ? what are the policy options for congress as it considers future nsf budgets ? increase funding for stem education at nsf . if congress seeks to increase nsf's stem education capacity and its role in the federal portfolio , it could provide additional funding for nsf's stem education activities . it could increase funding for e&hr — congress could do this by either shifting funding from other appropriations accounts to e&hr or by providing additional funding directly to the main education account . a shift in funding from other accounts to e&hr would not necessarily result in a real increase to nsf's stem education programs ( particularly if the reductions were to r&ra , which could presumably offset such reductions by limiting its contributions to co - funded programs ) . further , reductions to other accounts may limit nsf's ability to meet congress's non - stem education priorities . increase the r&ra contribution to e&t — another way to increase overall funding for education at the nsf would be to increase the r&ra contribution to e&t activities through increased contributions to co - funded activities . congress could do this with or without overall increases to the nsf and r&ra ; however , if r&d funding does not also increase at the rate of inflation , purchasing power may be lost . increasing r&ra contributions to e&t activities may deepen the integration of these complementary nsf missions or may put pressure on research activities . decrease funding for stem education at nsf . if congress seeks to capture savings from the nsf budget or prioritize stem education activities at other federal agencies , it could reduce funding for nsf stem education programs . to this end , congress has at least two options . it could prioritize certain programs — for example , by either portfolio role or performance — and reduce others . alternatively , it could reduce topline support for e&hr and limit the percentage of r&ra that may be used for e&t . prioritization — in general , prioritization of certain programs might result in savings , depending on the choices policy makers make about reductions and support for the programs it preserves . however , congressional prioritization of nsf's stem education programs may challenge the foundation's historical autonomy , which many analysts see as essential to its scientific mission . congress has at least two options for prioritizing nsf's stem education programs: portfolio role and performance . by portfolio role — instead of treating nsf's education activities as a single function , congress could separate nsf's stem education r&d programs from its student and institutional aid programs . congress could then establish differential funding rates for nsf's stem education r&d and aid programs . for example , some analysts suggest that research funding is most efficient when provided in predictable incremental increases ( as opposed to wide variations , which impose adjustment costs ) .