appendix a . letters establishing the congressional art competition appendix b . congressional art competition sample forms appendix c. congressional art competition leadershi . the $3,000 scholarship may be renewed annually . other scholarships are targeted for winning entrants from a specific congressional district . in recent years , these have included scholarships to the high school summer institute at chicago's columbia college and the art institute of phoenix . the names of the 2018 winners and their artwork are available at https: / / www.conginst.org / art - competition / ? the congressional art competition co - chairs generally invite an artist from their respective congressional districts to address the student winners at the reception . since it began in 1982 , "over 650,000 high school students nationwide have been involved with the nation - wide competition. there are no required procedures for selecting the winning entries for participating congressional districts . any entry that conforms to the general specifications stated in the "guidelines for students and teachers" is eligible to represent a congressional district . members of congress may have local art teachers , art gallery owners , civic leaders , local businesses , or member office staff assist with the judging to select their district winner . members of congress may also enlist the participation of businesses in the congressional district to donate plaques , savings bonds , and other prizes , or to sponsor a reception or event to announce the competition's district winner . for example , since 2004 , the savannah college of art and design ( scad ) in savannah , ga , has offered scholarship opportunities to the first - place winners of the district competitions as long as funding is available , according to school sources . georgia's 13 th congressional district winner may receive a scholarship to the art institute of atlanta , in pennsylvania , the 15 th congressional district winner is eligible for a full - year scholarship to the baum school of art in allentown , and tennessee 3 rd congressional district participants are eligible for a $3,000 scholarship to tennessee wesleyan university in athens , tn . additional prizes that have been awarded include roundtrip airfare to washington , dc , for the opening of the annual exhibition , gift certificates to local art supply stores , family memberships for a year to an art museum , and cash . although no congressional or taxpayer funds may be used for prizes or scholarships , corporate sponsorship is allowed . as in past years , southwest airlines is providing two roundtrip tickets to winning entrants from any city with scheduled southwest service to ronald reagan washington national airport or baltimore - washington's thurgood marshall international airport ( bwi ) . tickets will be issued to a parent or guardian as epasses and are to be used within the period of two weeks before and two weeks after the washington , dc , congressional art competition ceremony . southwest airlines does not provide hotel accommodations or hotel discounts . the winning artwork must conform to strict guidelines and meet all deadlines .