homeland security is essentially about managing risks . dhs receives approximately 52% . congress and policymakers are responsible for funding homeland security priorities . these priorities need to exist , to be clear and cogent , in order for funding to be most effective . presently , homeland security is not funded on clearly defined priorities . in an ideal scenario , there would be a clear definition of homeland security , and a consensus about it ; as well as prioritized missions , goals , and activities . policymakers could then use a process to incorporate feedback and respond to new facts and situations as they develop . this report examines how varied , and evolving , homeland security definitions and strategic missions may affect the prioritization of national homeland security policy and how it may affect the funding of homeland security . to address this issue , this report first discusses and analyzes examples of strategic documents , their differing homeland security definitions , and their varying homeland security missions . prior to 9 / 11 , federal , state , and local governments responded to domestic terrorist attacks in an ad hoc manner . these terrorist attacks , and the governments' responses , however , did not significantly affect how policymakers perceived , defined , and prioritized security as related to the homeland . two examples of these domestic terrorist attacks are the 1993 world trade center ( wtc ) and the 1995 alfred murrah federal building bombings . on february 26 , 1993 , radicalized islamic terrorists detonated a bomb beneath the wtc . in response , president clinton ordered his national security council to coordinate the bombings' response and investigation . the cia's counterterrorist center and the national security agency , along with the fbi , were among the numerous federal agencies that participated in the investigation . this use of the national security council was an ad - hoc response specifically to this event , and it did not result in the development of strategic documents . on april 19 , 1995 , timothy mcveigh exploded a bomb - laden truck in front of the alfred p. murrah federal building in oklahoma city . following this bombing , president clinton directed the department of justice ( doj ) to assess the vulnerability of federal facilities to terrorist attacks or violence and to develop recommendations for minimum security standards . these standards , however , were not a wide - ranging strategy for u.s. homeland security strategy . it was the 9 / 11 terrorist attacks that initiated the debate and development of a broader homeland security strategy . the 9 / 11 terrorist attacks on new york city , pennsylvania , and washington , dc , were a watershed event . as with the 1993 wtc and 1995 oklahoma city bombings , the federal , state , and local government's response to the 9 / 11 terrorists attacks was ad hoc . in new york city , first responders included such entities as the new york police and fire departments , and port authority and wtc employees . it is also necessary , in order to coordinate and communicate , to ensure stakeholders are aware of , trained for , and prepared to meet assigned missions .