there are additional considerations . a unilateral drawdown on u.s. strategic stocks would probably have less impact on the world oil market than a coordinated international drawdown of the sort that occurred after the 2011 release to meet iea obligations vis - à - vis libya's production curtailment . some might argue that it would be unwise under any scenario for the united states to draw down its strategic stocks while other nations continue to hold theirs at current levels . additionally , it is always possible that producing nations will reduce production to offset any spr oil delivered into the market . in 2017 , some might argue that the market is already well - supplied and that short - term supply concerns are not affecting prices , but market conditions and current and anticipated geopolitical events are affecting prices . others argue that the oil commodity futures market is behind speculative bidding that has driven prices . some have perceived the spr as a defensive policy tool against high oil prices . if an spr release has no discernible impact on oil prices , it is possible that the spr will lose some of whatever psychological advantage it exercises on prices when left as an untapped option . while the number of u.s. refineries that process crude oil into fuels has decreased over the last decade , refining capacity has increased somewhat . in 2016 , the eia reported 141 refineries operating with over 18 million barrels per day in capacity ( this includes three refinery complexes each made up of two formerly independent refineries ) . some 55 refineries have coking processes for converting petroleum resid to higher value products . the gulf coast region ( petroleum administration for defense district 3 ) makes up nearly 45% of the u.s. refining capacity , with 57 refineries processing more than 9.0 million barrels per day . the region also has the highest concentration of coking refineries . over the last 25 years , the api gravity of imported crude oils had been decreasing , while average sulfur content had been increasing . api gravity , a measure developed by the american petroleum institute , expresses the "lightness" or "heaviness" of crude oils on an inverted scale . with a diminishing supply of light , sweet ( low sulfur ) crude oil until relatively recently , u.s. refineries had to add coking capacity to convert lower - priced heavier , sour crude oils to high - value products such as gasoline , diesel , and jet fuel . more recently the problem has become how to effectively integrate growing production of lto into the refinery input stream . the government accountability office ( gao ) observed in 2006 that 40% of the crude oil refined by u.s. refineries was heavier than that stored in the spr , and that the proportion of stored crude oil grades was not as compatible as it could be with refineries that had been moving towards heavier grades of crude oils . based on a 2005 spr crude oil compatibility study , doe agreed that the spr could store a small percentage of heavy crude to satisfy the short - term needs of a few refineries in the event of a supply disruption .