, what it costs bop to incarcerate one additional inmate ) . for example , if the per capita cost of incarceration is $22,000 per inmate and bop's prison population decreased by 1,000 inmates , it does not mean that bop would save $22 million . per capita costs are not equivalent to marginal costs ( i.e. per capita costs do not equate to marginal costs because per capita costs reflect the total amount bop obligates in a fiscal year divided by that fiscal year's average daily population . some costs ( eg , food and clothing expenses ) would decrease if bop incarcerated fewer inmates . however , obligations also account for items like staff salaries , which might not change until the prison population decreases to a point where bop could close prisons and reduce staff . for example , if all of bop's high security facilities hold 10% more inmates than their rated capacity and bop's prison population decreases to a point where these facilities hold the same number of inmates as their rated capacity , it is likely that bop would not reduce staffing at those prisons , which would mean that obligations for high security facilities for that fiscal year would not decline significantly . this trend might be partly explained by the increasing per capita cost for incarceration . as show in figure 4 , the nominal per capita cost of incarceration has increased from approximately $22,000 per inmate in fy2000 to almost $35,000 in fy2016 , a 61% rise . from fy2000 to fy2012 , the per capita cost of incarceration roughly increased at the same rate as inflation . however , since fy2013 increases in the per capita cost have started to outstrip inflation . the increasing per capita cost of incarceration is partly due to inflationary pressures , such as the increasing cost of health care , food , clothing , and utilities . however , it is notable that the per capita cost of incarceration has increased at a greater rate than inflation since fy2013 , which coincides with the decreasing prison population . stable or increasing obligations combined with a decreasing prison population will result in increasing per capita costs because the shared inmate expenses are dispersed across fewer inmates . one concern among some policymakers is that bop's expanding budget is starting to consume a larger share of the department of justice's ( doj ) overall annual appropriations . figure 5 shows what proportion of doj's annual discretionary budget was dedicated to bop . bop's overall budget is more susceptible to fluctuations due to changes in year - to - year appropriations for bop's b&f account . the trend lines ( the dashed lines in the figure ) show that since fy1980 , both bop's total budget and the s&e account have , in general , encompassed a growing share of doj's annual appropriations . the noticeable spike in bop's share of doj's annual appropriations in fy1990 was the result of congress appropriating more than $1 billion for the b&f account .