section 305 of h.r . 2309 , "modifications relating to collective bargaining," would strike subsections ( c ) and ( d ) of 39 u.s.c . section 1207 , which relate to procedures for resolving labor disputes . no more than seven days after the hearing is concluded , each party would have to present two offer packages , each of which would specify the terms of a proposed final agreement . it would replace them with new subsections ( c ) and ( d ) to require neutral arbitrators , impose and / or shorten time limits on mediation and arbitration , and specify factors that arbitration boards must consider . subsection ( c ) would be amended to change the manner of selecting members of each three - member arbitration board which is established if parties cannot resolve a dispute within 30 days after a mediator was appointed or if they decide upon arbitration before that 30-day period expires . the board would consist of one member appointed by the postal service and one member appointed by the bargaining representative of employees and a third member who had been appointed as a mediator pursuant to 39 u.s.c . section 1207 ( b ) . section 1207 ( c ) ( 1 ) of current law provides that the postal service and the collective bargaining representative of employees each shall select one board member and that the two members who were selected by the parties shall choose the third board member . can congress through legislation modify the scope of bargaining or terms of collective bargaining agreements ? congress has authority prospectively to modify the scope of bargaining or terms of collective bargaining agreements after they expire . in the 1970 act , congress granted the postal service and collective - bargaining representatives authority to bargain collectively over compensation , fringe benefits such as health insurance and life insurance , and other conditions of employment , but it could amend that statute to limit the scope of bargaining subjects in the future . for example , congress could mandate that rates of employee premiums for health or life insurance no longer will be subjects of collective bargaining . enacting a statute to modify the scope of bargaining or terms of agreements before they expire , however , may present legal questions to be resolved by a court . for example , a court may have to determine whether such a statute may cause the postal service to breach a contract or exceed constitutional limits under the takings and / or due process clauses of the fifth amendment . some sections of title iii "postal service workforce" as reported favorably to the full house by the house committee on oversight and government reform on october 13 , 2011 , would directly modify some provisions of title 39 of the u.s. code that relate to postal service collective bargaining agreements and employee - management relations . many of these sections appear to have been based on recommendations of the president's commission on the united states postal service issued in 2003 . section 301 ( a ) , "modifications relating to pay comparability," of h.r . 2309 would amend the first sentence of 39 u.s.c .