this is the only nwrf payment option for such lands . if so , the increase would affect reserved lands with net revenues , and those acquired lands in counties paid under this option . but as figure 2 shows , net revenues have been fairly constant , and have declined in recent years . once the amount authorized is calculated ( box g ) , this amount is compared with the national total of receipts . theoretically , if the net receipts are sufficient to meet the formula levels , then each county is paid the full amount ( box j ) . however , net receipts have never yet been sufficient to meet formula levels . boxes j , k , and l: appropriate additional funds . if the net receipts are not sufficient to meet the formula , the authorizing statute allows annual appropriations to make up the difference . to date , congress has approved additional funds to supplement the net receipts . ( see figure 2 . ) if these supplements , plus receipts , are sufficient to meet the authorized levels , each county is paid the full amount under the formula ( box j ) . if not , each county receives a pro rata amount ( box l ) . since the modern program began making payments in 1978 , the additional appropriations , plus the net receipts , have fallen short of the authorized level except in fy1981 , when funding reached 118% of the amount authorized in the formula . the decline appears to be an effect of the formula creating a growing authorization level , rather than marked reductions in annual appropriations . ( see " authorized levels and appropriations ," below for discussion. ) besides the general criteria described above , there are also specific criteria that affect individual states or territories , or affect calculation of how many acres are eligible for nwrf payments or later pilt payments . one of the exceptions occurs in alaska . the fy201 3 annual report lists a total of 76,241,824 acres of fws public domain land that would qualify for pilt payments . this total is based on new survey data , which the state disputes . as a result of the dispute , fws reports a larger figure ( 80,342,130 acres ) for the pilt calculations , based on a historic total previously used . because of the complexity of the nwrf and pilt formulas , it is not clear how much greater a payment alaska boroughs receive based on the older figures , nor which boroughs receive the greatest benefit . in hawaii , the acres of system lands reserved from the public domain land , shown in the fy201 3 annual report ( 254,418 acres ) , also differ from those used to calculate pilt . there is an unresolved dispute between fws and the state about 252,511 acres of submerged lands . as in other areas , fws does not include these submerged lands as eligible for nwrf and pilt . there remain 1,907 acres reserved from the public domain in the state that are not submerged ; these acres are reported as eligible for pilt .