what options does congress have to affect the outcome of such cases ? although the court did not provide the definitive clarification of the ministerial exception that many were expecting , its decision nonetheless indicates its preferred direction of the constitutional analysis for future cases . the court's decision in hosanna - tabor did not address the scope of the statutory exception of the ada . rather , it was grounded in the constitutional protections afforded to religious organizations under the first amendment . in other words , regardless of the explicit statutory protection for religious organizations like hosanna - tabor in the ada , the school still was able to exercise its constitutional right to terminate perich's employment without affording her the legislative protections of the ada . accordingly , the legislative options for congress in response to the court's decision in hosanna - tabor are extremely limited . congress may seek to include a preferred standard of review in its religious exceptions to nondiscrimination legislation , but such clarification must comport with the requirements of the constitutional exception . the most probable method for clarification of the proper standard for the constitutional exception is further litigation , as the court alluded in its decision . which legal claims might the ministerial exception apply to ? many questions still remain regarding the scope of the ministerial exception: who qualifies as a ministerial employee ? statutory exemptions apply only to religious employers making decisions based on religion . in light of the split among the circuit courts over the standard for determining the scope of the ministerial exception , it seemed likely in hosanna - tabor that the u.s. supreme court would clarify the analysis of how courts should define minister in future employment discrimination lawsuits involving religious organizations . one federal court has explained that the statutory exemption is significantly distinct from the constitutional protections to such religious organizations because the "statutory exemption applies to one particular reason for employment decision — that based on religious preference. congress has included explicit statutory recognition of the hiring rights of religious organizations in these laws . the statutory exemptions also differ from the constitutional exception because the statutory exceptions exempt employers from liability for decisions regarding any employee , rather than being limited to ministers and ministerial employees . for example , the religious exemption under title vii has been held to allow a religious organization to terminate the employment of an employee with no religious duties . two prominent examples of legislation that include religious exemptions for prohibitions on discrimination are title vii of the civil rights act of 1964 and the americans with disabilities act ( ada ) . this report analyzes the constitutional bases of the ministerial exception and examines selected statutory provisions reflecting its protections under federal employment laws . these exemptions are sometimes referred to as ministerial exceptions , but they differ from the constitutional ministerial exception as discussed in this report . the report addresses critical questions involved in the application of the ministerial exception , including which employees qualify as ministers , the extent to which courts may defer to religious entities claiming the exception , and whether the exception may apply to any claim brought against a religious entity .