section 208 . with respect to all executive branch employees , 18 u.s.c . section 208 requires recusal of such executive branch officer and employee from any particular governmental matter when that matter may affect the financial interests of "any person or organization with whom he [the employee] is negotiating or has any arrangement concerning prospective employment. additionally , there are detailed executive branch regulations on negotiating and seeking private employment , at 5 c.f.r . this legislation addressed that perception . in addition to affirming that the insider trading restrictions of securities law and regulation apply to members of congress and to other federal officials , the stock act further affirms expressly that each officer and employee of the legislative branch , each executive branch official , and each judicial officer and employee owes a duty of trust and confidence to the united states and the citizens of the united states with respect to material , nonpublic information derived from such person's public employment . the stock act directs the ethics entities in the house and senate — the house ethics committee and the senate select committee on ethics — to issue interpretations of chamber rules "clarifying" that members and staff are prohibited from using nonpublic information derived from their positions "as a means for making a private profit. although such explicit regulations already exist in the executive branch , the legislation directs that the office of government ethics issue such interpretive guidance , and that the judicial conference of the united states issue such guidance to federal judges and to judicial employees . from the inclusiveness of the language of the legislation , and from previous guidance , it would appear that the restrictions on the use of nonpublic , material information extends not only to trading directly by the member of congress or by staff on such information , but would extend also to passing on such material , nonpublic information to another so that such other person may make a private profit for himself or herself , or for the public official . under existing and pre - stock act law , members of congress and certain employees of the legislative branch ( including those paid at a rate of pay exceeding 120% of the base salary of a gs - 15 ) , as well as executive branch officials who occupy "a position classified above gs - 15," or , if not on the general schedule are in a position compensated at a "rate of basic pay ... equal to or greater than 120 percent of the minimum rate of basic pay payable for gs - 15," are generally subject to the public financial disclosure provisions of the ethics in government act of 1978 , as amended . those employees compensated at the rate of pay described above are required to file detailed public financial disclosure statements by may 15 of the following year if the individual works for the government for more than 60 days in the calendar year . these disclosure reports have been available to the public for viewing at the office of the agency ethics officer , or a copy may be furnished to those requesting a copy .