this involves two steps . first , a measure of business size would need to be chosen . two measures were used in this report — an asset - based measure and a receipt - based measure . alternatives to these two options include a profit - based measure , an employment - based measure , a composite measure ( i.e. , based on assets , receipts , and employment ) , or industry specific measures ( eg , an asset - based measure for certain industries , and a receipt - based measure for other industries ) . an asset - based measure has some attractive features . assets are likely to be more stable over the business cycle than revenues , profits , and employment . therefore , using an asset - based measure would help to reduce uncertainty about how a business will be taxed in any given year . it may also be harder for pass - throughs to manipulate their assets to avoid being labeled as large . the most sophisticated pass - throughs may be able to shift revenue or income to subsidiaries located outside the u.s. in an attempt to avoid the corporate tax . at the same time , certain firms may still be able to strategically shift assets out of the country to avoid the corporate tax . there is some evidence that firms with extensive intangible assets ( eg , patients , copy rights , trademarks , etc .

 ) , such as those in the pharmaceutical industry , and the computer and electronic equipment industry , may be engaged in this behavior . an asset - based measure of size , however , may not accurately measure the economic size of businesses in particular industries . certain firms and industries may be less capital intensive than others and therefore have fewer assets . for example , the manufacturing and mining industries will naturally have more assets than the health care industry , or the education industry because these two industries are more service - oriented . particular health care and education firms could still be considered large if measured by receipts , profits , or employment , but may not be classified as such when measured by assets . an alternative to using a single measure of size would be to use a composite measure of size that is based on assets , employment , and revenue or income . how do large pass - throughs compare with corporations ? this question is slightly more complicated than it appears since there are several different ways to measure firm size . size could be measured by employment , profits , assets , or a variety of other statistics . additionally , two different industries may require different measures of size . for example , one industry may be more capital intensive than another , leading firms in that industry to naturally have more assets , whereas firms in another industry may generally have fewer assets while still employing a large number of workers . data availability , however , limits the analysis presented here to using just two different measures of firm size — a receipt - based measure and an asset - based measure .