an fta can encourage fdi through two channels . first , permanent preferential access to the u.s. market reassures potential investors that access to the largest market is more stable . second , enhanced investment rules protect investors . investment is a critical component of a country's economic growth and development , and where domestic savings rates are low , or opportunities are readily apparent , fdi is one way to meet demand for capital . there are potentially many economic benefits to fdi , although their realization depends on where and how fdi is invested , and the policies governing its use . in general , however , there appears to be broad recognition that the benefits of fdi outweigh the costs in most cases for developing countries . trends in fdi vary among the six cafta - dr countries and total net foreign direct investment is shown in figure 7 , with the united states the largest investor in the region . trends suggest that a formal investment agreement alone is not sufficient to guarantee uniform results . three trends stand out: first , fdi increased in all cafta - dr countries immediately prior to and after the fta entered into force , but magnitudes differed widely ; second , investment is also influenced by macroeconomic conditions , as reflected in the decline following the 2007-08 global financial crisis ; and , third , costa rica and the dominican republic outdistanced the rest of the countries in attracting new fdi . they have the highest labor rates ( see table a - 10 in the appendix ) and level of manufactured exports , indicating that investment is not necessarily drawn to low - cost producers , but rather to countries that have relatively higher levels of stability , education , and productivity . both theoretical and empirical literature on trade presents differing viewpoints on the benefits of liberalizing commercial exchange in small developing countries . trade can promote growth through increased productivity , and firm - level studies corroborate the strong link between firm productivity and exporting , but they often argue that the benefit from trade comes from "facilitating the growth of high - productivity plants , not by increasing productivity growth at those plants. that is , productivity may increase trade more than the other way around , although both directions of influence are likely . many economists also argue that trade liberalization can increase a country's long - term growth rate through other channels including increased market size , production specialization , scale economies , transfer of technology and managerial / worker expertise , more efficient resource use , and increased investment . case studies , however , offer contradictory evidence , pointing up examples where growth has or has not followed trade opening . such seemingly irreconcilable outcomes raise fundamental questions over how and why the benefits of trade seem to be more robust in some cases , but not in others . cafta - dr countries comprise an economically heterogeneous group and seem to mirror the disparate responses to trade liberalization found in the economic literature . country - and product - specific trade and fdi trends vary significantly .