most of these appropriations have been for disaster relief . over the 24 fiscal years stretching from october 1 , 1989 , to september 31 , 2013 , there were 59 bills signed into law that included supplemental appropriations . as figure 1 indicates , 31 of these measures included rescissions to offset some of the discretionary budget authority in the legislation — an analysis of these bills identified 18 that carried provisions affecting the drf . this report will not be updated . according to cbo analysis , fema was the second - largest recipient of supplemental appropriations in the 1990s , behind only the department of defense . none had provisions explicitly linking their rescissions to additional monies for the drf . however , six of the bills with rescissions had discretionary spending reductions of such a size that the entire discretionary cost of the bill was offset . three of those fully offset bills carried provisions affecting the drf . crs analyzed these three bills to see whether these were cases where supplemental disaster relief was paid for by offsetting cuts to other parts of the budget . the background on each of these three instances follows . as these analyses illustrate , supplemental disaster relief has only been fully offset once since 1990 . as congress looks to the future of how it budgets for disasters , it may find itself again considering whether or not to offset disaster relief . it may also find itself in the next few years considering whether to continue or modify the bca provisions providing budgetary flexibility for disaster relief , or whether to take a different approach . with the one exception noted above ( p.l . 104-19 ) , in the timeframe reviewed , congress did not fully offset supplemental funding for the drf , although it has provided some offsets at times for disaster assistance . however , the appropriations process for fy2012 and consideration of supplemental appropriations in fy2013 saw extensive debate on this topic . while congress has provided a precedent for those asking how it would approach funding disaster relief under the bca in response to a catastrophic disaster , funding the federal response to similar future events and ongoing concern about federal spending will likely continue to maintain congressional interest in this issue . in the timeframe assessed by this report , supplemental appropriations for disaster assistance , including those for the drf , were requested after the disaster had struck and were on the scale of hundreds of millions to billions of dollars . although initial emergency needs had usually been met before congress provided funding , congress faced political pressure to respond in a timely fashion to ensure needed relief resources are available beyond the immediate term . adding the additional step to the process of identifying offsets would have extended the time it takes for congress to respond . the most common types of offsets are spending cuts . during the debate on supplemental appropriations in the wake of hurricane sandy , amendments were offered proposing two types of offsets: specific programmatic cuts and across - the - board cuts .