appendix a . score of the house farm bill ( h.r . 2642 , as combined with h.r . 3102 ) table a - 1 presents the detailed year - by - year scores of each provision in the house - passed farm bill ( h.r . 2642 , as combined with h.r . the score at the title level is slightly different as presented in the summary in the conference report score , but section - by - section details were not available . therefore , the more detailed section - by - section score from the earlier but consistent cbo score of the bill , as reported , is provided here . figure a - 1 shows the title - by - title totals of the house - passed farm bill for each individual year in the budget window . the format and scale are consistent with figure 7 that shows the amounts for the enacted 2014 farm bill . in addition to the larger scale of reductions apparent in the house bill , a cumulative limit on new farm program payments in the house bill was scored so that it reduced outlays in fy2020 ( revealing more of the repeal of direct payments ) and deferred those payments until fy2021 ( balancing the program over those two years ) . this provision was not in the enacted farm bill , which consequently does not have the range of scores in the commodity title for fy2020-fy2021 . appendix a . no estimate was provided for the conference agreement . however , not all of these amounts represent new programs or spending , since much of the totals are for reauthorizing programs that already are appropriated in the annual agriculture appropriations bill ( eg , agricultural research ) . moreover , these amounts would be subject to annual decisions by the budget committees and the appropriations committees . appendix b . score of the senate farm bill ( s. 954 ) table b - 1 presents the detailed year - by - year scores of each provision in the senate - passed farm bill ( s. 954 ) . figure b - 1 shows the title - by - title scores of the senate - passed farm bill for each individual year in the budget window . it uses the formulas that exist in law at that time . baseline projections rise and fall based on changes in economic conditions , even without any action by congress . each farm bill title with mandatory spending represents a share or proportion of the farm bill budget . one share of the farm bill that has attracted attention is the nutrition baseline , but other shares of the baseline have similar stories . the proportion and size of the farm bill budget contained in the nutrition title has increased over time . when the 2008 farm bill was enacted , the nutrition title was 67% of the 10-year total ( $406 billion out of a $604 billion 10-year projected total ) . when the 2014 farm bill was enacted six years later , the share in the nutrition title was 79% of the total ( $756 billion out of a $956 billion 10-year projected total ) .