appendix b . methodology the sampling frame used for this research limits the public housing authority ( pha ) universe , takes a census of very large phas ( those with more than 6,000 units ) , and takes a random sample of the remaining pha universe consisting of large , medium , and small phas . crs defined the pha universe and the pha groupings similarly to the hud study in 2000 on pha discretionary authority , the uses of discretionary authority in the tenant - based section 8 program , as described below . the chosen sampling frame allowed crs to observe the discretionary choices of very large phas and to make comparisons between very large phas and a statistical representation of all other phas in the pha universe . in this report , comparisons between very large phas and a statistical representation of all other phas have not been made , but the data collected could be used to do so in future reports . pha universe the pha universe excludes all phas that operate outside of typical program rules or models . these include moving - to - work ( mtw ) phas , phas in territories , and phas administering state - level programs . thus , a question raised by this study is what type and level of oversight for discretionary policies is appropriate to ensure that federal policy objectives are met ? it is often argued that administrative flexibility decreases administrative burdens , which results in cost savings . pha industry groups generally support efforts to increase administrative flexibilities , citing the administrative burden and the administrative costs associated with the current hcv program . as federal policymakers look for ways to reduce the cost of the hcv program , there is an ongoing interest in the deregulation of assisted housing programs and expansion of the moving - to - work demonstration ( see earlier description of the mtw program ) . however , there is some indication that the cost savings associated with administrative flexibility have not always occurred in the housing choice voucher program . within this study , the statements of some pha officials suggested that some of the discretion granted to phas has created its own administrative burden . for instance , one pha official stated that he wished hud would develop a uniform policy for denials based on criminal activity so that there would be fewer challenges to the pha's policy . this finding is supported by testimony phas have provided to congress . one pha official testified to congress in 2006 that "the deregulation contemplated in qhwra is really re - regulation . we now spend a large amount of staff time on the new administrative provisions of qhwra , specifically , the agency plan ... the income targeting strategy , rental integrity and its associated pic reporting. the official also shared her belief that the reporting requirements tied to areas of discretion negate the benefit of discretion and are costly for the administration of assisted housing programs .