al . found that in the 1990s , the yearly average number of u.s. ipos comprised 27% of all ipos in the world , while the united states accounted for 27% of world gross domestic product ( gdp ) . since 2000 , however , they found that the u.s. share of all ipos has fallen to 12% whereas the u.s. share of worldwide gdp has averaged 30% . analysis such as the doidge study generally suggests that there has been an overall numerical decline in the number of yearly domestic ipos and the nation's share of overall ipos as well . how does this compare with trends for other markets overseas ? some have argued that the ability of some foreign stock exchanges , such as the united kingdom's alternative investment market ( aim ) , to successfully market and brand themselves as lower - cost , attractive venues for smaller firms has helped to lure ipos away from u.s. exchanges . another study in 2011 found that firms in countries with weaker governance , investor protections , and other legal institutions are less likely to go public with an ipo in their home country , and are more likely to go public globally , in a country with stronger institutions . if true , this trend should tend to boost u.s. listings by companies from some foreign countries . indeed , it could be argued that an example of this is evidence that suggests that former state - owned chinese firms that have gone public have become a growing portion of global and u.s. ipos in recent years . another study found that the market share of u.s. ipos by foreign companies as a percentage of the total has increased in this decade , partly due to the low number of u.s. companies going public . for instance , in 1988 , 8.3% of the total of 109 ipos in the united states were by foreign companies , and none of the total ipos were by chinese companies in particular . by 2010 , 34.4% of the total of 128 domestic ipos were by foreign companies , and 25.8% of the ipos were by chinese companies . while there is little evidence that supports concerns that foreign companies are fleeing the united states , the domestic ipo market does not appear to have kept pace with the united states' share of economic growth worldwide . a 2011 study by doidge et . the doidge study and others have tended to attribute the drop in u.s. ipo activity vis - à - vis the rest of the world to a combination of lower u.s. ipo activity by u.s. firms , and the growth of ipos in other countries during this period , particularly in emerging markets . some evidence suggests that other developed countries may face a similar situation . for example , both germany and france saw their respective ipo volumes drop by more than 50% from 2002 to 2007 relative to the 1994- 2001 period , even as average ipo proceeds in those countries more than doubled , according to one study . this may indicate that , as in the united states , some other developed countries may also be losing smaller ipo deals .