it appears to assume that all of the cuts would be applied to the base defense budget only . but the bca and earlier laws governing sequestration make it clear that the baseline for cuts would include not only the base appropriation ( for which $551 billion is requested ) , but also funding for overseas contingency operations ( for which $88.5 billion is requested ) , plus any other defense emergency appropriations ( for which no funds have been requested to date ) , plus unobligated balances of funds provided in prior years ( which dod currently projects to total $81.6 billion at the beginning of fy2013 ) . any sequester would be applied to the sum of those amounts ( $721 billion ) plus any defense emergency funds that may be provided later in the year . if , as crs estimates , a sequester of $60 billion is required , the percentage cuts required would total 8.3% if military personnel accounts are not exempted . if the president exempts the $149 billion requested for personnel accounts , the percentage reduction applied to the rest of the budget would total 10.5% . dod maintains that the automatic cuts would be irrational because equal percentage reductions would be required in each individual line item in defense appropriations bills — technically referred to as programs , projects , or activities ( ppas ) . that may or may not be the case , however , as a dod fact sheet attached to the november 14 letter acknowledged . under the sequestration provisions of the balanced budget and emergency deficit control act ( bbedca ) of 1985 , as amended in 1990 , the president has authority to propose to congress a joint resolution that would reallocate cuts among ppas , provided additions are offset by reductions that are equal both in budget authority and in outlays . whether that provision applies to targets set by the budget control act , however , is uncertain because of some ambiguities in the language of the statute , and the office of management and budget — which would make the final legal determination – has not yet done so . but none of those efforts proved wholly successful until the economy expanded dramatically at the end of the 1990s . with no effective overarching deficit agreement in place , congress addressed the deficit issue mainly in annual budget debates that led to perennial limits on spending and occasional increases in taxes . between fy1986 and fy1998 , ( leaving aside funding for the 1991 persian gulf war , which was mainly financed by allies ) , defense spending declined , after adjusting for inflation , for 13 years in a row , ultimately falling by 35% compared to the peak in fy1985 . a more comprehensive , long - term budget agreement in the early years of that period might have led to a smaller decline in defense .