the balanced budget act of 1997 ( p.l . 105-33 ) gave the va the authority to retain these funds in the medical care collections fund ( mccf ) . the funds deposited into the mccf would be available for medical services for veterans . the carryover has been the result of lower than anticipated retroactive payments associated with the recent presumptions related to agent orange . in general , the average payments for benefits , including disability compensation , pension , and survivor benefits are expected to increase due to the annual cost - of - living adjustment ( cola ) . the readjustment benefits category reflects a number of benefits related to the transition of servicemembers from active duty status to veteran status , as well as disabled veterans , including education benefits , vocation rehabilitation , financial assistance for adaptive automobiles and equipment , and housing grants . these collected funds do not have to be spent in any particular fiscal year and are available until expended . the insurance ( mandatory ) category includes supplemental funding for national service life insurance ( nsli ) , service - disabled veterans insurance ( s - dvi ) , and veterans mortgage life insurance ( vmli ) . the increase between fy2012 and fy2013 for insurance reflects the deaths associated with the nsli and s - dvi programs and the increase in the maximum coverage under the vmli program . the housing and other mandatory benefits category includes guaranteed and direct loan programs for veterans , native american housing loans , and various proprietary receipts ( from the public ) . the decrease in the mandatory housing category between fy2012 and fy2013 reflects the timing of the re - estimates for the programs . the fy2013 re - estimates will not be completed until the end of fy2012 and will be reflected in the fy2014 budget submission . the medical services account funds health care services provided to eligible veterans and beneficiaries in va's medical centers , outpatient clinic facilities , contract hospitals , state homes , and outpatient programs on a fee basis . the medical support and compliance account funds management and administration of the va health care system , including financial management . the medical facilities account includes funds for the operation and maintenance of the va health care system's capital infrastructure ( excluding construction ) , such as costs associated with utilities , facility repair , laundry services , and groundskeeping . table 2 shows the va budget for mandatory benefit programs and administration as reported by the va for fy2011 through fy2013 . the changes in certain accounts between fy2011 and fy2013 may reflect changes due to law , regulations , or other factors as discussed below . the disability compensation category includes payments for a number of benefits , such as disability compensation ; dependency and indemnity compensation ( dic ) ; pension benefits for low - income disabled or elderly combat veterans and their survivors ; burial benefits ( allowances , flags , headstones , etc .

 ) ; and a clothing allowance for certain disabled veterans . the large increase ( $10.5 billion , or 20.5% ) between fy2012 and fy2013 is overstated due to the impact of carryovers ( unobligated balances ) .