the house agreed to h.con.res . 112 on march 29 , 2012 , by a vote of 228 to 191 . the house budget resolution sets general budgetary parameters . among other things , it expresses the desired levels of spending for government health programs over 10 years ( fy2013-fy2022 ) , creates two health care - related reserve funds , and presents a policy statement regarding assumptions about future medicare reforms . the budget resolution includes instructions for reconciliation to six committees , which are instructed to identify specified dollar amounts of deficit reduction . a budget resolution is not intended to establish details of spending or revenue policy and does not provide levels of spending for specific agencies or programs ; it is not a law and is not signed by the president . rather , the budget resolution provides the framework for the consideration of other legislation . while the house budget resolution suggests and assumes certain health care - related policy changes , separate legislation would need to be developed ( by the committees of jurisdiction ) and passed to actually modify federally funded health care programs . the congressional budget office ( cbo ) was asked to provide an analysis of the long - term budgetary impact of chairman ryan's budget proposal , and issued its report on march 21 , 2012 . cbo was provided additional detail by the staff of the house budget committee regarding assumptions that should be made while conducting the analysis that were not included in the budget resolution language or the accompanying report . cbo's analysis , however , does not provide an official cost estimate for legislation that might implement the proposal , as it did not conduct its analysis using actual legislative language and was asked to provide an impact analysis beyond the 10-year budgetary window . to conduct its analysis , cbo used its most recent long - term projections , which are based on an extension of cbo's baseline forecasts issued in march 2012 . in general , the budget proposal , as outlined in chairman ryan's "path to prosperity" report , in the committee report , and in cbo's analysis , suggests a change in the structure of the medicare and medicaid programs ; the repeal of many of the provisions in the patient protection and affordable care act as amended by the health care and education reconciliation act of 2010 ( aca , p.l . 111-152 ) , including those that establish insurance exchanges ; and changes to tort law governing medical malpractice . this report provides a synopsis of the health care - related changes in chairman ryan's fy2013 budget proposal . this summary is based on the text of the concurrent resolution , the committee report , the fy2013 "path to prosperity" report , and the cbo analysis of the proposal . the collective details are referred to in this report as the "budget proposal" or chairman ryan's proposal . crs provided a similar summary of the proposed health care changes included in the fy2012 house budget in crs report r41767 , overview of health care changes in the fy2012 budget offered by house budget committee chairman ryan .