effect on other u.s . interests : what retaliation from iran and its regional allies ( including lebanese hezbollah and hamas or other palestinian militants ) is likely against israeli targets ? if iran retaliated , would it limit the targeted area to israel , or would it also target u.s. interests and allies in the region and elsewhere ? if iran expands its response to u.s. or u.s. - allied targets , what forms might that take ? what is the likelihood and potential scope of a crisis in the strait of hormuz and persian gulf regarding global energy prices and potential region - wide conflict ? what are other possible regional consequences of an israeli attack ? this report has many elements that are the subject of vigorous debate and remain fully or partially outside public knowledge . crs does not claim that it has confirmed independently any sources cited within this report that attribute specific positions or views to israeli , u.s. , or other officials . several factors may influence any israeli political decision relating to a possible strike on iranian nuclear facilities . these include , but are not limited to , the views and interactions of israeli decisionmakers ; the public debate in israel , the stances and anticipated responses of u.s. , regional , and international actors ; estimates of the effects of a possible strike ; and the anticipated iranian response regionally and internationally . discussion below regarding the israeli decisionmaking process and the factors that may influence it is largely dependent on secondary sources that crs does not claim to confirm independently . another factor in israel's deliberations is the question of operational capability: can israeli forces conduct a successful strike , however they define "success" ? what are the factors in israeli thinking and who are the main actors involved in the decision ? under what conditions is a final political decision regarding military action likely ? how does israel assess the operational requirements of a potential strike ? effect on iran's nuclear program and regime : ultimately , is an attack more likely to prevent an iran with nuclear weapons or help bring it about ? if an attack only delayed a potential nuclear weapons program in iran , would israel feel compelled to take additional military action later ? what effect might an attack have on a potential iranian decision to weaponize its nuclear program ? would an attack strengthen or weaken the iranian regime , particularly given that current trends indicate that the regime faces significant economic challenges and political divisions ? crs does not claim that it has confirmed independently any sources cited within this report that attribute specific positions or views to israeli , u.s. , or other officials . one israeli journalist has written: while a large - scale operation against iran … would stretch the [israel air force's] resources , it is still within its capabilities . this is exactly what the lion's share of the defense budget has been spent on for over more than a decade . on fighter jets , airborne tankers , long - range reconnaissance drones and electronic warfare aircraft .