appendix b . brief history of past army drawdowns post - world war ii during world war ii , the army determined what its reasonable post - war strength should be and developed plans for a peaceful demobilization . initially , the army established a post - war goal of an active and reserve structure capable of mobilizing 4 million troops within a year of the outbreak of a future war . later , the army set the strength of the active ground and air forces at 1.5 million ( the army air corps did not become the u.s. air force until july 26 , 1947 , with the enactment of the national security act of 1947 , p.l . the vast majority of servicemembers in the army during world war ii were draftees . the army's demobilization plans provided for the release of troops on an individual basis based on points . soldiers received point credits for length of service , combat participation and awards , time spent overseas , and parenthood . also factoring into the army's plans was the availability of shipping to bring overseas troops to the united states , as well as the capacity to process the discharged soldiers . however , pressure for faster demobilization from the public , congress , and the troops themselves affected the army's plan for an orderly process . the army responded by easing eligibility requirements and released half of its 8 million troops by the end of 1945 . in early 1946 , the army slowed its return of troops from overseas to meet its constabulatory requirements in germany and japan , which elicited another public outcry to speed up demobilization . public opposition diminished after the army more than halved its remaining strength during the first six months of 1946 . president truman was determined to balance the national budget , which also affected the army's manpower . the administration's dollar ceiling for fy1947 led to a new maximum army strength of just over 1 million . in order to reach this new level , the army stopped draft calls and released all post - war draftees along with any other troops eligible for demobilization . by june of 1947 , the army consisted of 684,000 ground troops and 306,000 airmen . although considered large for a peacetime army by american standards , the loss of many capable maintenance specialists resulted in widespread deterioration of equipment . active army units were understrength , had many barely trained replacements , and were considered "shadows of the efficient organizations they had been at the end of the war. this post - war reduction saw the army go from 8 million soldiers and 89 divisions in 1945 to 591,000 men and 10 divisions by 1950 — a 93% reduction in manpower over five years . half of the army's 10 divisions were deployed overseas , with far eastern command controlling four infantry divisions on occupation duty in japan and the european command controlling one infantry division in germany . the remaining five divisions ( two airborne , two infantry , and one armored division ) were stationed in the united states and constituted a general reserve to meet emergencies .