this suggests a number of other issues . very specifically , the lack of a lead agency is reflected in the fact that doj , dhs , and fbi have each issued training guidelines for cve . they are very similar , but the issuance of three almost identical but separate guidelines raises the question: why not just have one set created by one body overseeing the cve program ? congress may pursue with the administration the feasibility or value of designating a lead agency , or the possibility of naming a lead via legislation . however , it is unclear what types of authority — especially in the budgetary realm — such a lead may be able to wield over well - established agencies playing central roles in the cve strategy . on the other side of these budgetary questions , without a lead agency , how will the administration evaluate the effectiveness of federal cve efforts ? the sip underscores that individual departments and agencies involved in cve "will be responsible for assessing their specific activities in pursuit of sip objectives , in coordination with an assessment working group. while this may seem straight - forward , the british government has struggled with measurement issues related to its counter - radicalization strategy . u.k. officials have made "progress ... in measuring outputs but not always in measuring outcomes. in other words , counting the number of engagement events is one thing . it is quite another thing to evaluate their impact . the sip mentions this problem as well . however , the sip does not discuss ( 1 ) specific metrics , ( 2 ) what real authority the assessment working group will have to independently evaluate and impact cve activity within federal departments and agencies , and ( 3 ) whether the assessment working group will have the power to standardize measures of success across federal agencies and departments . in the end , the lack of a lead agency with budgetary control over cve efforts and clear responsibility for implementation of the strategy makes it difficult to conceptualize exactly how spending in this area will be prioritized , evaluated , and then re - prioritized based on results . without a high degree of transparency , an engagement strategy driven by federal agencies charged with intelligence gathering and law enforcement responsibilities may run the risk of being perceived as an effort to co - opt communities into the security process — providing tips , leads , sources , and informants . this threatens to "securitize" a relationship intended as outreach within the marketplace of ideas . it has been noted that "unlike counterterrorism , which targets terrorists , counter - radicalization is focused on the communities that are targeted by terrorists for recruitment . the aim is to protect , strengthen , and empower these communities so that they become resilient to violent extremism. as such , some suggest that it might not be particularly effective to have the same federal agencies responsible for counterterrorism also be the main players in the cve strategy .