in other words , alone—we fail . at the same time , the 2006 bpc roadmap , more explicitly than any other guidance , also invoked the idea of savings: "the department's efforts to build the planning and operational capabilities of partner agencies and international partners have the potential to reduce the length of u.s. force deployments , minimize the range of circumstances in which u.s. forces are called upon , and preserve the department's financial resources. at that time , the term "building partnership capacity" was applied ambitiously to all potential dod partners including other u.s. agencies , non - governmental organizations , and the private sector , as well as international partners . the 2006 guidance documents recognized the need for both integration of effort and clarification of roles and responsibilities across these stakeholders . what the roadmap did not do was square the circle by addressing how partnership could achieve savings in the face of a larger overall requirement . the bpc roadmap argued in support of the nspg proposal that if the u.s. government is at cross purposes internally , partnership will cost more and be less effective . the 2010 qdr echoed its predecessor in portraying close interagency integration as necessary to successful partnership . the 2010 qdr also did something singular in terms of the internal dod division of labor on partnership matters , by calling to "strengthen and institutionalize general purpose force ( gpf ) capabilities for security force assistance. such a boost for the role of gpf might suggest the need for an updated rationalization of the respective contributions of gpf and special operations forces ( sof ) to partnership efforts . what role if any do shared norms play in shaping outcomes ? and to what extent if any can the u.s. government shape shared norms ? in principle , worldview and national interests shape national security strategy , which in turn articulates goals . these issues are variously addressed in recent strategic guidance documents . key unclassified guidance documents include the 2006 quadrennial defense review ( qdr ) report , and its follow - on building partnership capacity ( bpc ) roadmap ; the 2010 national security strategy ( nss ) ; the 2010 qdr report ; the 2010 quadrennial diplomacy and development review ( qddr ) ; and the 2012 defense strategic guidance ( dsg ) . furthermore , the u.s. government would have a clear internal division of roles and responsibilities for partnership—among departments , and among key components within departments—in order to prevent confusion , mitigate friction , and allow effective and efficient preparation and execution by each entity . that clear division of labor would be reinforced , in turn , by congressional oversight . in general , strategic guidance tends to be strong in calling for integration of effort , though usually without prescribing mechanisms for achieving that integration ; and weak in calling for , let alone clarifying , a clear division of roles and responsibilities: at the systemic level , the 2010 nss calls resoundingly—in a three - page section—for whole - of - government approaches , noting that "we must update , balance , and integrate all the tools of american power.