this leaves several questions . if a car is an effect , what other personal property may be covered under this approach ? will computer data constitute an effect ? there are no easy answers to these questions . additionally , because the court focused on the attachment of the device and the property interests involved , there remain questions of whether prolonged tracking with a device is permissible under the fourth amendment if there is no trespass . as the majority noted , "[s]ituations involving merely transmission of electronic signals without trespass would remain subject to katz analysis. justice alito's and sotomayor's concurrences in jones may be scrutinized for how the court might handle these scenarios under katz . as more cell phones and cars are outfitted with gps tracking technologies , police need not physically attach a device to track its movements . because the jones majority opinion is based on a physical trespass into a constitutionally protected area , it seemingly will not apply where gps is preinstalled . justices alito , and his four - justice concurrence , and sotomayor , concurring separately , provide insight into how a future court may apply the fourth amendment to evolving technologies . these opinions rely , to a certain extent , on the mosaic theory first discussed in the d.c . circuit opinion , which says that tracking a person's public movements over a long duration is constitutionally unacceptable even if tracking each of the movements individually may be permitted . whether this approach will garner a majority on the court is unclear . however , at a minimum , these concurrences have engendered discussion in the lower courts , with several courts citing the mosaic theory as a viable alternative . the question then becomes how much weight should the alito and sotomayor concurring opinions be accorded ? there is no one rule to answer this question . generally , there are two types of concurrences in supreme court opinions . the first is the true concurrence , in which the justice concurs in the judgment , but disagrees with the reasoning . justice alito's opinion exemplifies that type of concurrence ; he agreed that the surveillance constituted a fourth amendment search , but would have decided the case under the traditional reasonable expectation of privacy test instead of the trespass test . the second category is the simple concurrence , where the justice agrees with the judgment and the reasoning of the majority , but also poses possible new theories that may not be directly relevant to that particular case , but can be used later to move the law in a particular direction . justice sotomayor's opinion seems to fit this latter category . although these two concurrences chart somewhat different courses in their strategy and reasoning , when combined they appear to command five votes on the court — a potential majority . all nine justices agreed that tracking a person for four months is a constitutional search . where there is little agreement among court observers , though , is what level of suspicion is required to conduct gps monitoring or whether a warrant is required .