it was approved by a vote of 39-23 . sblf and ssbci advocates argued that the programs were necessary because "many companies , particularly small businesses , claim that it is becoming harder to get new loans to keep their business operating and that banks are tightening requirements or cutting off existing lines of even when the businesses are up to date on their loan repayments. in their view , the sblf and ssbci would promote economic growth and job creation by enhancing small business access to capital . the house committee on financial services' republicans indicated in the report accompanying h.r . 5297 that they "were unanimous in our opposition to this misguided legislation. they argued that the sblf and ssbci did not address what they considered to be the core issue affecting small business job creation during the economic recovery — the need to stimulate demand for credit by small businesses . they argued that the bill would fail to help small businesses or create jobs , would succeed only in adding billions of dollars to the national debt , and concluded that "the solutions to america's economic problems do not lie in more taxpayer - funded bailouts. instead of supporting federal spending programs to enhance small business access to capital , they advocated an extension of a series of small business tax credits as a more effective means to stimulate small business job creation and economic growth . on june 14 , 2010 , the house committee on rules issued a rule for h.r . 1436 ) that provided that "in the engrossment of h.r . 5297 , the clerk shall add the text of h.r . 5486 , as passed by the house , at the end of h.r . 5486 shall be laid on the table. 5486 , to amend the internal revenue code of 1986 to provide tax incentives for small business job creation , and for other purposes , included several tax incentives for small businesses and several revenue - raising provisions designed to offset the costs of the tax incentives . also , at that time , the house committee on rules posted on its website legislative language for a proposed amendment in the nature of a substitute to h.r . 5297 , as reported , which included a proposed $1 billion small business early - stage investment program . on june 17 , 2010 , the house passed h.r . 5297 , by a vote of 241-182 . the engrossed bill , retitled the small business jobs and credit act of 2010 , also included the language in h.r . 5486 and the small business early - stage investment program , as well as the $30 billion sblf and $2 billion ssbci . the arguments presented in the house report accompanying the bill , both for and against the bill's passage , were also presented during house floor debate . for example , advocates argued that the ssbci would "increase small business lending which will retain and create jobs.