snap benefits are not the same as cash . although snap benefits have a dollar value , they may only be spent on eligible food at authorized stores equipped with ebt machines . "trafficking" usually means the direct exchange of snap benefits ( formerly known as food stamps ) for cash , which is illegal , and both retailers and recipients might engage in this form of fraud . retailer trafficking of snap benefits usually occurs when a snap recipient sells their benefits for cash , often at a loss , to an owner or employee of a store participating in snap . the food and nutrition act mandates penalties for retailers and participants engaged in trafficking , including fines and imprisonment . this equation is illustrated in the first row of figure 1 . thus , ( as illustrated in the second row of figure 1 ) a three - person household in one of the 48 states with $400 in counted net income ( after deductions ) would receive a monthly allotment of $384 in fy2018 . a three - person household with no counted income would receive the maximum monthly benefit . benefits are not taxable and purchases made with snap benefits may not be charged sales taxes . receipt of snap benefits does not affect eligibility for , or benefits provided by , other public assistance programs , although some programs use snap participation as a "trigger" for eligibility , and others take into account the general availability of snap benefits in deciding what level of benefits to provide . eligible one - or two - person households are guaranteed a minimum monthly benefit allotment equal to 8% of the maximum benefit for a one - person household ; effective october 2008 . this replaces an older rule stipulating a minimum benefit of $10 a month only for one - and two - person households . for fy2018 , the minimum benefit is $15 a month for a household in the 48 states and dc . this means that if the benefit calculation for a one - or two - person household yields a result of less than $15 , that household is guaranteed to receive $15 a month . in fy2016 , over 8% of snap households received the minimum benefit . benefit issuance is a state agency responsibility , and states contract with private vendors to carry out most of their issuance activities . benefits are provided through electronic benefit transfer ( ebt ) systems under which recipients are issued a debit - like card that they use to make food purchases . net income is the gross income with certain specified deductions subtracted . throughout the body of this report , current participation , benefit amount , and spending figures are provided . for a historical table of such information ( dating back to 1985 ) , see table a - 1 . snap has financial , work - related , and "categorical" tests for eligibility . its financial tests require that those eligible have monthly income and liquid assets below limits set by law and adjusted for inflation .