appendix a . other tax provisions for current - year higher education expenses under current law , there are a variety of benefits available to taxpayers for current - year higher education expenses . a complete list can be found in crs report r41967 , higher education tax benefits: brief overview and budgetary effects , by [author name scrubbed] . of these benefits , the aotc , the hope credit , the lifetime learning credit , and the above - the - line deduction for tuition and fees are often discussed together as the main tax benefits for current - year higher education expenses ( under current law , the tuition and fees deduction is scheduled to expire at the end of 2017 ) . a taxpayer cannot claim both the deduction and an education credit ( lifetime learning or aotc ) for the same student in the same year . details on the lifetime learning credit and the tuition and fees deduction are provided below . appendix b . calculating the aotc: a stylized example the smiths pay $8,000 of college expenses for sarah . of the $8,000 in expenses , $6,000 are for tuition and are considered qualifying expenses , while $2,000 are for room and board expenses , which are not qualifying expenses . the smiths' daughter sarah attends university x in the same year her parents incur the $8,000 in college expenses . the smiths file their tax return as married joint filers . they have a combined income of $100,000 , which is below the level at which the credit begins to phase out ( $160,000 ) . to help pay for these costs , the university gives sarah a $4,000 tax - free scholarship ( i.e. , none of the scholarship is subject to taxation ) , which can be used to pay for any part of sarah's university expenses . the remainder of the cost is paid for with student loans . sarah is a first - year undergraduate at university x enrolled full - time in a degree program and is eligible to claim the aotc . she is claimed as a dependent by the smiths . step 1 . qualifying expenses: sarah has $6,000 in qualifying expenses that are reduced by the entire value of her tax - free scholarship . importantly , even though the tax - free scholarship can be used for expenses aside from tuition and fees , because it is tax - free , she must reduce her qualifying expenses by the total value of the award . if she had used the $4,000 award to pay for room and board ( not a qualifying expense ) and she had also reported it on her ( or her parent's income tax return ) , she would not need to reduce her qualifying expenses by the value of the award . however , because the award is entirely tax - free , her $6,000 in qualifying expenses are reduced by $4,000 and she has $2,000 in qualifying expenses . step 2 . calculating the aotc: because sarah has $2,000 in qualifying expenses , her parents can claim a $2,000 aotc ( 100% x first $2,000 of qualifying expenses ) .