that proposal did not receive wide support . pha industry groups raised concerns that a block grant funding model could lead to funding reductions down the road , as has been seen with other hud block grant programs . tenant advocates raised concerns that deregulation would mean that they would lose protection in the law against policies that would raise tenants' rents and subject them to conditions of assistance they felt would be unreasonable . a differently structured block grant proposal could garner wider support , although some of the same concerns raised in 2004 could be raised again . in addition , hud has expressed concern about the capacity of some agencies entering the mtw demonstration program . as previously mentioned , some of the phas admitted to the current program were considered poor performers prior to entering . hud argues that high performers are more likely to succeed because they have proven their ability to meet reporting requirements and thus will be able to report on their activities and outcomes as required in the mtw demonstration program . hud has also recommended that phas be selected for the program based on evaluation capacity , previously demonstrated innovation , and the level of local support . finally , it is unclear if the mtw program as currently designed , or if a fully deregulated block grant program , would be a good program model for small phas , particularly those that administer only the public housing program or only the housing choice voucher program . another option for policymakers is to make no changes and allow the mtw demonstration program to continue as it is currently structured . the existing mtw agencies have agreements through 2018 ( with the possibility for extensions beyond that date , at hud's discretion ) . congress may also consider adding small numbers of additional agencies , as it has done the past several years . further , as noted earlier , hud has taken some steps to address concerns raised by critics of the existing program , such as increasing mtw reporting requirements , standardizing agreements , and including evaluation requirements for new agencies entering the program . if the program continues as is , participating phas will continue to experiment with new policies that may influence the primary assisted housing programs . even without a full evaluation of the policies adopted by mtw phas , it appears that both hud and policymakers are considering incorporating some of the reforms adopted by mtw agencies into the mainstream programs . both the obama administration and some members of congress from both parties have proposed or supported changes to hud rental assistance programs that would either require or allow phas to adopt policies that mtw phas have experimented with , including changes to inspection rules , including allowing biennial inspections ; changes to income calculation rules , including allowing alternate sources of documentation or definitions of income and a streamlined calculation process ; changes to rent policies , including higher minimum rents and / or a limited rent policy demonstration ; expanded authority to phas to "voucher - out" their public housing and replace it with project - based assistance ; and allowance for phas to blend their public housing operating and capital funding .