the law was enacted on february 7 , 2014 . however , this must be read in conjunction with two other aspects of the law . provision applies to certification periods after the effective date: snap households are certified to receive benefits for a period of time , and have to follow state rules for reporting changes , such as changes in household income or size of the household . 3102 would result in 850,000 snap - recipient households receiving benefits reduced by an average of $90 per household per month ; however , due to later implementation timing of the new law it is expected that fewer will be affected than forecasted in h.r . a policy change could result in a reduction of benefits for some households that either currently receive the excess shelter deduction or receive a higher excess shelter deduction due to liheap payments that are lower than the $20 threshold . the total number will also depend on whether households are able to document their utility costs in other ways . modifying the treatment of liheap in snap might create changes in the program application process , but it is difficult to know just what these might be . the "heat and eat" states would appear to no longer have any reason to issue liheap payments below the enacted threshold requirement of $20 to snap participants , since such sums would neither substantially assist with utility costs nor generate larger snap benefits . states have the option to delay implementation for current recipients: the law gives states the option to delay implementation or reduce its impact for as long as five months after the law takes effect . the specifics of this state option — how usda - fns will implement it and how the states will implement it — are not known at this time . taken together , this means that for new snap applicants , the new rules should take effect 30 days after february 7 , 2014 . however , for current snap recipients , the exact date that they are subject to the new rules ( and possible benefit reduction ) will depend both on ( 1 ) when their current certification period ends , and ( 2 ) whether and how their state delays implementation . in addition to the option to delay implementation , a state continues to have the option to issue liheap payments greater than $20 . provision takes effect 30 days after enactment: the law says that the amendments in section 4006 take effect 30 days after enactment of the law . the period of certification is based on state choices within a federal framework . the new law indicates that when a new snap household applies for benefits , if that is 30 days after the law's enactment , the benefits will be calculated based on the $20 threshold rule , but for households already receiving snap it will be only when they apply to recertify that their benefit calculation will be subject to the $20 rule . three aspects of "when" are specified in the text of the legislation ( section 4006 of p.l . this recertification scenario , though , is subject to a state's decision to delay implementation .