appendix a . military construction appropriations , fy2011-fy2013 appendix b. sequestration impac . it is authorized to compel action by the va . it is authorized to hold unconstitutional or otherwise unlawful and set aside decisions , findings , conclusions , rules , and regulations issued or adopted by the va or the board of veterans' appeals . the secretary of the army is responsible for the administration , operation , and maintenance of arlington national cemetery and the soldiers' and airmen's home national cemetery . in addition to its principal function as a national cemetery , arlington is the site of approximately 3,100 non - funeral ceremonies each year and has approximately 4 million visitors annually . 5854 differs from the administration request in that the request provided funding for arlington national cemetery from three accounts in two different appropriation bills . 5854 provides the same level of total funding in this single account . s. 3215 contains a lower level of funding than the request . the armed forces retirement home trust fund provides funds to operate and maintain the armed forces retirement home in washington , dc ( also known as the united states soldiers' and airmen's home ) , and the armed forces retirement home in gulfport , ms ( originally located in philadelphia , pa , and known as the united states naval home ) . the appropriation for the afrh facilities is normally all from the armed forces retirement home trust fund . the trust fund is maintained through gifts , bequests , and a $0.50 per month assessment on the pay of active duty enlisted military personnel and warrant officers . table 7 shows the fy2012 enacted appropriations , the administration request , and p.l . 113-6 funding for fy2013 ( pre - sequester ) for each of the related agencies . the court is an independent judicial tribunal with exclusive jurisdiction to review decisions of the board of veterans' appeals . it has the authority to decide all relevant questions of law ; interpret constitutional , statutory , and regulatory provisions ; and determine the meaning or applicability of the terms of an action by the va . the commission maintains 24 cemeteries and 25 memorials in foreign countries and on u.s. soil . the u.s. court of appeals for veterans claims was established by the veterans' administration adjudication procedure and judicial review act of 1988 ( p.l . the american battle monuments commission ( abmc ) is responsible for the maintenance and construction of u.s. monuments and memorials commemorating the achievements in battle of u.s. armed forces since the nation's entry into world war i ; the erection of monuments and markers by u.s. citizens and organizations in foreign countries ; and the design , construction , and maintenance of permanent cemeteries and memorials in foreign countries .