the first part discusses rtw laws themselves . in an agency shop , workers covered by a collective bargaining contract are required to pay a fee for representation ( an agency fee ) but are not required to join the union . since union shop agreements must permit covered workers to forego full union membership and only pay a representation fee as a core financial member , union shops and agency shops operate similarly in practice . this report is divided into two parts . it provides a brief legislative history on the federal role in the regulation of unions , a summary of the origin and development of rtw laws , a discussion of recent events at the state level , and federal legislation related to rtw . the second part of the report reviews the varied empirical research on the effects of rtw laws . specifically , it will discuss the mixed evidence indicating relationships between rtw laws and other economic outcomes . prior to the passage of the federal labor laws discussed in this report , the regulation of labor and collective bargaining was left to the states . laws varied , but most states adopted policies of open competition with minimal governmental regulations . in 1926 , the railway labor act was the first federal law to guarantee collective bargaining rights to a group of workers . the norris - laguardia act , passed in 1932 , prohibited federal courts from issuing an injunction in any labor dispute . previously , judges could end a strike if they did not approve of its methods or objectives . the norris - laguardia act , however , did not guarantee collective bargaining rights ; it merely regulated employer - union relations once they were established . in rtw states , employers and elected unions may not agree to collective bargaining contracts with union security agreements . as such , workers who are covered by a collective bargaining contract may choose whether or not to join the representing union and pay corresponding union dues . states without rtw laws are subject to the union security provisions of the nlra . these provisions specify that an elected union and an employer can agree to a collective bargaining contract that requires all workers covered by the contract to become dues - paying members within 30 days . workplaces covered by such an agreement are often called union shops . in 1963 , the supreme court ruled that , even in a union shop , an employee cannot be required to join a union pursuant to a union security agreement . instead , the employee may pay dues but decline to become a full union member . dues - paying nonmembers are referred to as financial core members . in spite of their name , financial core members are not union members: they may not participate in union activities or even vote on the ratification of the collective bargaining contract that covers them . financial core members are not subject to union bylaws or union discipline but they are subject to the rights and responsibilities in the collective bargaining contract with their employer .