it also resulted in a sequestration in fy2013 . the sequestration process required automatic , largely across - the - board , spending cuts at the account and program level to achieve specified deficit reduction targets . it took place on march 1 , 2013 , and resulted in a reduction of approximately $3 billion in funding for hud in fy2013 . looking ahead , the lower discretionary spending limits contained in the bca , as amended , are meant to reduce the growth of discretionary spending over time . as a result , in order to meet these lower discretionary spending limits , congressional appropriators will be required to provide less in appropriations , more in offsets , or both , across the federal budget and , presumably , also in hud's budget . future cost growth in the section 8 project - based rental assistance account should begin to slow now that most of the old rental assistance contracts are on an annual renewal cycle , although inflation costs built into renewal contracts may result in the need for increased funding in the future . cost growth in the section 8 housing choice voucher program is not expected to slow . the cost of individual vouchers is largely driven by market factors . the subsidies the program provides make up the difference between the low , income - based rents paid by tenants and the cost of housing in the private market . if the gap between tenant incomes and private market rents grows , the cost of each individual subsidy also grows . the government accountability office ( gao ) released a report citing these market factors as being the primary driver of recent cost growth in the section 8 voucher program . additionally , the section 8 voucher program has seen growth in the number of people it serves , as policy changes have transferred families from other housing assistance programs ( such as public housing , section 8 project - based rental assistance , and section 811 housing for persons with disabilities ) , into the voucher program . however , it is important to note that , even as more people are served by the program , far more families are eligible for assistance than are served , which means there are waiting lists for assistance in most communities . congress has heretofore demonstrated a commitment to providing sufficient funding so that all section 8 project - based rental assistance contracts are renewed and every family that is receiving a voucher — roughly 3 million families , including individuals who are elderly or have disabilities and families with children — can continue to receive assistance . as the cost of the programs has risen in recent years , due to the expiration of old pbra contracts and growth in the cost and number of vouchers , questions about the future of that commitment have arisen and interest has grown in reforms that could lead to cost savings . however , to the extent that commitment remains , and assuming market trends continue and significant cost - saving reforms are not enacted , it is unlikely that the cost of the pbra and voucher programs will decline , and they may continue to increase .