in addition , h.r . 1756 would have terminated certain other functions of the commerce department and transferred others to existing agencies . the bill would have terminated commerce's administrative functions , the economic development administration , the minority business development agency ( mbda ) , the united states travel and tourism administration ( ustta ) , and industrial technology programs . it would have transferred the weight and measure functions of the national institute for standards and technology ( nist ) to the national science foundation ( nsf ) . this issue is beyond the scope of this report . see crs report r41916 , the u.s . export control system and the president's reform initiative , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] . in the 2011 state of the union address , president obama advocated the need to reorganize the federal government to ensure that it is "more competent and more efficient. along those lines , the president noted that there are multiple federal agencies that have export - related functions . on march 11 , 2011 , the president issued a memorandum directing the office of management and budget ( omb ) to conduct a review of federal agencies and programs "involved in trade and competitiveness , including analyzing their scope and effectiveness , areas of overlap and duplication , unmet needs , and possible cost savings" and to submit recommendations on reorganizing and streamlining federal government functions in these areas . omb's recommendations to the president have not been publicly released to date . on january 13 , 2012 , president obama asked congress for authority to reorganize and consolidate the business - and trade - related functions of six federal agencies into one department: the commerce department , the ex - im bank , opic , sba , tda , and ustr ( see the textbox for an overview of these agencies ) . the reorganization authority requested by the president is currently dormant . this authority , which was available to presidents periodically between 1932 and 1984 , would allow the president to present reorganization plans to congress under an expedited process . on february 16 , 2012 , president obama sent draft legislation , entitled the reforming and consolidating government act of 2012 , to congress that would give him the authority to reorganize and consolidate the federal government . the legislation , introduced as s. 2129 ( lieberman ) on february 17 , 2012 , would reinstate authority granted to past presidents to reorganize the executive branch . a similar bill was introduced in the house ( h.r . 4409 , barrow ) on april 19 , 2012 . president obama reiterated his trade reorganization proposal in his fy2014 budget request . he may resubmit his request for reorganizational authority in the 113 th congress . the administration's stated intention for the proposed new department is to streamline trade negotiation , financing , promotion , and enforcement functions . the new department reportedly would be organized into four "pillars": ( 1 ) trade and investment functions ; ( 2 ) small business and economic development ; ( 3 ) technology and innovation ; and ( 4 ) economic statistics .