sugar users ( i.e. , manufacturers of sugar - containing food products and beverages ) supported making changes to the u.s. sugar program . in their view , the sugar program "was made worse by the 2008 farm bill" and had operated as "a textbook example of the consequences of excessive government intrusion in the marketplace. they argued that the program , "by overly restricting the supply of sugar in the u.s. market," had kept u.s. market sugar prices "far above" world sugar prices . the congressional budget office ( cbo ) projected in its may 2013 baseline that the continuation of current sugar policy as approved by the senate , and reported by the house agriculture committee , would result in budget outlays of $39 million over 5 years ( fy2014-fy2018 ) and $188 million over 10 years ( fy2014-fy2023 ) . both bills also would have repealed the sugar - for - ethanol program . the senate - passed farm bill ( s. 954 ) and the house - passed farm bill ( h.r . 1947 ) proposed to continue 2008-enacted u.s. sugar policy without change . an amendment ( identical to s. 345 , sugar reform act ) to reflect the interests of sugar users and consumers was offered by program opponents during senate floor debate on may 22 , 2013 , but was defeated . on june 20 , 2013 , the house debated future sugar policy when it considered an amendment to h.r . 1947 , the first farm bill . once these policies are disciplined through multilateral trade negotiations under the auspices of the world trade organization ( wto ) , the u.s. sugar production sector would advocate for an end to current u.s. sugar policy . sugar industry spokesmen point to h.con.res . 39 as a roadmap to accomplish this ( see " other bills " for details ) . observers of the longstanding wto doha round negotiations note that trade negotiators have tried since 2001 to discipline trade - distorting agricultural policies but have not yet succeeded . further , wto member countries have not yet agreed upon any timetable to go beyond the limited deals covering agriculture agreed to at the december 2013 bali ministerial . this outlook suggests that the u.s. sugar production sector's roadmap would not yield any results for quite some time , and likely not in the time period covered by the newly reauthorized sugar program ( i.e. looking at the near term , sugar industry spokesmen note that any efforts to change the program require addressing the impact of large unrestricted sugar imports from mexico . specifically , the industry seeks joint management of sugar by both the united states and mexican governments to balance supply and demand . to address the criticism made that the sugar program no longer operates on a no - cost basis ( as seen in fy2013 ) , the industry notes that the $258 million spent was less than 3% of commodity program spending and the first time in a decade that the program had not operated at no net cost to the taxpayer . retired crs specialist [author name scrubbed] was the original author of this report . this proposal , similar to h.r .