this conclusion may not be warranted . the motives that led other countries to implement very high speed rail lines are varied . some , like japan and china , did so originally in part to meet the demand on already overcrowded conventional rail lines . the basis fra has used for selecting projects to be funded is not always clear . which hsr projects should receive funding ? in the hsr development program , congress required that projects be part of a state rail plan or the national rail plan in order to receive funding . the fra is currently developing a national rail plan , but high speed rail development grants have been awarded prior to the completion of the plan . nor is it clear whether fra's national rail plan will reflect the rail plans of the states or will lay out a national rail vision that may not coincide with individual states' priorities . beyond the development costs , congress may wish to consider how to pay for maintaining and operating an hsr system over the long term . passenger revenues may not be sufficient to cover the operating costs of high speed lines , including the maintenance of the new hsr infrastructure . the federal government has not assumed long - term responsibility for infrastructure , other than that owned by amtrak , and has not supported train operations other than those deemed to be part of amtrak's national network . measures to ensure adequate funding for train operations and infrastructure maintenance may be desirable to protect the federal investment in hsr . following are brief accounts of high speed rail networks in selected countries . except where otherwise indicated , these countries have lines currently operating at speeds of 186 mph or more . japan japan may be the ideal country , geographically , for high speed rail ; its main island is relatively long and narrow , so that its relatively large population is concentrated in cities arrayed along a corridor . japan opened its first high speed rail line , between tokyo and osaka , in 1964 . that line was built to expand capacity in an overcrowded rail corridor . from its inception it earned enough revenue to cover its operating costs , and reportedly earned enough money within its first few years to pay back its construction costs . the success of the tokyo - osaka line encouraged expansion , and the japanese government has supported construction of other high speed lines . as of 2011 , the high speed rail network was 1,665 miles in length , with more under construction . currently , new lines are funded by public - private partnerships , with part of the funding coming from the now - privatized regional rail companies , and the rest from the national and local governments . since 1987 , when the government began the privatization of japan national railways , all high speed lines have been operated by private companies . current information on the profitability of individual high speed lines is not available , but all of the more recent lines have much lower ridership than the heavily traveled tokyo - osaka line .