energy security. app . 2061 et seq. ) for fiscal year 2013 for biofuels production may not be obligated or expended for the construction of a biofuel refinery until the department of defense receives matching contributions from the department of energy and equivalent contributions from the department of agriculture for the same purpose . section 2821 states: sec . congressional notification for contracts for the provision and operation of energy production facilities authorized to be located on real property under the jurisdiction of a military department . section 2662 ( a ) ( 1 ) of title 10 , united states code , is amended by adding at the end the following new subparagraph: '' ( h ) any transaction or contract action for the provision and operation of energy production facilities on real property under the jurisdiction of the secretary of a military department , as authorized by section 2922a ( a ) ( 2 ) of this title , if the term of the transaction or contract exceeds 20 years.'' this provision requires dod to notify congress when entering into contracts for the provision and operation of energy production facilities on real property owned by the united states if the contract is longer than 20 years . section 2822 states: sec . availability and use of department of defense energy cost savings to promote energy security . section 2912 ( b ) ( 1 ) of title 10 , united states code , is amended by inserting after ''additional energy conservation'' the following: ''and energy security'' . section 2823 states: sec . continuation of limitation on use of funds for leadership in energy and environmental design ( leed ) gold or platinum certification . ( a ) additional requirements for report on energy - efficiency standards. — subsection ( a ) of section 2830 of the military construction authorization act for fiscal year 2012 ( division b of public law 112 – 81 ; 125 stat . 1695 ) is amended — ( 1 ) in paragraph ( 1 ) , by striking ''not later than june 30 , 2012 , the'' and inserting ''the'' ; and ( 2 ) by striking paragraph ( 3 ) and inserting the following new paragraph ( 3 ) : '' ( 3 ) department of defense unified fa cilities criteria and related policies. — the report shall also include the department of defense unified facilities criteria and related department of defense policies , which shall be updated — '' ( a ) to reflect comprehensive guidance for the pursuit of design and building standards throughout the department of defense that specifically address energy - and water - efficient standards and sustainable design attributes for military construction based on the cost - benefit analysis , return on investment , total ownership costs , and demonstrated payback of the design standards specified in subparagraphs ( a ) , ( b ) , ( c ) , and ( d ) of paragraph ( 2 ) ; and '' ( b ) to ensure that the building design and certification standards are applied to each military construction project based on geographic location and local circumstances to ensure maximum savings.'' ( b ) prohibition on use of funds for leed gold or platinum certification pending report.