it is identical to h.r . title iv appears to seek legislative certainty for a denied citizen petition to force the environmental protection agency ( epa ) to regulate lead in ammunition and in fishing sinkers . on august 27 , 2010 , epa denied one portion of the petition relating to the production of lead for use in ammunition , stating that the agency did not have legal authority to regulate ammunition under tsca . epa continued to evaluate the petition with respect to fishing tackle and accepted public comments until september 15 , 2010 . epa denied that portion of the petition on november 4 , 2010 . on april 30 , 2012 , a lawsuit challenging the denial was dismissed . on june 7 , 2012 , a suit was filed challenging epa's 2012 denial of a new petition to regulate lead shot under tsca . 4089 would prevent federal regulation through tsca , but not through other statutory authorities: lead shot has been banned in the united states for the hunting of migratory waterfowl since 1991 under authority of the migratory bird treaty act and the endangered species act . title iv does not appear to preempt state laws that ban use of lead . for example , new hampshire , new york , and vermont prohibit sale and / or use of lead sinkers . delaware prohibits killing deer with lead shot , and pennsylvania and california prohibit taking big game with lead ammunition . title v , added by h.amdt . s. 1066 would do the same . before may 15 , 2008 , when the esa listing of polar bears as a threatened species took effect , it had been legal to import polar bear trophies from canada . the law would apply only to bears legally killed prior to may 15 , 2008 . permit fees of $1,000 for each trophy would be available for a u.s. - russia polar bear conservation fund to support polar bear conservation activities . fws contends that once the proposed rule to list polar bears as a threatened species was published in january 2007 , an extensive campaign was conducted by fws to alert hunters to the potential impact of esa listing on the ability to import polar bear trophies . however , despite this warning , fws continued to authorize the import of polar bear trophies under existing law until the esa listing became final . the permitting process was truncated by court order making the listing effective immediately rather than after 30 days . fws does not oppose legislation allowing hunters who both applied for an import permit and completed their legal hunt prior to esa listing . fws originally declined to support another version of this provision ( h.r . 991 , as introduced ) because the introduced version would have allowed hunters to import polar bear trophies regardless of whether the hunter had applied for the permit prior to the esa listing . 991 was amended to address fws concerns before it was reported by the house committee on natural resources on december 1 , 2011 . others oppose title iii of h.r . 4089 , believing it would encourage hunting of species whose listing was imminent .