three such efforts are described below . a 2011 report by ceres , disclosing climate risks & opportunities in sec filings: a guide for corporate executives , attorneys & directors , examined various public company disclosures after the guidance went into effect , with a focus on the quality of climate change risk disclosures from an investor perspective . the study's central conclusion was that most corporate filers needed more experience at communicating the risks associated with climate change . overall , it found that large public companies have improved their climate change risk disclosures in recent years , but recommended that more work be done . with respect to deepwater drilling risk disclosures , the report found that out of 50 deepwater drilling risk disclosure ratings given , 4 merited a good rating , and 29 were rated either poor or involved no disclosure ; after the gulf of mexico oil drilling disaster , disclosure on drilling and safety generally remained weak , including disclosures related to drilling risk management and spill response strategy ; 8 out of 10 of the companies disclosed minimal or no information on safety or environmental statistics ; and 8 out of 10 of the companies disclosed minimal or no information regarding their investments in safety - related research and development . overall , for both climate risk and deepwater drilling disclosures , the report concluded that its "findings are concerning , and demonstrate the need for oil and gas companies to better align their climate risk and deepwater drilling risk disclosure with sec rules and investor expectations. another study on the impact of the guidance was published by davis polk & wardwell , a law firm with a significant corporate securities practice . the study , environmental disclosure in sec filings , 2011 update , examined a large number of 2010 corporate disclosure filings after the guidance's first year . some of its findings were as follows: despite concerns of some critics that the guidance would lead to extraneous and unimportant disclosure that might distract investors from focusing on significant disclosures , the guidance did not appear to have had as significant an impact on disclosure as various critics had feared . disclosures appeared to feature more generic weather risk factors . in assessing the quality of companies' disclosures , ceres rated such disclosures as either good — detailed disclosure of the financial impacts of existing and proposed regulatory requirements on the company ; fair — disclosure of regulatory risk discusses legislation and its possible effects on the company , but makes no attempt at quantifying or assigning a value to the risks , or fails to place such values in a meaningful context ; or poor — disclosure of regulatory risks does not mention existing or proposed regulations , or mentions them without analyzing possible effects on the company . the study concluded that good climate change risk disclosures were rare and that the vast majority of climate change risk disclosures were either fair , poor , or involved no such disclosure . summarizing its findings , ceres observed , although public companies' climate reporting has improved somewhat in recent years , it remains true that disclosures very often fail to satisfy investors' legitimate expectations .