bush and obama . legislation creating new judgeships might also provide a new president with the opportunity to appoint a greater number of judges than he might have inherited . legislation substantially increasing the number of authorized judgeships was enacted in 1978 ( omnibus judgeship act , p.l . 95-486 ) ; 1984 ( bankruptcy amendments and federal judgeship act , p.l . 98-353 ) ; and 1990 ( federal judgeship act , p.l . the large number of district court vacancies , for example , inherited by president clinton contributed , in turn , to the relatively large number of district court confirmations during his presidency . the large number of district court vacancies inherited by president clinton was , in part , the result of 74 new district court judgeships created by the federal judgeship act of 1990 . over the course of a presidency , opportunities for a president to make circuit and district court appointments continue to be affected by the rate at which judges depart office ( by taking senior status , retiring , resigning , or dying ) . during some presidencies , substantial new judicial appointment opportunities also have arisen because of the statutory creation of new circuit and district court judgeships . both factors — judicial departures and the statutory creation of new judgeships — can , throughout a president's tenure , affect the number of persons nominated by the president and the number confirmed by the senate . for example , a study found that , largely as a result of judges retiring from full - time service on the bench , president obama was confronted during his first three years in office with more judicial vacancies than his two immediate predecessors: 92 judges took senior status in the first three years of the obama administration compared to 72 and 70 in the clinton and bush administrations' first three years.... had district judges taken senior status in obama's first three years at the same rate they did under clinton or bush , there would have been almost no increase in vacancies... . a variety of factors can affect how long a president takes to select a nominee to fill a judicial vacancy . these factors include how many individuals are involved in identifying and vetting potential nominees , the specific selection criteria a president desires to emphasize in identifying nominees , whether a supreme court vacancy occurs , and , if so , the resources devoted to filling that vacancy . a vacancy on the supreme court , for example , occurred early in both the clinton and obama administrations , and in both instances , while the administrations' searches were underway for a supreme court nominee , the presidents sent few lower court nominations to the senate . the level of consultation between a president and a nominee's home state senators also can influence the president's pace in selecting nominees for judicial vacancies . home state senators traditionally play an important role in the selection of district and , to a lesser extent , circuit court judges . the pace might be slowed by communication or other difficulties between the president and those senators who represent states with vacant federal judgeships .