with the help of the u.n . transitional administration in east timor ( untaet ) , timor - leste's independence marked the end of three centuries of portuguese rule and 24 years of indonesian control . one of the world's poorest nations , timor - leste ( also known as east timor ) continues to face many challenges in consolidating its democracy and developing its economy , though it has made considerable strides in building stability and democratic institutions . the current u.n. mission , the united nations integrated mission in timor - leste ( unmit ) , has been present since a breakdown in civil order in 2006 . it is preparing to wind down operations by the end of 2012 . elected as president in april 2012 , he was an inexperienced politician who derived much of his support from gusmao's endorsement . his political inclinations are unclear . jose ramos - horta , a nobel peace laureate , has served as both president and prime minister of timor - leste . ramos - horta left timor - leste days before indonesian troops invaded timor - leste in 1975 . he went on to represent fretilin abroad and press for timor - leste's cause on the international stage . in 1996 he was awarded the nobel peace prize , along with bishop belo , for his work to promote the independence of timor - leste . he was appointed president after the resignation of mari alkatiri in july 2006 . ramos - horta was seriously wounded in an assassination attempt led by former major alfredo reinado on february 11 , 2008 , which also slightly wounded prime minister gusmao . mari alkatiri was prime minister until he resigned in the wake of unrest following the dismissal of a dissident group of timor - leste troops in 2006 . he remains secretary general of fretilin , the largest opposition party , and he has considerable support within the country . like ramos - horta , alkatiri went abroad as indonesian forces invaded timor - leste in 1975 . alkatiri is part of the small minority of muslims in timor - leste . many observers describe the relationship between alkatiri and gusmao as one of intense rivalry . the democratic republic of timor - leste has a unicameral national parliament of 65 members . the current parliament was elected on june 30 , 2007 . a new body will be selected in elections on july 7 , 2012 . the parliament grew out of an 88-member constituent assembly that was elected in august 2001 and drafted a constitution for timor - leste that went into effect in 2002 . timor - leste at that time was under the administration of the united nations , which had taken control in late 1999 after indonesia withdrew from the territory . timor - leste formally became independent on may 20 , 2002 . the new constitution provided for an elected parliament of 52 to 65 members , but the constituent assembly declared itself the first national parliament of the new state . fretilin is the party that led the resistance to indonesian rule . the constitution also provided for parliamentary government with a largely symbolic , popularly elected president .