these include the following . nato's commitment to afghanistan , both during the ongoing transition away from a primary emphasis on combat and after the transition . some allied leaders — notably new french president françois hollande — have indicated a desire to accelerate the withdrawal of forces from afghanistan . the evolution of nato's partnership policy could have significant political and operational implications for the alliance , including on its decision - making procedures and its force projection capabilities . congress may want to consider the appropriate role of non - nato members in the alliance's political structures and in allied operations . how would the increased participation of partners affect broader u.s. strategic interests ? should nato seek to develop and / or enhance defense and security cooperation with the governments of libya , tunisia , egypt , and other countries in the mediterranean and broader middle east region ? prospects and conditions for future nato enlargement . successive u.s . administrations and some members of congress have emphasized the importance of nato's "open door" membership policy . congress may want to consider the possible implications of further nato enlargement for u.s. and nato security interests . what have been the costs and benefits of nato's post - cold war enlargement and what are the potential costs and benefits of possible future enlargement ? should there be a limit to nato's "open door" policy ? should the alliance consider offering russia the possibility of nato membership ? the u.s. administration and some members of congress continue to view nato as the world's preeminent military alliance and the cornerstone for transatlantic security cooperation . as nato has evolved to confront a range of new and emerging security challenges , it has recorded some important achievements and faced considerable challenges . on the one hand , ongoing military operations in afghanistan , the balkans , and off the horn of africa demonstrate nato's capacity to respond simultaneously to multiple security crises . on the other hand , severe budgetary constraints currently facing allied governments on both sides of the atlantic have caused some to question nato's ability to continue to sustain such an operational tempo . these budget constraints and public opposition in many european countries to military operations in afghanistan could play a key role in shaping the scope of future nato operations . as the alliance moves forward after the chicago summit , allied responses to these and the other challenges outlined above could be important factors in determining nato's ability to meet and refine its strategic objectives . nato allies continue to express divergent views on the appropriate force posture for the alliance . congress may want to consider the implications for u.s. security interests of this ongoing debate within nato . in particular , what role should u.s. non - strategic nuclear weapons play in alliance force posture ? do these weapons currently play an important deterrent role or is their presence primarily a symbol of u.s. commitment to nato ? what are the benefits of nato's evolving territorial missile defense capability ? what is the european allied commitment to that capability ? nato's relations with non - nato member states and international organizations .