113-94 in april 2014 . additional federal funds have been provided since 2004 for convention security , coordinated by the u.s. secret service in conjunction with state and local law enforcement in jurisdictions where the conventions were held . congress appropriated $100 million for convention security in 2004 , 2008 , and 2012 , of which $50 million was for each convention in each year . contemporary national nominating conventions give the parties a rare opportunity to showcase nominees , party leaders , and positions before a national television audience , but they are no longer the venue in which the nominee is chosen . although some observers speculated that a contested convention could occur at the 2012 republican national convention , that did not occur . there has been speculation that the 2016 republican nomination could be contested in some fashion , if a candidate does not emerge from the primary season with a majority of delegates . if that does not occur , the 2016 conventions will again be largely ceremonial , campaign driven events . in recent decades , the role of the national conventions has been to ratify , rather than select , the party nominees . elections without an incumbent president running , even if they are competitive , are usually resolved early in the primary season , well before the convention meets . elections that include an incumbent president are usually concluded without much drama as well , and the delegates are elected in primaries and caucuses that attract little attention because of the lack of competition ( i.e. , president reagan in 1984 , president clinton in 1996 , president bush in 2004 , and president obama in 2012 ) . both the 1976 republican and 1980 democratic conventions provided a reminder that incumbents can be endangered under certain conditions , but presidents ford and carter ultimately prevailed in 1976 and 1980 , respectively , despite strong challenges from governor ronald reagan and senator edward kennedy . as the conventions have evolved into media events , the traditional format of past years has been replaced by a television - friendly script designed for a prime time audience each night . as in the past , delegates ratify the choice of nominee in a roll call vote and various party leaders and rising stars give speeches , but the action is targeted to viewers , rather than the delegates inside the convention venue . finally , the party may have a traditional keynote speaker or multiple keynote speakers address the convention , followed by a vice presidential candidate speech on the second to last night and , on the last night , a speech by the nominee to kick off the general election campaign . a brokered , or multi - ballot , convention was a phenomenon of the mid - 20 th century and earlier , when the convention delegates were sometimes required to vote multiple times before a candidate could achieve a majority of vote to claim the nomination . for the past 60 years , the major party nominees have always accumulated a majority of delegate votes before the convention , with one exception ( discussed in the following section ) .