appendix a . background on scope and terms usda activities and relationships to appropriations bills the u.s. department of agriculture ( usda ) carries out widely varied responsibilities through about 30 separate internal agencies and offices staffed by about 100,000 employees . discretionary spending is controlled by annual appropriations acts and consumes most of the attention during the appropriations process . eligibility for participation in mandatory programs ( sometimes referred to as entitlement programs ) is usually written into authorizing laws ; any individual or entity that meets the eligibility requirements is entitled to the benefits authorized by the law . in fy2012 , about 15% of the agriculture appropriations bill was for discretionary programs ( about $20 billion ) , and the remaining balance of 85% was classified as mandatory ( about $117 billion ) . most agency operations ( salaries and expenses ) are financed with discretionary funds . major discretionary programs include certain conservation programs ; most rural development programs ; research and education programs ; agricultural credit programs ; the special supplemental nutrition program for women , infants , and children ( wic ) ; the food for peace international food aid program ; meat and poultry inspection ; and food marketing and regulatory programs . the discretionary accounts also include fda and cftc appropriations . the largest component of usda's mandatory spending is for food and nutrition programs — primarily the supplemental nutrition assistance program ( snap , formerly food stamps ) and child nutrition ( school lunch and related programs ) — along with the farm commodity price and income support programs , the federal crop insurance program , and various agricultural conservation and trade programs . some mandatory spending , such as the farm commodity programs , is highly variable and driven by program participation rates , economic and price conditions , and weather patterns . formulas are set in the 2008 farm bill ( p.l . in recent years , mandatory spending has tended to rise particularly as nutrition benefits have risen because of the recession ( see " historical trends " ) . although mandatory programs generally are outside the scope of the appropriations debate , amounts for these programs are included in the annual agriculture appropriations act . in terms of budget enforcement , though , mandatory spending decisions are governed in the authorizations process via the congressional budget office baseline . for example , the snap and child nutrition programs are funded by an annual appropriation based on projected spending needs . in fact , snap is referred to as an "appropriated entitlement," and requires an annual appropriation . in contrast , the commodity credit corporation operates on a line of credit with the treasury , but receives an annual appropriation to reimburse the treasury and to maintain its line of credit . usda spending is not synonymous with farm program spending , nor are agriculture appropriations completely correlated with usda spending . usda divides its activities into "mission areas.