6091 as reported by the house committee on appropriations . this report is organized along these lines . the first section ( title i ) provides information on interior agencies ; the second section ( title ii ) discusses epa ; and the third section ( title iii ) addresses other agencies , programs , and entities . a fourth section of this report discusses selected cross - cutting topics that encompass more than one agency . entries in this report are for major agencies ( eg , the national park service ) and cross - cutting issues ( eg , wildland fire management ) that receive funding in the interior , environment , and related agencies appropriations bill . for each agency or issue , we discuss some of the key funding changes that appear to be of interest to congress based on hearings on agency budgets and statements in appropriations committee reports , among other sources . we also address related policy issues that occur in the context of considering appropriations legislation . appropriations are complex , and not all issues are summarized in this report . for example , budget submissions for some agencies number several hundred pages and contain innumerable funding , programmatic , and legislative changes for congressional consideration . further , appropriations laws provide funds for numerous accounts , activities , and subactivities , and the accompanying explanatory statements provide additional directives and other important information . for information on programs funded in the bill but not directly discussed in this report , please contact the key policy staff members listed at the end of the report . in general , in this report the term appropriations represents total funds available , including regular annual and supplemental appropriations , as well as rescissions , transfers , and deferrals , but excludes mandatory spending authorities . the house committee on appropriations is the primary source of the funding figures used throughout the report . other sources of information include the senate committee on appropriations , agency budget justifications , and the congressional record . in the tables throughout this report , some columns of funding figures do not match the precise totals provided due to rounding . epa's primary responsibilities include the implementation of federal statutes regulating air quality , water quality , pesticides , toxic substances , the management and disposal of solid and hazardous wastes , and the cleanup of environmental contamination . epa also awards grants to assist states and local governments in implementing federal law and in complying with federal requirements to control pollution . 6091 as reported by the house appropriations committee included a total of $7.06 billion for epa , $1.29 billion ( 15.5% ) less than the president's fy2013 request of $8.34 billion , and $1.39 billion ( 16.5% ) less than the fy2012 enacted appropriation of $8.45 billion . table 12 presents the fy2013 amounts for epa reported by the house appropriations committee compared to the president's fy2013 budget request and appropriations enacted for fy2012 within the eight accounts that fund the agency . as indicated in table 12 and discussed below , the house appropriations committee approved an overall decrease for epa below the president's fy2013 request and the fy2012 enacted level .