appendix a . description of data the data used in this report come from the 2008 internal revenue service ( irs ) statistics of income ( soi ) form 990 public use file . the irs soi exempt organization file contains information on 501 ( c ) ( 3 ) through ( c ) ( 9 ) organizations that filed the form 990 informational return . do these issues apply to other charitable gifts ? the remaining sections examine the first three questions as they relate to dafs , how treasury answered them , and what further policy options might be considered . the analysis presented below uses data from the 2008 internal revenue service ( irs ) statistics of income ( soi ) form 990 public use file ( see appendix a for more information ) . this dataset contains information as reported by a sample of tax - exempt organizations on the form 990 , which is an informational return . the 2008 return asks organizations to provide information on donor advised funds , including the number of funds maintained , contributions to and grants from dafs , and the total value of daf assets . since 2005 , the irs has been gathering information on dafs on the form 990 informational returns filed by tax - exempt entities . prior to 2005 , the primary resource for information on dafs was an annual survey of daf sponsoring organizations conducted by the chronicle of philanthropy . the data reported on the irs form 990 is an improvement over the survey - generated data that was previously available . nonetheless , the form 990 data has limitations . one of the primary limitations of the irs form 990 data is its aggregate nature . data on dafs is reported at the sponsoring organization level , and not at the individual daf account level . thus , for organizations that sponsor more than one daf , information on contributions , grants , and payout rates per individual daf are not available . the 2011 treasury report was the first comprehensive report on sponsoring organizations and dafs that used data as reported on the irs form 990 . the treasury report used data from the 2006 form 990 informational returns . the analysis below uses information as reported on 2008 form 990s . in a number of instances , the results presented below are compared to the results as reported in the 2011 treasury report . comparisons between the treasury report and the analysis below should be viewed with caution for a number of reasons . first , the irs form 990 was redesigned in both 2006 and 2008 . given that these forms were unfamiliar to filers , there is greater risk that the reported information may contain errors . second , while on the 2008 form 990 daf - related information is reported in a separate section , this was not the case in 2006 . finally , the analysis here is based on a sample of returns as reported in the public use file . thus , all reported statistics are estimated population totals based on this sample . the more observations with reporting errors , particularly those with high sampling weights , the less accurate the population estimates .