66-152 , 41 stat . given that a public service obligation is still attached to railroads , albeit largely lifted with respect to passenger service , do freight railroads have the right to solely set the price for passenger access or should the public's convenience and necessity be given some consideration ? must it be vital or merely convenient ? could a freight railroad be forced to forego some amount of freight revenue in order to make room for passenger trains ? if so , how much forgone revenue is tolerable ? should a prosperous railroad be required to forego more revenue than a financially weak railroad ? the interstate commerce commission , the stb , and the courts have usually addressed these questions in the context of permitting railroads to discontinue a service , but their responses may shed light on how the railroads' public service obligations might be weighed in the face of demands for an additional service . after world war i , passenger rail service went through a period of contraction followed by stagnation . intercity bus and automobile travel began to attract passengers away from trains . the great depression made matters much worse ; many major railroads entered bankruptcy . an icc study conducted in the late 1950s cited 1930 as the first year that the industry ran an operating deficit from passenger service . this deficit increased year after year , except during world war ii . beginning with the transportation act of 1920 ( p.l . 456 ) , which returned the railroads to the private sector after nationalization during world war i , congress demonstrated increasing concern with the financial health of the carriers . congress recognized that the system was too large in scope and operated by too many carriers for optimal performance on a national scale . the 1920 act included a number of provisions aimed at consolidating the nation's railroads . one of these provisions allowed the railroads to petition the icc to abandon unprofitable lines . prior to the 1920 act , states had been an obstacle to abandonment , often requiring railroads to continue providing local services at a loss . the terms by which the icc was to evaluate abandonments became the basis for it to evaluate proposed passenger service discontinuances after world war ii: the law required the icc to weigh "public convenience and necessity" and the financial health of the railroad . between 1920 and 1963 , the icc permitted the abandonment of nearly 50,000 miles of railroad , approximately one - fifth of the total mileage that existed in 1920 . it is not known how much of this mileage , if the right of way was still clear , would be useful today for passenger service . the transportation act of 1920 addressed only total abandonment of a line , and did not give the icc authority to regulate railroads' attempts to discontinue just the passenger trains over a line while continuing freight train service . this shortcoming was highlighted by a case in which a railroad appealed to the wisconsin public service commission to cancel passenger train service on a 27-mile line only during the winter months due to light traffic .