instead , p.l . 113-6 continues the program as currently structured appropriating $5.4 million in loan subsidies in support of $240 million in loan guarantees . the disaster relief appropriations act , 2013 on january 29 , 2013 , president obama signed the disaster relief appropriations act , 2013 , into law ( p.l . the act provided $50.7 billion in supplemental funding and legislative provisions to address the immediate losses from hurricane sandy , as well as to support mitigation for future disasters . community challenge grants . $46 million were proposed to be competitively awarded to up to 50 individual communities to assist them in developing local complements to the larger regional integration planning grants . housing - transportation integration research . $8 million were proposed to have been set aside for a joint hud , dot , and epa research initiative that would seek to quantify and evaluate the benefits and tradeoffs of various sustainability initiatives . the cdbg section 108 loan guarantee program ( section 108 ) allows states and entitlement communities to collateralize their annual cdbg allocation in an effort to attract private capital to support economic development activities , housing , public facilities , and infrastructure projects . communities may borrow up to five times their annual allocation for a term of 20 years through the public issuance of bonds . the proceeds from the bonds must be used to finance activities that support job creation and that meet one of the national goals of the cdbg program . the administration's budget proposed increasing the program's loan commitment ceiling from $240 million in fy2012 to $500 million in fy2013 . in addition to an increase in the loan commitment ceiling , the administration proposed revamping the program by charging a fee - based assessment to borrowers accessing the program , which would eliminate the need for an appropriated credit subsidy . the senate appropriations committee bill , s. 2322 , recommended $3.210 billion for activities funded under the cdf account , including $3.100 billion for cdbg formula grants awarded to states , entitlement communities , and insular areas . this was 5% more than the $2.948 billion appropriated in fy2012 for formula grants . s. 2322 supported the administration's $60 million funding request for indian tribes . the bill recommended an appropriation of $50 million for sci activities . this was half the amount requested by the administration . in addition , the bill would have required hud to allocate over $12 million of the amount appropriated to sci for communities with populations of less than 500,000 . the bill also supported the administration's budget request calling for the conversion of section 108 loan guarantees to a fee - based program and increasing the loan guarantee commitment to $500 million for fy2013 from the $240 million approved for fy2012 . the senate committee bill recommended continued funding of section 4 ( capacity building for community development and affordable housing ) activities at the $35 million appropriation level , but did not support the administration's request to transfer the program from its current account , the self - help homeownership opportunity program account , as shown in table 2 . the house bill , h.r .