similar to h.r . 6412 , the stem jobs act of 2012 would define stem as a field included in the department of education's classification of instructional programs taxonomy within the summary groups of computer and information sciences and support services , engineering , mathematics and statistics , and physical sciences . the foreign stem graduates would have to receive degrees from a doctorate - granting university that the carnegie foundation for the advancement of teaching rates as having a very high or high level of research activity or that the national science foundation has classified as having research activity equivalent to those institutions classified by the carnegie foundation . it would amend the labor certification provisions in the ina to require employers of foreign stem graduates to submit a job order for the position with the state workforce agency in that state , which in turn is required to post the position on its official website . on september 20 , 2012 , the stem jobs act of 2012 ( h.r . 6429 ) failed to receive the necessary two - thirds vote to pass under suspension of the rules . at the crux of the legislative debate is whether expedited immigration pathways for stem foreign graduate students would be in the national interest , and two widely cited studies of the issue are illustrative of this debate . the two studies featured below yield divergent findings , in large part because they use different research designs and study different stem populations . this section does not purport to say that one research design is superior to another or that one target population is more meritorious than the others . rather , it offers two examples with distinct approaches to highlight the competing perspectives . one approach is from the vantage point of the immigration caseloads in the visa categories that stem degree holders currently use to become lprs ; it explores the question of how long would foreign nationals from china and india who have stem degrees wait to become lprs of the united states . the other approach is a retrospective analysis of the foreign nationals who earn doctorates in stem fields ; it addresses the issue of retention rates of foreign stem doctorates in the united states 10 years after graduation . a 2011 study by stuart anderson of the national foundation for american policy ( nfap ) examined prospective lprs with approved petitions to immigrate who were waiting in the queue for a numerically limited visa . since the official data sources do not provide a complete total of cases in the pipeline , nfap estimated some of the missing components . the nfap analysis of the data indicate that the majority of employer - sponsored lprs at the end of 2010 were from india and china . nfap's anderson estimated that a professional worker from india who applies for a professional and skilled ( third preference ) visa would wait approximately 70 years to obtain lpr status . figure 9 presents the nfap estimates for the upper end ( i.e. , maximum number of years ) that prospective lprs have been waiting and might continue to wait for an lpr visa according to when they filed their petitions .