the program expired in 2011 . the investment tax credit ( itc ) provides financial incentives for solar power at a rate of 30% . without legislative action , the itc is due to end on december 31 , 2016 , after which it will revert to a permanent rate of 10% for commercial investments and expire for residential investments . the section 1603 treasury cash grant program requires solar projects to have commenced construction by december 31 , 2011 , and to complete construction by december 31 , 2016 . the sunshot initiative is one of several doe programs to support the solar industry and increase domestic pv manufacturing . solar manufacturing continues to go through a shakeout , with manufacturers closing u.s. plants because of difficult global business conditions , stiff competition particularly from chinese companies , and falling prices for solar panels . beyond that , the extraction of large quantities of shale gas seems likely to lower the cost of generating electricity from natural gas , potentially reducing demand for solar panels . while state - level renewable fuels standards , which require utilities to obtain a certain proportion of their electricity from renewable sources , may provide continuing demand for utility - scale pv installations in some states , the lower cost of gas - fired generation may limit interest . in some parts of the united states , residential and commercial pv systems produce electricity at prices competitive with conventional grid electricity , once subsidies are taken into account . however , although the per - watt cost of solar pv systems has declined significantly , in most areas of the country solar power is still not competitive with power generated from fossil fuels . the cost disadvantage could widen if subsidies are unavailable or if retail electricity prices decline due to the lower price of natural gas . in the absence of continued government support for solar installations or for the production of solar equipment , the prospects for expansion of domestic pv solar manufacturing may be limited . modern photovoltaic technology traces its roots back to 19 th - century breakthroughs by scientists from europe and the united states . in 1839 , a french physicist , alexandre edmond becquerel , discovered the photovoltaic effect , and in 1883 , an american inventor , charles fritts , made the first primitive solar cell . progress in modern solar cell manufacturing began in the 1940s and 1950s when russell ohl discovered that a rod of silicon with impurities created an electric voltage when illuminated and three scientists at bell laboratories in new jersey ( daryl chapin , calvin fuller , and gerald pearson ) developed the first commercial photovoltaic cell . further advancing pv cell manufacturing was the space race of the 1960s , with the competition between the united states and the former soviet union driving demand for solar cells , which were , and still are , used to power some spacecraft and satellites . the first generation of photovoltaic manufacturing firms included such names as hoffman electronics , heliotek , rca , international rectifier , and texas instruments . the technology , however , remained too expensive for other uses , and the market remained very small .