§§1801 et seq. ) added during the 1996 reauthorization and amended in 2006 , included specific requirements to end overfishing and to rebuild overfished stocks . to implement these requirements , the msfcma directed the national marine fisheries service ( nmfs ) ( also referred to as noaa fisheries ) within the national oceanic and atmospheric administration ( noaa ) of the u.s. department of commerce to develop regulations by 2008 to provide guidance for establishing annual catch limits ( acls ) and related biological benchmarks . by the end of 2011 , a requirement to implement acls and end overfishing in all federally managed fisheries came into effect . for fish stocks at low levels of abundance , stock rebuilding within a 10-year time frame ( with some exceptions ) is also required . many commercial fishermen question whether the current provisions of the msfcma and their implementation by nmfs adequately reflect the complexities and related uncertainties associated with the management of fish stocks . many commercial fishermen believe they are being held to an impossibly high standard because fishing mortality is only one of many factors that affect stock abundance . other factors , including environmental conditions and fish habitat degradation , are often beyond managers' and fishermen's control . furthermore , they assert that assessments of fish stocks are often flawed or incomplete because of inadequate data and simplistic population models . many fishermen explain that rebuilding schedules and population benchmarks are set on a strict timetable and at specific levels , but the outcomes of theses management measures are subject to a high level of uncertainty . from their perspective , the fishing industry is sometimes left to endure the economic and social consequences of lower revenues and fewer fishing opportunities when harvest restrictions are implemented to satisfy msfcma rebuilding requirements . environmentalists counter that overfishing and previous management failures illustrate the need to maintain established fish stock rebuilding schedules . they maintain that the lack of progress preceding the recent changes to the msfcma in 2006 was due to the failure of many fishery management plans to reduce exploitation sufficiently to end overfishing . they assert that absent stringent limits for rebuilding , managers too often put off the short - term reduction in catch necessary for stocks to recover . they emphasize that relatively short - term sacrifices associated with rebuilding will result in long - term economic gains to recreational and commercial fishermen . several different bills related to overfishing and stock rebuilding have been introduced during the 112 th congress . 3061 and s. 238 would require preparation of fishery economic impact statements to evaluate whether fishery management plans provide for the sustained participation of fishing communities . 3061 , and s. 632 include in part , identical language which would increase management flexibility when rebuilding fish stocks . fishermen assert that stock rebuilding timeframes and population benchmarks are set at specific levels , but the outcomes of these management measures are subject to many factors outside of managers' control . fish populations vary for many reasons that are often beyond the immediate control of fishermen and managers such as the condition of fish habitat , ecosystem shifts , and global climate change .