opponents of the pipeline , however , are critical of this impact assessment . the results of an lca can be used to evaluate the ghg emissions intensity of various stages of the fuel's life cycle , as well as to compare the emissions intensity of one type of fuel or method of production to another . ghg emissions profiles modeled by most lcas are based on a set of boundaries commonly referred to as "cradle - to - grave," or , in the case of transportation fuels such as petroleum , "well - to - wheels" ( wtw ) . table 3 summarizes the ghg emissions impacts of the various stages of canadian oil sands production and presents examples of mitigation strategies that have been offered by industry , academia , and other stakeholders . these uncertainties often make comparing results across resources or production methods problematic . hence , the usefulness of lca as an analytical tool for policy makers may lie less in its capacity to generate comparative rankings , or "scores," between one source and another , and more in its ability to highlight "areas of concern," or "hot spots," in the production of a given hydrocarbon fuel . in this way , lca can serve to direct policy makers' attention to those areas in resource development that present the greatest challenges to ghg emissions control , and hence , the biggest potential benefits if adequately managed . many forecasters identify petroleum products refined from canadian oil sands as one possible solution . canadian oil sands account for about 54% of canada's total crude oil production , and that number is expected to rise from its current level of 1.9 million barrels per day ( mbd ) in 2013 to 4.8 mbd by 2030 . further , the infrastructure to produce , upgrade , refine , and transport the resource from canadian oil sands reserves to the united states is in place , and additional infrastructure projects — such as the keystone xl pipeline — have been proposed . increased production from canadian oil sands , however , is not without controversy , as many have expressed concern over the potential environmental impacts . these impacts may include increased water and natural gas use , disturbance of mined land , effects on wildlife and water quality , trans - boundary air pollution , and emissions of greenhouse gases ( ghg ) during extraction and processing . a number of key studies in recent literature have expressed findings that ghg emissions per unit of energy produced from canadian oil sands crudes are higher than those of other crudes imported , refined , and consumed in the united states . while ghg emissions and other air quality issues originating in the upstream sectors of canada's petroleum industry may not directly impact u.s. national emissions inventories or u.s. ghg reporting per se , many environmental stakeholders and policy makers have noted that the increased use of more emission - intensive resources in the united states may have negative consequences for both u.s. and global energy and environmental policy .