his wife and two children are with him . jerome cohen , the new york university legal scholar , says that chen plans to study comparative law , international law , anglo - american law , and english , and to allocate time for "political activity. the last of the u.s. embassy personnel at the hospital leaves later that evening , reportedly in order to give chen and his family privacy . secretary of state hillary rodham clinton issues a statement saying she is pleased that the u.s. government was able "to facilitate chen guangcheng's stay and departure from the u.s. embassy in a way that reflected his choices and our values. she also references chinese government commitments to chen , including giving him "the opportunity to pursue higher education in a safe environment. chinese foreign ministry spokesman liu weimin says china "expresses strong dissatisfaction" at the "abnormal means" by which the u.s. embassy took chen into the embassy compound , accusing the united states of "interference in china's internal affairs. liu demands that the u.s. apologize , carry out a "thorough" investigation of the incident , "hold relevant people accountable," and take steps to ensure that such an incident does not happen again . two senior state department officials brief the foreign media on the set of understandings that led to chen's exit from the embassy , including the chinese government's agreement to allow chen to relocate from shandong province and enroll in a chinese law school . after talking to his wife , friends , and associates , chen changes his mind about staying in china and requests to travel to the united states . may 3 , 2012 opening day of the u.s. - china strategic & economic dialogue in beijing . chinese government officials interview chen at the hospital about his allegations of mistreatment at the hands of local officials in shandong province . at a meeting with the chinese foreign ministry's cui tiankai , u.s. officials suggest that chen should travel to the united states . referring to the chen case , chinese foreign ministry spokesman liu weimin accuses the united states of "confusing public opinion" and "covering up by all means its responsibility for the incident," and again calls for a u.s. apology , a u.s. investigation of the incident , and a "promise to prevent similar incidents. the foreign correspondents club of china reports that some of its members have had their press credentials confiscated for entering the chaoyang hospital grounds to try to report on chen's stay there . the congressional executive commission on china holds a hearing entitled "recent developments and history of the chen guangcheng case. and it is not something that either we or anyone anticipates occurring again. to discourage such a scenario , china has allowed only very limited coverage of the case in its domestic media and blocked related search terms on news and social media sites . however , during the first two weeks of the story , chen's friends provided updates about his status and their own situations through twitter and other social media , while the comment sections of some official news sites reportedly were flooded with supportive expressions for chen and ambassador locke .