units. as required by ceq regulations , rural development has also promulgated a list of extraordinary circumstances in which an action that would otherwise qualify for a ce may have to undergo further nepa review because the action may have a significant environmental effect . these circumstances may be present when actions "would be located within , or in other cases , potentially affect" certain wetlands ; wild or scenic rivers ; critical habitats or endangered / threatened species ; sole source aquifer recharge areas ; and state water quality standards , among other natural or historical resources . rural development uses form rd 1940-22 when it documents its use of a ce . the form provides a checklist with a column of land uses and environmental resources on the left side . the preparer must indicate whether each of these uses or resources is "present within the site ( s ) of the proposed action," within the action's "area of environmental impact," or is "affected by the proposed action. completion of the checklist determines whether extraordinary circumstances exist , and thus whether a ce may be used . at the bottom of the form , the preparer must certify that [t]his proposal meets , in terms of its size and components , the criteria for a categorical exclusion as defined in section 1940.310 and 1940.317 . as indicated in [the checklist above] , the proposal does not affect any important land uses or environmental resources that would subject it to disqualification as a categorical exclusion . finally , the proposal is neither a phase nor segment of a project which when viewed in its entirety would not meet the requirements of a categorical exclusion per section 1940.317 ( d ) . on march 18 , 2012 , a news article appeared suggesting that rural development was reconsidering the use of a ce for loans made for the purchase of homes on properties leased for drilling . the article stated that the agency might subject these loans to more detailed nepa environmental review in part because of the potential environmental impact of hydraulic fracturing on properties with drilling leases . however , on march 21 , 2012 , rural development issued an administrative notice stating that it would continue to use a ce for the provision of "financial assistance for the purchase of a single family dwelling" on properties with drilling leases . the notice stated that "[t]he presence of gas leases on a property alone does not constitute any of the special circumstances listed in [rd instruction 1940.310 , which refers to 1940.317,] or the policy considerations contained in rd instructions 1940.303 through 1940.305. . in other words , according to rural development , loans made to facilitate the purchase of homes on properties leased for drilling may continue to fit within a ce . additionally , it appears that the agency does not consider the existence of drilling leases on a property alone to implicate any of the extraordinary circumstances that would prevent the use of a ce as listed in sections 310 or 317 of the agency's environmental program . hydraulic fracturing has been controversial for its potential effects on the environment .