aftermath . on august 30 , 2013 , the ninth circuit in turn vacated the decision of the district court and remanded to that court for proceedings consistent with the supreme court's opinion . in the remand order , the circuit noted that the supreme court expressly disavowed ruling on its holding that channeled stormwater runoff constitutes a cwa "point source," and therefore , in the circuit's view , left it intact . this may be important to the district court's ruling if that court turns its attention to the amended stormwater rule now in effect ( see " epa's response " below ) . a joint motion to dismiss has been filed by the defendants , but has not yet been ruled on . according to data reported by states to epa , silviculture and related activities , including forest and logging roads , are among the top 12 probable sources of impairment for rivers , streams , and coastal shorelines in the united states . improperly designed or maintained forest roads can affect watershed integrity through three primary mechanisms . first , they can intercept water falling as rainfall directly on road surfaces as well as subsurface water moving underground . second , they can concentrate flow on the road surface and in adjacent ditches and channels . and third , they can divert surface and subsurface water from unaltered flow paths . impacts from these processes will vary and often may be negligible , but they can include increased loading of sediment , suspended solids , and turbidity ; altered streamflow ; pollution from chemicals associated with forest roads ; and impaired aquatic habitat . the majority of such impacts may be attributed to a relatively small subset of forest roads and often a small portion of those roads , according to epa . since decker affirmed epa's reading of a version of the phase i stormwater regulations no longer in effect , no agency response will be necessary . in any event , the rule as amended in november 2012 clarifies that stormwater discharges from logging roads do not constitute stormwater discharges "associated with industrial activity" and , accordingly , that a npdes permit is not required . for the purpose of assessing whether stormwater discharges are "associated with industrial activity," the only facilities that are industrial , as pertinent here , are rock crushing , gravel washing , log sorting , and log storage . notwithstanding , a few legal observations about the supreme court ruling can be made . first , since decker affirmed epa's interpretation of its rule to exempt channeled logging road runoff from npdes permit requirements , the amended rule's clearer statement of that same exemption is unlikely to offer any fresh ground for judicial challenge . as noted above , however , a petition for review of the amended rule has been filed . second , the supreme court's approval of a citizen suit here effectively allowed the use of a citizen suit to challenge epa's interpretation of a regulation promulgated 36 years ago . arguably , this opens the door for citizen - suit challenges to other long - standing agency regulations in the right circumstances .