it competes with the prd in southern mexico . the national action party ( pan ) is a socially conservative , pro - business party that was formed in 1939 by catholic activists , professionals , and entrepreneurs who disagreed with the pri's intervention in the economy and its hierarchical and secularist tendencies . the tribunal's ruling is final and cannot be appealed . some members of congress may be concerned that the leadership changes resulting from the july 1 , 2012 , mexican elections will significantly impact u.s. - mexican relations , particularly now that the party controlling the presidency has changed . however , few analysts are predicting that the transition from pan to pri rule will result in any seismic shifts in bilateral relations . throughout the campaign , enrique peña nieto sought to reassure u.s. policy makers that a pri administration would continue to combat organized crime , combat corruption , and govern democratically . peña nieto also expressed support for increased bilateral and trilateral ( with canada ) economic cooperation . since the elections , president - elect peña nieto has said that he is committed to "having an intense , close relationship of effective [security] collaboration measured by results" with the united states . president obama has congratulated peña nieto on his victory and assistant secretary of state for western hemisphere affairs roberta jacobson has said that u.s. officials "look forward to working with him" after he takes office . during the campaign , enrique peña nieto pledged to continue the fight against organized crime and said that maintaining some form of military involvement in antidrug operations will be necessary . he also vowed , however , to focus more on reducing violent crime in mexico than on seizing drugs or arresting kingpins . peña nieto said he would increase the size of mexico's federal police , create a national gendarmerie comprised of some military forces currently engaged in fighting organized crime that will be under civilian control , and establish 32 unified state police forces . he also announced that general oscar naranjo , former head of the colombian national police , would serve as one of his security advisors . naranjo has reportedly recommended adopting a two - pronged strategy of using elite units of military and police forces to go after top dto leaders ( as calderón has done ) , while focusing the rest of law enforcement efforts on reducing violence and street crime in six of the country's most violent cities . president - elect peña nieto is likely to pursue violence reduction as a key metric of the success of his government's security strategy , a goal that u.s. officials have said is "extremely logical. in his platform , peña nieto pledged to develop a national strategy to reduce violence that will contain binding commitments for all levels of government , along with civil society . he also proposed focusing anticrime efforts and socioeconomic programs in the most violent cities . while some members of congress have expressed concerns about how peña nieto's victory may impact u.s. - mexican security cooperation , obama administration officials have said that they expect to continue "strong counter - narcotics cooperation with the new president.