1201 et seq. ) the nalc has contended that the usps's use of cds carriers instead of usps mail carriers "violates the spirit of the nation's basic postal law. using contractors , the union has said , circumvents the collective bargaining process and opens the door for the usps to replace all career mail carriers with contractors . 91-375 ; 84 stat . hcr contracts come in three subtypes . "transportation" contracts have private "suppliers" transport mail between postal facilities . "combination" contracts require suppliers to make a small number of mail deliveries in the course of transporting mail between the usps's facilities . "contract delivery service" ( cds ) contracts compensate suppliers for collecting and delivering mail in rural areas . this latter subtype of contract became the focus of controversy in 2007 . in november 2010 , the nrlca - usps collective bargaining agreement expired . a year later , the nalc - usps contract expired . whether the mail contracting mous remain in force is unclear . the usps and the two unions had negotiations and entered mediation . unable to settle their differences , the parties went to binding arbitration . the usps and the nrlca completed binding arbitration in july 2012 . the previous collective bargaining agreement's language regarding the hiring of private contractors to deliver mail was not altered , leaving it unclear whether the usps and nrlca have come to a working agreement on this particular issue . the usps and the nalc entered binding arbitration in june 2012 . arbitration of the usps - nalc agreement likely will be completed in the coming months . the usps , nalc , and nrlca may settle the matter through arbitration and ensuing memoranda of understanding . in the event that the use of contractors cannot be settled through the parties themselves , there are at least two broad perspectives that might be taken on the situation . first , it might be argued that congress should take no action . historically , congress has not enacted specific policies concerning the extent of the usps's use of contractors to deliver mail . it has left the matter to be decided by the postal service and its letter carrier unions through collective bargaining and the grievance process . congress may continue this practice , reasoning that the usps has legitimate grounds to pursue cost - savings via the use of contractors . indeed , it might be further contended that the use of contractors to deliver mail is in keeping with long - time usps practices . the postal reorganization act of 1970 ( pra ; p.l . 725 ) replaced the u.s. post office department with the usps , an independent establishment of the executive branch ( 39 u.s.c . the pra requires the usps to "maintain an efficient system of collection , sorting , and delivery of the mail nationwide" ( 39 u.s.c . 403 ( b ) ( 1 ) ) . to this end , the pra provides the usps with considerable discretion over its operations . 5005 authorizes the usps to "obtain mail transportation service ... by contract from any person or carrier for surface and water transportation under such terms and conditions as it deems appropriate.