the authors maintain that h.r . 3581 has "the four flaws," alleged negative characteristics that are identified below . in the president's budget for fy2013 , the office of management and budget selected "fair value budgeting for credit programs" as a topic for in - depth analysis . omb compared and contrasted the current cost to the government with fair value budgeting , which would reflect social costs . omb found that the current fcra method for estimating cost provides a different measure of cost than the fair value method , which takes different risks and costs into account . to calculate fair value , cash flows unadjusted for expected losses would be discounted with a market rate that reflects the characters of the cash flows of the loan or loan guarantee ( comparable market rate ) , instead of treasury rates . the comparable market rate would differ from the maturity - matched treasury rate in most cases and vary across credit programs , and even across individual loans and guarantees in some cases . fair value is conceptually appealing in that it reflects closely the preferences of market participants . it is debatable , however , whether fair value estimates for credit programs also represent the preferences of taxpayers and the society as a whole . in addition to this conceptual issue , several practical and implementation issues would need to be carefully considered in evaluating fair value proposals . key issues include: how to develop accurate estimation methods ; comparability of cost estimates across programs ; and whether agencies would be able to implement fair value , particularly given limited administrative resources . a fair value proposal that does not address these conceptual and practical issues would probably fail to improve resource allocation and could even be counter - productive . omb stated that the market interest rate on a private loan depends on seven factors , with only the first two of the following being reflected in the treasury rate . these seven factors were identified by omb: time preference ( present versus future , included in fcra cost estimate ) expected loss from default ( included in fcra cost estimate ) compensation for uncertain returns — uncertainty premium compensation for lower liquidity — liquidity premium cost of administering the loan ( this cost is not included in an fcra cost estimate but is relevant to taxpayers . it is currently recorded on a cash basis. ) tax rate on interest income contract terms determining lenders' and borrowers' right . in march 2012 , cbo released an issue brief titled fair - value accounting for federal credit programs . administrative expenses were reported as outlays . in a given fiscal year , the budgetary cost of a loan program , not the individual loans , was its net cash flow . this equaled new loans made plus any administrative expenses associated with these loans ( rarely recognized in the loan accounts ) less any loan fees , repayments of principal , and payments of interest . furthermore , the two proposals differed in their methods of determining the value of subsidy costs . the administration proposed to sell most loans on private credit markets .