they are motivated by self interest and profit . one estimate has placed the annual cost of cybercrime to adults in 24 countries across the globe at $113 billion . in addition to the economic impact , cybercrimes can have public health and national security consequences , among others . u.s. officials face the challenging task of identifying the perpetrators of malicious cyber incidents in which victim and criminal can be far removed from one another . the person or persons behind an incident can range from lone actors to expansive criminal networks or even nation states . this challenge of actor attribution is further compounded by the anonymity afforded by the digital realm . it can sometimes be difficult to determine the actor's motivation — is the criminal driven by greed or glory in the form of recognition among fellow criminals in the cyber world , or does the criminal have broader ideological motives ? finding the answers to these questions is key to distinguishing between cybercrimes and other cyber threats such as cyber attacks , cyber espionage , and cyber warfare . relevant distinctions exist between these various malicious activities in the cyber domain just as lines have been drawn between their real world counterparts . for over three decades , congress has been concerned about cybercrime and its related threats . today , these concerns often arise among a larger discussion surrounding the federal government's role in ensuring cyber security . this report discusses the concept of cybercrime and related cyber threats such as cyber espionage and cyber warfare . while it touches on these related threats , this report only does so in the context of framing the discussion of cybercrime . it questions whether — and under what circumstances — clear distinctions between the various threats should be delineated . the report also outlines how current federal strategies may address cybercrime . it raises issues surrounding the measurement and tracking of cybercrime . throughout , it discusses whether a clearer understanding of what constitutes cybercrime as well as its prevalence and harm could better equip policy makers to debate the sufficiency of federal law enforcement resources available to counter cybercrime and to conduct oversight in this arena . a singular , agreed - upon definition of cybercrime does not exist . various definitions have been offered by industry experts and scholars , and several have been formulated within the federal government . definitions have varied in their levels of specificity and breadth . for instance , one of the largest computer security companies , symantec corporation , defines cybercrime as "any crime that is committed using a computer or network , or hardware device. irrespective of the definition , conceptualizing cybercrime involves a number of key elements and questions , including where do the criminal acts exist in the real and digital worlds ( and what technologies are involved ) , why are malicious activities initiated , and who is involved in carrying out the malicious acts ? in the sections below , the questions of where , why , and who are discussed as they relate to cybercrime . this is followed by a discussion of government definitions of cybercrime and a debate on whether or when a common definition of cybercrime may be useful .