appendix a . planned nsc , opc , and frc procurement quantities this appendix provides further discussion on the issue of the coast guard's planned nsc , opc , and frc procurement quantities . overview the coast guard's program of record for nscs , opcs , and frcs includes only about 61% as many cutters as the coast guard calculated in 2011 would be needed to fully perform its projected future missions . the coast guard's planned force levels for nscs , opcs , and frcs have remained unchanged since 2004 . in contrast , the navy since 2004 has adjusted its ship force - level goals eight times in response to changing strategic and budgetary circumstances . although the coast guard's strategic situation and resulting mission demands may not have changed as much as the navy's have since 2004 , the coast guard's budgetary circumstances may have changed since 2004 . funding levels in pc&i account this appendix provides background information on funding levels in the coast guard's procurement , construction , and improvements ( pc&i ) account . overview as shown in table b - 1 , the fy2013 budget submission programmed an average of about $1.5 billion per year in the pc&i account . as also shown in the table , the fy2014-fy2016 budget submissions reduced that figure to between $1 billion and $1.2 billion per year . the coast guard has testified that funding the pc&i account at a level of about $1 billion to $1.2 billion per year would make it difficult to fund various coast guard acquisition projects , including a new polar icebreaker and improvements to coast guard shore installations . coast guard plans call for procuring opcs at an eventual rate of two per year . if each opc costs roughly $400 million , procuring two opcs per year in an pc&i account of about $1 billion to $1.2 billion per year , as programmed under the fy2014-fy2016 budget submissions , would leave about $200 million to $400 million per year for all other pc&i - funded programs . since 2017 , coast guard officials have been stating more regularly what they stated only infrequently in earlier years: that executing the coast guard's various acquisition programs fully and on a timely basis would require the pc&i account to be funded in coming years at a level of about $2 billion per year . statements from coast guard officials on this issue in past years have sometimes put this figure as high as about $2.5 billion per year . using past pc&i funding levels as a guide for future pc&i funding levels in assessing future funding levels for executive branch agencies , a common practice is to assume or predict that the figure in coming years will likely be close to where it has been in previous years . while this method can be of analytical and planning value , for an agency like the coast guard , which goes through periods with less acquisition of major platforms and periods with more acquisition of major platforms , this approach might not always be the best approach , at least for the pc&i account .