individual credit unions are owned by their membership . individual members are taxed on their dividends . credit union charters are granted by federal or state governments on the basis of a "common bond. this requirement determines the "field of membership," and it is unique among depository financial institutions . there are three types of charters: ( 1 ) a single common bond ( occupation or association based ) ; ( 2 ) multiple common bond ( more than one group each having a common bond of occupation or association ) ; and ( 3 ) a community - based ( geographically defined ) common bond . the members of a credit union elect a board of directors from their institution's membership ( one member , one vote ) . members' savings are referred to as "shares" and earn dividends instead of interest . credit union loan and investment powers are more restricted than those of commercial banks . credit unions can only make loans to their members , to other credit unions , and to credit union organizations . the investment authority of federal credit unions is limited by statute to loans , government securities , deposits in other financial institutions , and certain other limited investments . the national credit union administration ( ncua ) , an independent federal agency , is the federal regulator for credit unions . the national credit union share insurance fund ( ncusif ) is the federal deposit insurance fund for credit unions . the ncua manages the ncusif for the credit union industry . as of december 31 , 2011 , there were 7,094 federally insured credit unions ; these federally insured institutions held assets totaling $961.8 billion . this next section presents some policy issues related to legislation in the 112 th congress . the legislation would increase the lending authority of credit unions , but it does not require mbls to meet the definitions of a small business - loan or of a small business . an informal analysis presented in this report asks whether the differences in regulatory requirements for credit unions relative to community banks could translate into greater risks to the stability of the financial system after passage of the legislation . finally , recent studies pertaining to the current supply relative to demand for small business credit are reviewed to assess whether credit shortages exist . although "small business lending" appears in the bills' titles , the legislation does not contain any firm or loan size restrictions . the small business administration ( sba ) often uses the federal deposit insurance corporation's ( fdic ) definition of a small business loan as either a commercial real estate ( cre ) or commercial and industrial ( c&i ) loan of $1 million or less . the sba also defines a small business on an industry - by - industry basis , with most manufacturing and mining firms deemed small if they have fewer than 500 employees . the federal reserve defines a small firm as one having total annual sales of less than $50 million . if the legislation is enacted as currently written , credit unions would be able to make loans ( to their members ) that meet these definitions .