figure 1 . map of haiti source: map resources . adapted by crs . haiti shares the island of hispaniola with the dominican republic ; haiti occupies the western third of the island . since the fall of the duvalier dictatorship in 1986 , haiti has struggled to overcome its centuries - long legacy of authoritarianism , extreme poverty , and underdevelopment . while significant progress has been made in improving governance , democratic institutions remain weak . poverty remains massive and deep , and economic disparity is wide . in proximity to the united states , and with such a chronically unstable political environment and fragile economy , haiti has been a constant policy issue for the united states . armed rebellion and diminished international support for aristide led him to flee into exile in february 2004 . an international force authorized by the u.n. arrived shortly after his departure , and was replaced by minustah in june 2004 . minustah worked closely with the interim government from 2004 to 2006 , when , after several delays , elections were held . the mission continued to work closely with the préval administration . although some haitians call for the removal of foreign troops , former president préval supported the mission's presence , saying that he would "not adopt a falsely nationalist position," and that minustah should stay until haiti is ready to assume responsibility for security . more recently , popular protests have called for minustah's removal because of allegations of its role in introducing cholera to the country , and sexual abuse by some of its forces . although critical of some aspects of minustah , president martelly nonetheless advocates extending minustah's term to help maintain stability and to assist in the reconstruction effort . he has called for its eventual replacement with a revived haitian army . the u.n. security council and international donors call instead for a continued strengthening of the haitian national police . minustah's mandate includes three basic components: ( 1 ) to help create a secure and stable environment ; ( 2 ) to support the political process by fostering effective democratic governance and institutional development , supporting government efforts to promote national dialogue and reconciliation and to organize elections ; and ( 3 ) to support government and nongovernmental efforts to promote and protect human rights , as well as to monitor and report on the human rights situation . minustah has played a key role in emergency responses to natural disasters , including facilitating the delivery of emergency humanitarian assistance . as part of its work , the mission has also conducted campaigns to combat gangs and drug trafficking with the haitian police . reduction of minustah troops . minustah's current authorization runs through october 15 , 2015 . the mission's budget for this year ( july 1 , 2014-june 30 , 2015 ) is about $500 million . the u.n. has been gradually reducing minustah's number of troops since 2012 . in october 2014 the security council passed a resolution that will reduce military personnel by more than half , to a maximum of 2,370 military personnel .