may cause cancer . the federal agency for toxic substances and disease registry ( atsdr ) concurs and adds that exposure may lead to: neurological effects , and increased risk of asthma and / or allergy … in humans breathing 0.1 to 0.5 [parts formaldehyde per million parts of air ( ppm ) ] . eczema and changes in lung function have been observed at 0.6 to 1.9 ppm . decreased body weight , gastrointestinal ulcers , and liver and kidney damage were observed in animals orally exposed to 50 – 100 mg / kg / day formaldehyde . the 12 th report on carcinogens ( roc ) , issued by the u.s. department of health and human services' ( hhs ) national toxicology program ( ntp ) in june 2011 changed the classification of formaldehyde from "reasonably anticipated to be a human carcinogen" to "known to be a human carcinogen," based on its criterion that there is "sufficient evidence of carcinogenicity from studies in humans , which indicates a causal relationship between exposure to the agent , substance , or mixture , and human cancer. this roc listing does not necessarily mean that formaldehyde will cause an exposed individual to develop cancer ; rather , it means that at some sufficient level of exposure to formaldehyde some humans will develop cancer . the world health organization's international agency for research on cancer ( iarc ) listed formaldehyde as a carcinogen in 2006 . osha recognizes the iarc list of carcinogens as well as the ntp roc list for the purposes of its hazard communication standard , discussed below . osha formaldehyde standards workers' exposure to formaldehyde in general industries as well as shipyard employment and construction is regulated at the federal level and is addressed in osha standards or equivalent regulations in osha - approved state plans . osha has issued rules on formaldehyde exposure limits , protective equipment , and cancer warning labels for products that contain formaldehyde . the agency also notes that "[s]hort - term exposure to formaldehyde can be fatal," and that "[l]ong - term exposure to low levels of formaldehyde may cause respiratory difficulty , eczema , and sensitization. osha's formaldehyde standard "applies to all occupational exposures to formaldehyde , i.e . there is evidence that some people can develop a sensitivity to formaldehyde . it has also been shown to cause cancer in animals and may cause cancer in humans . health effects include eye , nose , and throat irritation ; wheezing and coughing ; fatigue ; skin rash ; severe allergic reactions . from formaldehyde gas , its solutions , and materials that release formaldehyde. osha's formaldehyde standard states that "[t]he permissible exposure limit ( pel ) for formaldehyde in the workplace is 0.75 parts formaldehyde per million parts of air ( 0.75 ppm ) measured as an 8-hour time - weighted average. the standard also has short - term exposure limits of 2 ppm per 15-minute time period and sets a level at which "increased industrial hygiene monitoring and initiation of worker medical surveillance" is triggered . this issue is discussed further in the appendix . in the absence of fda requirements regarding adverse event reporting , the cosmetic industry has made efforts to self - regulate .