appendix a . infrastructure . user fees will be used to "reduce the ratio of review staff to front line supervisors in the pre - market review program. fda will enhance and supplement scientific review capacity by hiring reviewers and using external experts to assist with device application review . fda will obtain streamlined hiring authority and work with industry to benchmark best practices for employee retention via financial and non - financial means . user fees will supplement ( 1 ) management training ; ( 2 ) mdufa iii training for all staff ; ( 3 ) reviewer certification program for new cdrh reviewers ; and ( 4 ) specialized training to provide continuous learning for all staff . fda will improve its it system to allow real - time status information on submissions . independent assessment of review process management . by the end of the second quarter of fy2013 , fda will hire a consultant to assess the device application review process . within six months of award of the contract , a report on recommendations likely to have a significant impact on review time will be published . the final report will be published within one year of contract award date . fda will publish a corrective action and implementation plan within six months of receipt of each report . the consultant will evaluate fda's implementation and publish a report no later than february 1 , 2016 . performance reports . as was the case in mdufa ii , fda will meet with industry on a quarterly basis to present data and discuss progress in meeting goals . the agreement requires more detailed information to be covered in quarterly reports by cdrh and cber ; specifically , elements to be included are listed for 510 ( k ) s , pmas , pre - submissions , and investigational device exemptions ( ides ) . cdrh reports quarterly and cber reports annually on 11 additional data points . fda reports annually on nine other topics . discretionary waiver . fda will grant discretionary fee waivers or reduced fees "in the interest of public health. authority for the waiver and reduced fees expires at the end of mdufa iii . according to the fda presentation at the march 28 , 2012 , public meeting , the fee waiver is intended for laboratory developed test ( ldt ) manufacturers . in addition to mdufa iii , congress , in fdasia , also reauthorized pdufa and included new authorities for a generic drug user fee act and a biosimilars user fee act . these three provisions were included with mdufa iii along with a variety of related and unrelated issues in the final legislative package , the fda safety and innovation act ( fdasia , p.l . 112-144 ) , which became law on july 9 , 2012 . because of the importance of user fees to fda's budget , pdufa and mdufa are considered to be "must pass" legislation , and congress has often in the past included language to address a range of other concerns .