appendix a . total and mexico - born population , by state , 1990 , 2000 , and 2010 appendix b . immigrant visas , fy2000 – fy2009 appendix c. nonimmigrant visas issued , selected types , fy2000-fy200 . does mexico support u.s. immigration policy goals ? should the united states and mexico pursue more collaborative approaches to certain immigration issues ? the report also examines a fifth , related policy issue: efforts to reduce emigration pressures within mexico . viewing the immigration debate from a u.s. - mexico perspective raises a number of questions about each of these issues , including about mexico's role in shaping u.s. migration flows and steps mexico has taken and could take to reduce unauthorized migration . within each of these categories , mexicans represent the largest group of foreign born in the united states . this section describes how social , economic , and demographic factors in mexico and the united states along with migration - related policies in both countries have produced four phases in the regional migration system: limited seasonal flows prior to world war ii , the bracero temporary worker program from 1942 to 1964 , the emergence of a predominantly illegal system from 1965 through the 1980s , and the consolidation of that system along with increased family - based immigration since the 1990s . while seasonal migration by mexican agricultural workers dates back to the 19 th century — and while most of california , arizona , new mexico , texas , nevada , colorado , and utah once belonged to spain and later mexico — large - scale permanent immigration from mexico to the united states is a recent phenomenon , as figure 3 illustrates . mexican lpr immigrants exceeded 1 million in a decade for the first time in the 1980s ( the darker bars in figure 3 ) and mexicans accounted for more than 15% of total lpr inflows for the first time in the 1990s ( the line in figure 3 ) . the lighter bars in figure 3 depict u.s. census data on the total mexican - born population living in the united states , which include legal immigrants , temporary nonimmigrants , and unauthorized migrants . as the figure illustrates , fewer than 1 million mexicans lived in the united states as recently as 1970 . all of these mexican migration and population trends increased markedly beginning around the 1970s , however , with legal immigration ( lpr inflows ) and the total mexico - born population living in the united states both roughly doubling during each decade beginning in 1970 . even as growth rates slowed after 2000 , the mexico - born population in the united states climbed to 11.5 million people by 2009 . immigration policy has been a subject of congressional concern over many decades . since 2001 , congress has considered a range of measures to strengthen border security and migration control , changes to the lpr and nonimmigrant visa systems , and proposals to legalize certain unauthorized aliens , among other issues .