postal service . the fslmrs seeks to prevent labor - management disputes that could burden or obstruct federal government operations . it grants certain rights to both workers and employers , seeks to prevent practices that could frustrate a peaceful worker - employer relationship , and provides mechanisms for workers and employers to resolve disputes . to achieve these goals , the fslmrs regulates the labor - management relationship between workers and employers in most federal agencies . it provides parties with a standard process for choosing a union to act as an employee representative in the collective bargaining process and details which individuals can participate in the process . once a union is selected , the fslmrs governs which subjects workers and unions can negotiate . the fsmlrs also regulates how workers , employers , and unions should behave towards each other during the union selection and collective bargaining processes and prohibits certain unfair actions . the federal labor relations authority ( flra ) administers and enforces the fslmrs . the flra has the authority to investigate and adjudicate representation disputes , ulp complaints , and contract disputes . the federal mediation and conciliation service ( fmcs ) is an independent agency that provides voluntary mediation services to parties who cannot resolve a bargaining dispute . the federal service impasses panel ( fsip ) is an entity within the flra that provides additional assistance in resolving disputes if fmcs services cannot resolve the dispute or if the parties specifically request fsip's services . the fslmrs regulates collective bargaining rights and duties for most federal agencies , employees , and unions . the preliminary sections of the fslmrs define "employer," "employee," and "labor organization. state and local laws govern state and local public employees . the fslmrs applies to most federal executive agencies , along with the library of congress , the government printing office , and the smithsonian institution . several agencies are specifically excluded from the statute's coverage . those excluded agencies are the government accountability office , the federal bureau of investigation , the central intelligence agency , the national security agency , the tennessee valley authority , the federal labor relations authority , the federal impasses panel , and the u.s. secret service . the president has the power to unilaterally exclude an agency or subdivision from coverage under the fslmrs if he determines the entity's "primary function" is "intelligence , counterintelligence , investigative , or national security work" and that the provisions of the statute cannot be applied "in a manner consistent with national security requirements and considerations. with this power , the president has excluded additional agencies and agency subdivisions , including the national nuclear security administration , the federal air marshall service , and several subdivisions of each branch of the military . an employee includes any individual employed in an agency or an individual who is no longer employed at an agency because of unfair labor practices and who has not obtained regular and substantially similar employment elsewhere .