termination premium . plans that terminate under certain distress terminations or in a pbgc initiated termination are liable for a termination premium of $1,250 per plan participant per year for three years . this premium was authorized in the deficit reduction act of 2005 ( p.l . 109-171 ) and was scheduled to expire december 31 , 2010 ; however , the pension protection act of 2006 ( ppa ; p.l . 109-280 ) made this premium permanent . in fy2013 , pbgc recorded $137 million in termination premiums . pbgc indicated that it does not expect to collect termination premiums and indicated that "the termination premium is reserved at 100% since no significant collection has yet been achieved. pbgc premium revenue in fy2013 was offset by $94 million in write - offs of interest , penalties , and termination premiums . erisa established the initial flat - rate premium of $1.00 per participant and the $2.60 flat - rate premium beginning in 1978 . the variable rate premium was first collected in 1988 and the termination premium was first collected in 2006 . since 2007 , the flat - rate premium has been adjusted annually for increases in the national average wage index , as determined by the social security administration . beginning in 2014 the variable - rate premium will also be adjusted for increases in the national wage index . the changes to the index were insufficient for an increase in the flat - rate premium in 2011 or 2012 . map - 21 set the premium rate for 2013 and 2014 and p.l . benefit payments are paid from the revolving funds . the assets of the revolving funds must be invested in u.s. government securities . the nonbudgetary trust fund receives the assets of pension plans that are trusteed by pbgc . the assets in this trust fund are invested according to an investment policy approved by pbgc board of governors and are currently invested 30% in equities and 70% in fixed - income securities . the investment income earned by the trust fund is not counted as part of the federal budget . some benefits are not fully guaranteed by pbgc . the flat - rate premium is a disadvantage to plans that offer smaller per - participant benefits . plan sponsors pay this premium regardless of the size of benefits an individual would receive . this structure favors plans that offer greater per - participant benefits , which pay a lower premium per dollar of benefits covered . for example , one of the factors in a typical db pension formula is the number of years of service a participant has with an employer . pension plans with participants that have longer job tenure would tend to have larger benefit obligations than pension plans with workers with shorter job tenure . the variable rate premium , which is calculated on the dollar amount of pension plan underfunding , takes into account the fact that plans terminated with larger amounts of underfunding would increase pbgc's deficit more than plans with smaller amounts of underfunding . however , two pension plans with equal amounts of underfunding could pose different risks to pbgc depending on the financial health of the plan sponsor .