dlt does not fund the telecommunications that connects that equipment . by contrast , the usf schools and libraries program supports the conduit or pipeline for communications using telecommunications services and / or the internet , and includes four categories of service: telecommunications services , internet access , internal connections , and basic maintenance of internal connections . similarly , the rural health care program provides discounts for rural non - profit health care providers by providing connectivity . finally , the rus programs are funded through annual appropriations and are subject to the annual congressional budget process . by contrast , usf is not funded through annual appropriations , but is funded by mandatory contributions from telecommunications carriers that provide interstate service . congress is seeking ways to best leverage federal programs to ensure that the goals of the national broadband plan — including universal broadband service by 2020 — are met to the greatest extent possible . with the september 30 , 2010 , conclusion of the american recovery and reinvestment act ( p.l . 111-5 ) broadband grant and loan awards , the rus broadband programs and the usf programs remain the only ongoing federal vehicles to provide financial assistance for rural broadband deployment . with both programs currently at a pivotal point , an issue for the 113 th congress is how best to shape those programs as they go forward . the statute authorizing the rural broadband loan and loan guarantee — section 601 of the rural electrification act of 1936 — was significantly modified in the 2008 farm bill , and is being addressed once more in the 2013 farm bill . typically a new farm bill is developed every five years , principally by the house committee on agriculture and the senate committee on agriculture , nutrition , and forestry . the appropriations committees in the house and senate both have a major role to play as well , as each considers annual appropriations for the rus broadband programs through the agriculture , rural development , food and drug administration , and related agencies appropriations act . meanwhile , the usf is undergoing a major and unprecedented transition through a series of reforms being implemented by the fcc . congress has largely adopted an oversight role and a "wait and see" posture with respect to the fcc's usf reforms . while numerous members have written letters to the fcc urging various modifications in the reform package , there was no comprehensive legislation introduced into the 112 th congress that addressed the fcc's usf reforms . the house energy and commerce committee , the senate commerce , science , and transportation committee , and the house committee on natural resources continue to assess the impact of the reforms , and the fcc's progress in their implementation .