crs reports covering different aspects of ccs are listed below . pipelines are the most common method for transporting co 2 in the united states . currently , approximately 4,100 miles of pipeline transport co 2 in the united states , predominately to oil and gas fields , where it is used for eor . transporting co 2 in pipelines is similar to transporting petroleum products like natural gas and oil ; it requires attention to design , monitoring for leaks , and protection against overpressure , especially in populated areas . using ships may be feasible when co 2 must be transported over large distances or overseas . fuel combustion accounts for 94% of all u.s. co 2 emissions . liquefied natural gas , propane , and butane are routinely shipped by marine tankers on a large scale worldwide . rail cars and trucks can also transport co 2 , but this mode would probably be uneconomical for large - scale ccs operations . costs for pipeline transport vary , depending on construction , operation and maintenance , and other factors , including right - of - way costs , regulatory fees , and more . the quantity and distance transported will mostly determine costs , which will also depend on whether the pipeline is onshore or offshore , the level of congestion along the route , and whether mountains , large rivers , or frozen ground are encountered . some of these include questions about pipeline network requirements , economic regulation , utility cost recovery , regulatory classification of co 2 itself , and pipeline safety . crs report rl34059 , the carbon cycle: implications for climate change and congress , by [author name scrubbed] . crs report rl34621 , capturing co2 from coal - fired power plants: challenges for a comprehensive strategy , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] . crs report rl34601 , community acceptance of carbon capture and sequestration infrastructure: siting challenges , by [author name scrubbed] . crs report rl34316 , pipelines for carbon dioxide ( co2 ) control: network needs and cost uncertainties , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] . electricity generation contributes the largest proportion of co 2 emissions compared to other types of fossil fuel use in the united states ( table 1 ) . electricity - generating plants are among the most likely initial candidates for capture , separation , and storage or reuse of co 2 because they are predominantly large , stationary , single - point sources of emissions . large industrial facilities , such as cement - manufacturing , ethanol , or hydrogen production plants , that produce large quantities of co 2 as part of the industrial process are also good candidates for co 2 capture and storage . such reductions would presumably reduce the likelihood of continued climate warming from greenhouse gases by slowing the rise in atmospheric concentrations of co 2 . to achieve the overarching goal of reducing the likelihood of continued climate warming would depend , in part , on how fast and how widely ccs could be deployed throughout the economy .