exports. critics assert that any economic benefits deriving from the agreement "will be relatively small and the regulatory costs could be significantly high — especially for the emerging market and developing countries engaged in the negotiations. the 17 th round of tpp negotiations were held in lima , ending on may 24 , 2013 . outstanding issues still being negotiated include services , government procurement , sanitary and phytosanitary standards , trade remedies , labor , and dispute settlements . the countries also discussed how to integrate japan into the next round of the negotiations in july . peru and the united states signed a debt - for - nature swap in 2008 that reduces peru's debt to the united states by more than $25 million over seven years , until 2015 . in exchange , peru agreed to use those funds to support grants to protect its tropical forests . peru and the united states held the fourth meetings of joint environmental commissions to review progress on implementation of the tpa environmental provisions , and of environmental cooperation activities under the u.s. - peru environmental cooperation agreement . the two countries reportedly made progress toward establishing an independent secretariat to consider enforcement matters as called for in the tpa , and said they would sign an agreement on the secretariat soon . the nationwide immunization program is completed . to allow the completion of one remaining anti - corruption program , the millennium challenge corporation ( mcc ) extended the end date until september 2012 . these activities were to be incorporated into usaid programs for the remainder of fy2012 and probably into fy2013 . a dominant theme in the relations between the two countries is the effort to stem the flow of illegal drugs , mostly cocaine , from peru to the united states . humala went on to win the presidency in 2011 . following his unsuccessful bid for the presidency in 2006 , ollanta humala moderated his stance five years later from an extreme leftist , populist , nationalist approach allied with venezuela's president hugo chavez , to a more center - leftist approach modeled after brazil's former president luiz inacio lula da silva . humala won the elections and was sworn in as peru's president in july 2011 for a five - year term . he defeated keiko fujimori , a conservative member of congress and daughter of disgraced former president alberto fujimori . in his first address as president , humala promised to maintain free - market policies while also working to narrow the wide economic distribution gap and eliminate the social exclusion of peru's poor , mostly indigenous population . he reiterated that commitment in a speech to the peruvian congress as he completed his first year in office . acknowledging that his government had not done all it pledged to do , humala said his goal was to cut peru's poverty by half , from 30% to 15% of the population by the end of his term in 2016 . at the end of 2012 , about a year and a half into humala's term , the poverty rate had dropped to 26% of the population . because of security concerns there , however , peru's eradication agency does not conduct operations there .