the litigation is ongoing . nrc's "waste confidence rule" arose from an effort to address the variety of concerns about spent fuel storage in a systematic and explicit manner , and to prevent them from being raised on a site - by - site basis as an issue during individual reactor licensing proceedings . partly in response to a legal challenge and subsequent remand , nrc issued in 1984 the first of three "waste confidence decisions" that included a series of specific findings , indicating generally that snf could be stored safely at least until an expected geologic repository began operation to accept wastes . in the first two waste confidence rules , nrc identified a specific date by which a permanent repository would be available and until which snf could be safely stored . nrc's most recent revision of the rule , however , "removed a date when a repository would be expected to be available for long - term disposal of spent fuel. nrc indicated that snf could be stored for at least 60 years beyond the end of the reactor operating life: the [nrc] has made a generic determination that , if necessary , spent fuel generated in any reactor can be stored safely and without significant environmental impacts for at least 60 years beyond the licensed life for operation ( which may include the term of a revised or renewed license ) of that reactor in a combination of storage in its spent fuel storage basin and at either onsite or offsite independent spent fuel storage installations . the two primary technologies being employed in the united states are wet pool storage and dry cask storage ( see " how is spent fuel stored now ? senator dianne feinstein , chair of the senate subcommittee on energy and water development appropriations , with jurisdiction over nrc and the u.s. department of energy ( doe ) , stated at a hearing in march 2011: most significantly , i believe we must rethink how we manage spent fuel . spent fuel must remain in pools for at least five to seven years , at which time it can be moved to safer dry cask storage . however , these pools often become de facto long - term storage , with fuel assemblies "re - racked" thus increasing the heat load of the pools . in california , for instance , fuel removed from reactors in 1984 is still cooling in wet spent fuel pools.... reports out of japan indicate there were no problems with the dry casks at dai - ichi . to me , that suggests we should at least consider a policy that would encourage quicker movement of spent fuel to dry cask storage . senator feinstein followed up this hearing statement with a formal letter to the nrc chairman asking nrc "to seriously consider regulatory policies that would encourage the movement of nuclear fuel , once sufficiently cool , out of spent fuel pools and into dry cask storage systems.