in doing so , purchasers need not be veterans . in fy2016 , the average time between va acquisition of a foreclosed property and sale was six months . for more information about disposition of property , see the earlier section of this report entitled " direct loans resulting from borrower delinquency or default ( acquired and vendee loans ) . most of these efforts were introduced when va revised its regulations in 2008 . under va regulations , a lender may enter into a loan modification with a borrower without prior va approval in circumstances where the borrower is in default , the reasons for loan default have been resolved and are not expected to recur , the borrower is a "reasonable" credit risk , at least 12 payments have been made since the loan closed , and a loan modification would reinstate the loan . the servicemen's readjustment act of 1944 ( p.l . 78-346 ) created the loan guaranty as part of a package of benefits for returning veterans . the guaranty was limited to the greater of 50% of the loan or $2,000 , and loans could not have an interest rate above 4% . the va paid the interest on the guaranteed portion of the loan during its first year . veterans had the greater of two years from the termination of the war , or two years from their date of separation from the military , to apply . within a year , congress amended the loan guaranty to address some of the aspects of the program that did not seem to be working ( p.l . the maximum guaranty was raised to $4,000 ( prices of homes had risen ) , the maximum maturity was increased from 20 to 25 years ( the shorter maturity period had resulted in higher payments ) , and veterans were given 10 years from the end of the war to apply ( two years had been too short a time frame ) . over time , the loan guaranty has been expanded to include all veterans who served on active duty from world war ii on , with varying length of service requirements , as well as those who served in the selected reserves ; the amount of the guaranty has grown ; business purchases are no longer eligible and farm purchases have been limited ; and the uses have expanded to include refinancing , energy efficiency improvements , and the purchase of manufactured homes . this section of the report describes eligibility for the loan guaranty ( " borrower eligibility " ) , ways in which it can be used ( " uses of the loan guaranty " ) , coverage ( " amount of coverage provided by the loan guaranty " ) , and how the va loan guaranty differs from the federal housing administration ( fha ) mortgage insurance program ( " how the va loan guaranty differs from fha insurance " ) . in addition to the va loan guaranty program , through which the va insures loans made to veterans by private lenders , there are several circumstances under which the va makes loans directly to veterans , as well as occasionally to nonveterans .