no civilians were wounded or killed . the global positioning system ( gps ) is a space - based satellite navigation system that provides location and time information in all weather , anywhere on or near the earth , where there is an unobstructed line of sight to four or more gps satellites . it is maintained by the u.s. government and is freely accessible by anyone with a gps receiver . some civilian receivers are controlled by the u.s. government via export controls . all gps receivers capable of functioning above 18kms ( 11 miles ) and speeds in excess of 515 meters per second ( 1,000 nautical miles per hour ) are classified as weapons or munitions capable for which state department - approved export licenses are required . the restrictions attempt to prevent use of the receiver in a ballistic missile , but the restrictions would not prevent the use in a cruise missile , which travels at much lower altitudes and slower speeds . many experts believe the proliferation of precision strike has already begun and will continue to accelerate as more and more countries continue to develop and purchase precision strike weaponry . the chart below was developed by james howe in association with the office of the secretary of defense net assessment summer study in 2010 titled "the growth and spread of the precision strike regime. the chart displays a snapshot of estimated worldwide precision strike capabilities between 2020 and 2040 . according to the study , "this map offers a first - order estimate of the geography of the mature precision - strike regime . it shows that the growth and spread of the precision strike regime is likely to be quite uneven . category i countries are those that are capable of fielding all elements of a precision strike system . category ii countries are those that are capable of fielding some elements of a precision strike system and purchase the rest . category iii countries are those that will be forced to purchase most elements of a precision strike system . category iv countries are those that will have commercial access to some precision strike munitions , particularly short range systems. in addition , some countries are developing capabilities aimed at countering u.s. precision strike dominance . the following is a sampling of a few countries actively developing and / or purchasing precision strike weapons and / or countermeasures . these three countries are a sampling and by no means a comprehensive worldwide overview . pentagon planners have considered the potential impact of the loss of u.s. precision strike dominance on future military operations . the observation that u.s. opponents will employ asymmetric capabilities and strategies to counter american conventional military superiority has been made frequently over the past decade . this phenomenon is not new , however , nor is it limited to land warfare . throughout the 19 th and early 20 th centuries rival nations sought to compete with british naval power while conserving their own resources by developing new weapons platforms , utilizing the inherent advantages of land - based firepower , and exploiting britain's dependence on overseas resources and extended lines of communication .