2601 et seq. ) ( 3 ) what types of electricity generation would qualify for the ces ? and ( 4 ) what mechanisms are available as a means of ces compliance ? additional design elements are also briefly discussed . at the request of the senate committee on energy and natural resources , eia analyzed the potential impact of the clean energy standard act of 2012 on the u.s. electricity sector . results from eia's analysis indicate that the projected electricity generation fuel mix would change when compared to eia's annual energy outlook reference case projections ( see figure 7 ) . changes to the electric power fuel mix are projected to reduce electric sector co 2 emissions in 2035 by 44% when compared to eia's reference case scenario . as with any long - term forecast , models used to calculate such estimates are subject to certain economic , cost , technology , market , and other assumptions that can make the accuracy and reliability of long - range projections questionable . eia's analysis compares two scenarios ( reference and s. 2146 ) with identical macro - level assumptions and adds policy parameters defined in the ces to the s. 2146 scenario . while this approach may not be able to accurately predict what will actually happen in 2035 , it does provide some indication of potential changes to the electric power sector associated with the ces policy design . however , it is possible that changes to certain underlying assumptions could yield different results than those provided in the analysis of s. 2146 . coal , nuclear , and non - hydro renewable energy sources would experience the most significant changes . in 2035 , electricity generated from coal would decrease by 54% , nuclear power would increase by 62% , and non - hydro renewables would increase by 34% relative to reference case projections . growth in non - hydro renewable sources of electricity is dominated by wind and wood / biomass ; however , solar electricity is essentially the same as in eia's reference case projections ( see figure 8 ) . natural gas generation is also expected to experience a relatively modest increase of 8% over 2035 reference case projections including natural gas - fired chp generation , which would increase by 21% in 2035 . eia's analysis also indicates that s. 2146 results in essentially no carbon capture and sequestration ( ccs ) projects as a means of ces compliance . with regard to the potential impact on electricity prices , eia projects that average u.s. electricity prices would increase , compared to eia reference case projections , by approximately 4% in 2025 and 18% in 2035 . eia also notes that the provision in s. 2146 to exempt certain utility companies from ces compliance requirements could create some degree of regional price disparity between exempt and non - exempt utilities . using one estimation approach , eia indicates that by 2030 electricity prices from non - exempt utilities could be 3% to 30% higher than exempt utilities . finally , eia's analysis estimates that the use of alternative compliance payments as a means of ces compliance is minimal throughout the projection period .