sdg 2 . we recognize that the development of goals could also be useful for pursuing focused and coherent action on sustainable development . we further recognize the importance and utility of a set of sustainable development goals , which are based on agenda 21 and jpoi [johannesburg plan of implementation] , fully respect the rio principles , in particular common but differentiated responsibilities , build upon commitments already made , respect international law and contribute to the full implementation of the outcomes of all major summits in economic , social and environmental fields , taking into account that these goals should ensure a holistic coherence with the goals set out in agenda 21 . these goals should address and incorporate in a balanced way all three dimensions of sustainable development and their inter - linkages . these goals should be incorporated and integrated in the united nations development agenda beyond 2015 , thus contributing to the achievement of sustainable development and serving as a driver for implementation and mainstreaming of sustainable development in the united nations system as a whole . the development of these goals should not divert focus or effort from the achievement of the millennium development goals . one of the key background documents for rio+20 is the fifth global environmental outlook ( geo - 5 ) , prepared under unep . its "summary for policymakers" was negotiated and endorsed by many governments , including the united states , in january 2012 . it concludes that , despite moderate successes in some areas on some environmental problems , neither the scope nor speed of adverse environmental changes worldwide has decreased over the past five years . eliminate gender disparity in primary and secondary education preferably by 2005 , and at all levels by 2015 . reduce child mortality 1 . reduce by two - thirds the mortality rate among children under age five . improve maternal health 1 . reduce by three - quarters the maternal mortality ratio . combat hiv / aids , malaria , and other diseases 1 . halt and begin to reverse the spread of hiv / aids ; 2 . achieve , by 2010 , universal access to treatment for hiv / aids for all those who need it ; 3 . halt and begin to reverse the incidence of malaria and other major diseases . ensure environmental sustainability 1 . integrate the principles of sustainable development into country policies and programs ; reverse loss of environmental resources ; 2 . reduce by half the proportion of people without sustainable access to safe drinking water and basic sanitation ; 3 . achieve significant improvement in lives of at least 100 million slum dwellers , by 2020 . develop a global partnership for development 1 . develop further an open , rule - based , predictable , non - discriminatory trading and financial system ; 2 . address the special needs of landlocked developing countries and small island developing states ; 3 . deal comprehensively with the debt problems of developing countries ; 4 . in cooperation with pharmaceutical companies , provide access to affordable essential drugs in developing countries ; 5 . in cooperation with the private sector , make available the benefits of new technologies , especially information and communications .