91-606 , 84 stat . some of the many options for doing so are discussed briefly here . as discussed in " eligibility criteria ," there are only three eligibility conditions provided in the law authorizing the cdl program . first , local governments must have suffered losses "as a result of a major disaster. second , a local government should have "suffer[ed] a substantial loss of tax and other revenues. third , there "has to be a demonstrated need for financial assistance" for the loan to be issued . fema has developed these three statutory conditions into a full set of regulations on eligibility , outlined in 44 c.f.r . congress could alter these legal and regulatory conditions to change the scope , use , and efficiency of the program . currently , program eligibility is restricted to local governments in declared disaster areas . as discussed in the report , the regulatory definition of local government allows a broad group of government entities to apply for loans . from an implementation standpoint , it may be too difficult to craft a one - size - fits - all regulation for these local government types , especially when considering the different types of operating budgets , revenues , and expenditures encompassed by these governments . additionally , though some standard methods exist for government accounting ( namely those established by the government accounting standards board ) , each jurisdiction does not necessarily interpret these standards in the same way . in response to this implementation challenge , congress could consider restricting loans only to a higher level of government jurisdiction . for instance , instead of all local governments being eligible for loans , loans could be offered exclusively to states that have been impacted by a disaster . the state could then disburse the loan proceeds to local governments as it deems appropriate with its own requirements and procedures . or , loans could be made at the county or parish level , which is the level of distinction used to declare disasters through the stafford act . allowing loans to be offered to states has been proposed in legislation before , though local governments were also eligible in that proposal . in conjunction with this change , the size of loans may need to be increased to adjust to the larger jurisdiction level . existing methods for assessing loan size ( expected revenue loss calculations ) could still be done at the higher jurisdiction level . conversely , congress could consider restricting the type of local government that is eligible for a loan to a more specified set of government entities , such as only general purpose municipal governments . this would reduce some of the complexity from the program by eliminating special districts , school boards , and other types of local governments that often have unique revenue streams and budget requirements . however , these types of local governments often also provide essential government services not provided by general purpose municipal governments . therefore , eliminating their program eligibility could reduce the potential benefits of the disaster assistance for the whole community .