appendix a . recently expired or repealed programs alternative fuel refueling property credit alternative motor vehicle credit biodiesel or renewable diesel income tax credit biodiesel or renewable diesel mixture tax credit incentives for alternative fuel and alternative fuel mixtures plug - in electric vehicle credit ( two - or three - wheeled ) repowering assistance program second generation biofuel producer credit ( previously the credit for production of cellulosic and algae - based biofuel ) small agri - biodiesel producer credit special depreciation allowance for second generation ( cellulosic and algae - based ) biofuel plant property appendix b . summary tables appendix b contains four tables table b - 1 provides a summary of the programs discussed in the body of the report , listed by agency ; table b - 2 lists programs and incentives for alternative fuels , by fuel type ; table b - 3 lists programs and incentives for advanced technology vehicles , by vehicle type ; and table b - 4 lists programs by agency that have expired or were repealed since december 31 , 2017 . there is no central coordination of how these incentives interact . in general , they are independently administered by separate federal agencies , including five agencies: department of the treasury , doe , dot , epa , and usda . this report focuses strictly on programs that directly support alternative fuels or advanced vehicles . it does not address more general programs ( eg , general manufacturing loans , rural development loans ) , or programs that have been authorized but never funded . the programs are presented by agency , starting with those that generally address the above factors , followed by those that are fuel - or technology - specific . programs that expired or were repealed on or after december 31 , 2017 , are included in appendix a , recently expired or repealed programs . congress may explore whether to reinstate these expired programs or establish similar programs . appendix b contains four tables: 1. a summary of the programs discussed in the body of the report , listed by agency ( table b - 1 ) ; 2. a listing of programs and incentives for alternative fuels , by fuel type ( table b - 2 ) ; 3. a listing of programs and incentives for advanced technology vehicles , by vehicle type ( table b - 3 ) ; and 4. a listing of recently expired programs by agency ( table b - 4 ) . some of these incentives have expired in recent years when their authorizations expired . many of the policy choices presented for alternative fuel and advanced vehicle technologies originated as a response to the nation's interest in reducing petroleum imports , a goal first articulated at the time of the two oil embargoes imposed by the organization of petroleum exporting countries ( opec ) in the 1970s . while president richard nixon is often cited as the first president to call for "energy independence," successive presidents and congresses have made efforts to reduce petroleum import dependence as well . as shown in figure 1 , since peaking in 2005 , net u.s. oil imports have fallen by 70% .