appendix a . hospital actions that may mitigate against readmissions the qios , in their 10 th statement of work's care transitions theme , and other experts in care transitions have considered a number of factors that are responsible for hospital readmissions . a discussion of selected factors is provided in this appendix . improving hospital discharge procedures hospital discharge planning is intended to provide clear , timely , and understandable information or instructions to the patient and his or her caregiver or family members , as well as to other providers outside the hospital setting . this process may include addressing needed post - discharge services , medications , and equipment , setting up follow - up appointments , coordinating with families as well as providing some education to patients ( and their caregivers ) about the transition to home or other settings , upon discharge . experts recommend that the discharge process within a hospital be standardized with an explicit delineation of roles and responsibilities among hospital staff to ensure that the patient leaves the hospital under the best possible circumstances and avoids adverse events that could lead to rehospitalization . table b - 1 provides four categories of readmissions , depending on whether or not they are related and / or planned . related and unplanned . some readmissions can be considered both related to the initial admission and unplanned . for instance , a person may be readmitted to a hospital to address an adverse event caused by an infection or sepsis , which resulted from problems occurring during a surgery . another example is a person with heart failure who is readmitted for chest pain . related and planned . other readmissions are those that are related to the initial hospitalization and are scheduled in advance by a hospital in order to deliver follow - up medical care , perform medical procedures , or both . for example , a patient may be admitted for heart failure and readmitted later for the placement of a cardiac stent . such readmissions are often part of the treatment plan for certain conditions . unrelated and planned . still other readmissions are those that are unrelated and planned . for example , an admission for chronic obstructive pulmonary disorder ( copd ) could be followed by a readmission for a scheduled hip replacement surgery . unrelated and unplanned . finally , some readmissions are unrelated to the initial hospitalization and are also unplanned . for example , readmissions for burns or traumas that are caused by accidents can be both unrelated and unplanned . another example might be an initial admission for a gastrointestinal disorder followed by a readmission for skin cancer . geisinger and unitedhealthcare group ( uhg ) approaches payers , providers , hospitals , and health systems have defined pprs in different ways . the geisinger health system and uhg , for example , are two entities that have tried to define pprs for the purpose of implementing strategies to reduce hospital readmissions rates .