senators . the following section examines this movement and two others , one favoring an amendment concerning apportionment in the state legislatures , and a third advocating a convention to propose an amendment requiring a balanced federal budget . these "case studies" provide a more detailed look at one campaign that accomplished its ultimate goal , direct election of senators , albeit without an article v convention , and two that came very close to meeting the constitutional threshold of applications from two - thirds of the states . an article v convention for proposing amendments to the constitution can only be called when the legislatures of two - thirds of the states submit applications . beyond its simple mandate , the constitution is mute on the details of enabling procedure , which would necessarily involve a broad range of actions within the legislatures , while also posing significant questions of procedure in the states . the article v convention for proposing amendments was the subject of considerable debate and forethought at the constitutional convention . the founders clearly intended it as a balance to proposal of amendments by congress , providing the people , through their state legislatures , with an alternative means to consider amendments , particularly if congress was unable or unwilling to act on its own . since it is one of the few provisions of the constitution that has never been implemented , however , the article v convention presents many questions for congress . this report has provided relevant historical and external perspectives , intended to assist members and their staff in consideration of this issue . a companion report , crs report r42589 , the article v convention to propose constitutional amendments: contemporary issues for congress , provides a complementary exposition and analysis of the potential role of congress in the process . in the event a convention became a serious possibility , members and staff could also draw on a large body of scholarly writing on the subject , and not least , the work and products of two decades of serious congressional consideration of the article v convention process from the 1970s to the 1990s . both of these provisions appear excellent . of the utility and practicability of the former , we have already had most satisfactory experience . the latter will probably never be resorted to , unless the federal government should betray symptoms of corruption , which may render it expedient for the states to exert themselves in order to the application of some radical and effectual remedy . on balance , the historical record indicates that the founders established the article v state application process as a complement to the congressional process proposal , to ensure that a convention could be called even if congress refused to consider an amendment or amendments , so long as the proposal enjoyed the supermajority support of two - thirds of the states .