these studies are discussed briefly below . using data from the national longitudinal survey of youth ( nlsy ) , researchers estimated the long - term effects of youth unemployment on labor market outcomes . they examined the employment status of young men in the sample when they were in their 20s and nearly 10 years later . the study found that their average level of education and training increased over time , but also that early unemployment affected both wages and future unemployment . it projected that a six - month spell of unemployment at age 22 would result in a 2% to 3% lower wage rate in their early 30s . other research has examined how young workers fare when entering the labor market during a weak economy . one study pooled data from the nlsy and other sources to estimate short - and medium - term effects of graduating from college during a recession at some point between 1974 and 2011 . the study found that graduating during a recession reduced earnings , on average , by 10% . the loss of earnings persisted , with average earnings loss of 1.8% per year over the first 10 years . this decrease is driven in part by an inability to obtain hours of work and a loss in earning power . other research has found that young people's experiences in the job market since 2000 have been less favorable than in prior years . an analysis by the federal reserve examined unemployment from 1990 through early 2013 for 22 to 27 year olds with at least a bachelor's degree . its analysis found that securing employment tended to be more difficult for those just out of college at any point over this period . the study also found that unlike their earlier counterparts , a greater share of young people graduating from college since the early 2000s were working in low - wage jobs ( eg , bartender , food server ) as opposed to other non - college jobs with higher wages ( eg , electrician , hygienist ) . this report provides an overview of the youth labor force situation . it shows that teens and young adults were withdrawing from the labor force over the time periods discussed , and those in the labor force were less likely to be employed than older workers . several factors influence these trends . for example , school enrollment means less supply of young workers . the characteristics of young workers — their relative lack of work experience , lower levels of education , and frequent movement in and out of the labor force — also play a role . perhaps most striking is that the employment - population ratio for youth , especially for teens , has eroded over the past decade — even in years when the economy was growing . this section provides a brief summary of some of these factors . one major factor is that youth have less education and experience relative to older workers . in general , firms are more likely to hire workers with greater experience . youth may also face increased competition for jobs that require less education .