ยง5195 et seq. and critical infrastructure protection and restoration . therefore , the purpose of the dpa authorities extends beyond shaping the u.s. military preparedness and capabilities , as the authorities may be used to enhance and support domestic preparedness , response , and recovery from natural hazards , terrorist attacks , and other national emergencies , among other issues . the full purpose of the dpa is discussed in the "declaration of policy" issued as part of the statute . the dpa has been amended and reauthorized numerous times since its original enactment because the statute includes a sunset provision that has required periodic reauthorization and offered the opportunity for amendment . congress passed the dpa in 1950 and has thus far reauthorized it 17 times , in 1951 , 1952 , 1953 , 1955 , 1974 , 1975 , 1977 , 1980 , 1984 , 1986 , 1991 , 1992 , 1995 , 2001 , 2003 , 2008 , and 2009 . the authorities provided in the dpa , with few exceptions , are set to expire on september 30 , 2014 . on march 30 , 2011 , president obama directed the secretaries of agriculture , energy and the navy to "investigate how they can work together to speed the development of "drop - in" biofuels substitutes for diesel and jet fuel" as one part of a broader plan to develop and secure the united states' energy resources . three months after the challenge was issued , the department of the navy ( navy ) , the department of energy ( doe ) , and the department of agriculture ( usda ) issued a memorandum of understanding ( mou ) to , in part , "assist the development and support of a sustainable commercial biofuels industry. all three federal agencies have entered into similar mous before , with each other and / or with other nations , to spur the development of biofuels . this mou is unique in that it focuses solely on commercial - scale development of advanced biofuels and brings in the primary federal agencies involved in the advanced biofuel pathway . an advanced biofuel is essentially any type of biofuel that is non - corn starch ethanol ( eg , algae - based biofuel , biomass - based diesel , cellulosic ethanol ) . there are three principal federal agencies involved with advanced biofuel research , development , and production . typically , congress views usda as the federal agency that provides resources and support for biofuel feedstock development and feedstock supply ( eg , biomass crop assistance program ) . typically , doe is viewed as the federal agency that provides resources and support for biofuel conversion technologies ( eg , loan guarantees ) . for this mou , the navy is the customer for the advanced biofuel . the objective of the mou is the construction or retrofit of multiple domestic commercial or pre - commercial scale advanced drop - in biofuel plants and refineries .