he is now being investigated for corruption himself . during the election campaign , as mass protests calling for then - president pérez molina's resignation and an end to corruption and impunity grew , so did morales's popular appeal . morales framed his lack of political experience as an asset . his campaign slogan was "neither corrupt nor a thief. he won guatemala's 2015 presidential election by a landslide with 67% of the vote . morales initially supported the international commission against impunity in guatemala ( cicig ) , which guatemala asked the united nations ( u.n. ) to form in 2007 to help the government combat corruption , human rights violations , and other crimes . after he became a target of investigations , he said he would not renew their mandate , which ends in september 2019 . the president tried to terminate cicig early unilaterally . many observers are concerned that morales's efforts could undermine ongoing investigations by the guatemalan attorney general's office and judicial proceedings , make political reform more difficult , and heighten instability in guatemala . the guatemalan congress is also moving legislation that , if passed , would reverse progress made in holding government officials and others accountable for corruption and crimes against humanity . guatemala faces many political and social challenges in addition to widespread corruption and impunity . guatemala has some of the highest levels of violence , inequality , and poverty in the region , as well as the largest population . indigenous people , about half of the population , experience higher rates of economic and social marginalization than nonindigenous citizens , and have for centuries . almost half of the country's children are chronically malnourished . guatemala's homicide rate decreased to 26.1 per 100,000 in 2017 , which nonetheless remains one of the highest rates in the region . guatemala has a long history of internal conflict and violence , including a 36-year civil war ( 1960-1996 ) . for most of that time , the guatemalan military held power and violently repressed and violated the human rights of its citizens , especially its majority indigenous population . reports estimate that more than 200,000 people were killed or disappeared during the conflict , with the state bearing responsibility for 93% of human rights violations . more than 83% of the victims were identified as mayan . in 1986 , guatemala established a civilian democratic government , but military repression and human rights violations continued . peace accords signed in 1996 ended the conflict . the united states maintained close relations with most guatemalan governments , including the military governments , before , during , and after the civil war . since the late 1980s , guatemala has sought to consolidate its transition from military and autocratic rule to a democracy . democratically elected civilian governments have governed for over 30 years , but democratic institutions remain fragile due to high levels of corruption , impunity , drug trafficking , and inequitable distribution of resources . although state institutions have investigated and arrested high - level officials , including a sitting president , for corruption , high levels of impunity in many cases continue due to intimidation of judicial officials , deliberate delays in judicial proceedings , and widespread corruption .