as a result , the mine shut down . at least 14 bills have been introduced in congress that would attempt to address the availability of rare earths ( and other materials and elements ) for u.s. industries ( including defense - related industries ) and lessening u.s. dependence on china , through such measures as promoting the research and development ( r&d ) of rare earth resources and related industries in the united states . in november 2011 , representatives hank johnson and mike coffman announced the formation of a congressional rare earth caucus . according to representative coffman , "with the establishment of this caucus , i am confident we will be able to build awareness on capitol hill about the critical threat china's trade policies of restricting rare earth exports pose to both the economic and national security of the united states. a march 2011 letter written by senators casey , schumer , stabenow , and whitehouse urged the obama administration to instruct the u.s. executive director at each multilateral bank , including the world bank , to oppose the approval of any new financing to the chinese government for rare earth projects in china , including rare earth mining , smelting or separation , or production of rare earth products . the letter also urged the administration to impose the same types of restrictions on chinese investment in mineral exploration and purchases in the united states as china imposes on foreign investment in rare earths in china . during his state of the union address on january 24 , 2012 , president obama announced plans to create a trade enforcement unit that will be "charged with investigating unfair trade practices in countries like china. in february 2012 , representative mike coffman and nine other members sent a letter to president obama noting the wto panel's and appellate body's rulings on china's restrictions on raw materials , and stating that: the similarity between chinese raw material exports and rare earth exports suggests that rectifying the rare earth situation should be among the first efforts undertaken in any new focus on trade equality . this has led some to contend the wto case against china on rare earths may have come too late for u.s. firms that are currently dealing with relatively high rare earth prices , and thus , it is argued , the wto case may do little to prevent u.s. high tech firms ( as well as those in japan and the eu ) from moving their production to china . other analysts argue that , while there has been anecdotal evidence that some rare earth users may have established or expanded operations in china , there is no evidence of a large - scale flight of foreign firms to china because of chinese rare earth policies . other analysts note that china's restrictions on rare earths may have backfired somewhat because such restrictions led to a sharp decline in global demand for rare earths and thus caused a sharp decline in prices during the second half of 2011 and the first few months of 2012 . we urge you to point the new trade enforcement unit at various restrictions , quotas , and de facto embargos used by china in the rare earth market .