each of these factors is discussed in more detail below . the following sections provide some background on how a ptc extension might impact u.s. wind project installations and manufacturing . a brief discussion of the potential impact of a short - term versus long - term ptc extension is also provided . as briefly discussed above , availability of the federal production tax credit is one of several factors that impact the amount of wind development and deployment in the united states . generally , state - level renewable portfolio standards ( rps ) create a source of demand for wind projects . overall u.s. electricity demand growth is also an important factor as it determines the total addressable market that wind projects can target . low natural gas prices can create economic competitiveness pressure for wind projects but high natural gas prices can result in additional opportunities for the wind sector . while not an all - inclusive list of factors that affect wind development , the factors addressed below do represent some of the critical non - ptc factors that influence the u.s. wind industry . the following sections provide additional details about each factor . the 112 th congress may decide if the ptc incentive for wind electricity will be extended , modified , or terminated . during the congressional debate about the future of the wind ptc incentive , congress may consider various policy options , including those discussed below . absent congressional action , the ptc incentive for wind electricity projects will no longer be available for new installations placed in service after january 1 , 2013 . some market projections suggest that annual wind capacity additions will decline precipitously if the ptc expires ( see figure 2 ) . as a result , wind - related manufacturing and project development employment would decline as well . allowing the ptc to expire may motivate wind equipment manufacturers and developers to take certain actions ( eg , maximize turbine performance , minimize manufacturing costs ) necessary to make wind electricity more broadly competitive on an unsubsidized basis . these actions could potentially result in a stronger and more robust , although possibly smaller , wind industry that can compete directly with all sources of power generation . however if state rps policies remain as - is and low natural gas prices persist , a prolonged industry contraction could limit the ability of the wind industry to respond once , and if , market conditions change . congress might also consider extending the ptc incentive . some market estimates indicate that a ptc extension would result in increasing u.s. wind capacity installations , when compared with allowing the ptc to expire — but at levels less than those observed since 2009 and less than current u.s. wind turbine manufacturing capacity ( see figure 2 ) . determining the duration of a possible ptc extension is also an important policy consideration . generally , the shorter the extension the more near - term wind market activity that may be stimulated since project developers are motivated to install new capacity in order to qualify for ptc incentives .