the provisions of h.r . 3798 and s. 3239 were endorsed by agricultural , veterinary , consumer , and animal protection groups . egg farmers and other family farms in more than 30 states also endorsed the bills . in what some supporters of h.r . 3798 and s. 3239 considered significant backing for the bill , the executive board of the american veterinary medical association ( avma ) voted to support h.r . 3798 in march 2012 . avma explained , "the decision was not made lightly . there was extensive deliberation , and the board reasoned that the standards are consistent with avma policy , as well as industry long - term expectations about changes in egg - production practices.' supporters of h.r . 3798 and s. 3239 also pointed to consumer support for changes in egg cages . in a two - part survey commissioned by uep , survey respondents indicated by a 4-to - 1 margin that they would support legislation transitioning from conventional cages to enriched cages . in the second part of the survey , respondents indicated support for federal legislation by a 2-to - 1 margin . according to dr. jeffrey armstrong , who has been a member of uep's scientific advisory committee from its beginnings , public perception is turning against conventional cages , and the uep - hsus agreement affords egg producers the chance to regain public trust . other groups representing agriculture and livestock producers , such as the american farm bureau federation ( afbf ) , the national cattlemen's beef association ( ncba ) , and the national pork producers council ( nppc ) , said that they vigorously opposed h.r . after the uep - hsus agreement was announced , ncba stated , "cattlemen are rightfully concerned with the recent uep - hsus agreement to seek unprecedented federal legislation to mandate on - farm production standards. in its statement , the nppc called such legislation on egg cages a "dangerous precedent," and was "gravely concerned that such a one - size - fits - all approach will take away producers' freedom to operate in a way that's best for their animals. in a december 6 , 2011 , letter to the house agriculture committee , eight farm groups expressed their opposition to any proposed legislation resulting from the usp - hsus agreement . although some animal welfare groups signed on with hsus in endorsing the shift to enriched cages , other related groups remained strongly opposed to h.r . 3798 and s. 3239 because of their view that an enriched cage is still a cage that harms laying - hen welfare . the humane farming association ( hfa ) is leading a campaign to "stop the rotten egg bill" emphasizing that h.r . 3798 and s. 3239 could nullify already enacted state law , take away citizens' right to vote on cages , and prevent state legislatures from passing laws to protect laying hens . animal welfare has become an increasingly salient public issue over the past decade .