the ftc was the primary regulator of nondepository financial institutions . the ftc's authority was much more limited than that of the banking regulators . its authority was almost exclusively limited to ex post enforcement . the ftc's powers generally were limited to ex post enforcement . in other instances , the cfp act imposes subjective standards intended to give the cfpb the flexibility to evolve with consumer financial markets , but that also create the potential that the bureau will overreach by regulating beyond congressional intent . apparently as a result of the policy considerations outlined above , the act's allocation of regulatory authority among the prudential regulators and the cfpb varies based on institution size and type . regulatory authority differs for ( 1 ) depository institutions with more than $10 billion in assets ( i.e. , "larger depositories" ) ; ( 2 ) depository institutions with $10 billion or less in assets ( i.e. , "smaller depositories" ) ; and ( 3 ) nondepositories . the dodd - frank act also explicitly exempts a number of different entities and consumer financial activities from the cfpb's supervisory , enforcement , and rulemaking authorities . consequently , compliance costs and the extent to which the cost and availability of credit will be affected by the new regulator will depend on the type of institution that is providing consumer financial products and services , as well as exactly how the bureau wields its powers and how aggressively it ( and other state and federal regulators ) enforces consumer protection laws and regulations . the breadth of the cfpb's supervisory , enforcement , and rulemaking powers is similar to that of the banking regulators . the banking regulators , however , have held those authorities for decades , thus establishing a degree of certainty in the industry as to how those powers will be exercised . the fact that the cfpb does not have a similar history , coupled with the bureau's overarching focus on consumers , as opposed to safety and soundness , and its potential to oversee a large number of nondepository financial institutions that largely were unregulated at the federal level have some anxious that the bureau will overreach in exercising its powers and , as a consequence , excessively restrict consumer credit and unduly increase regulatory costs . the stated goal of the bureau is to: implement and , where applicable , enforce federal consumer financial law consistently for the purpose of ensuring that all consumers have access to markets for consumer financial products and services and that markets for consumer financial products and services are fair , transparent , and competitive . the bureau is established within the frs , but it has considerable independence from the frb .