under the current ffdca sec . 712 ( c ) ( 2 ) ( a ) , any member of an advisory committee would be prohibited from participating in any "particular matter" in an advisory committee meeting in which such member , or an immediate family member of such member , has a "financial interest that could be affected by the advice given to the secretary with respect to such matter. the hhs secretary retains the right to grant a waiver to any member of such advisory panel to participate in "a particular matter considered in a committee meeting," either as a voting or non - voting member of the advisory committee , when the secretary determines that "it is necessary to afford the advisory committee essential expertise. provisions in s. 3187 and h.r . 5651 regarding advisory committee conflicts of interest are summarized and compared with current law and with each other in table 13 . a number of additional provisions in the two bills are summarized and compared in table 14 . these provisions are: reauthorization of the critical path public - private partnerships ; guidance regarding internet promotion of medical products ; electronic submission of applications ; tanning bed labeling ; global clinical trials ; regulatory science ; information technology ; reporting requirements for medical products covered by user fee agreements ; strategic integrated management plan for fda workforce ; patient participation in medical product discussions ; nanomaterials in fda - regulated products ; gao report regarding online pharmacies ; medication and device errors ; statutory pay - as - you - go statement ; communicating drug information , including to underrepresented subgroups ; report on small businesses ; whistleblower protection , u.s. public health service ; clinical trial registration ; compliance date for over - the - counter sunscreen products ; changes to the controlled substances act ( csa ) ; and prescription drug monitoring programs . the senate voted 96-1 to pass s. 3187 on may 24 , 2012 . the house voted 387-5 to pass h.r . 5651 on may 30 , 2012 . pdufa and mdufa sunset on october 1 , 2012 and committee bipartisan leadership has been committed to completing the reauthorizations before fda would have to initiate lay - off notification procedures that would disrupt drug and device application review and postmarket safety activities . fda - focused newsletters and the national media report that "ping - pong" negotiations , rather than a formal conference committee , are underway between house and senate staff and members to resolve the differences between the bills . despite a successful bipartisan effort to build a core set of drug and device provisions that could join , but not derail , must - pass user fee provisions , there remain complex issues that members of congress will likely pursue after a final bill is passed out of s. 3187 and h.r . these include changing the premarket approval and clearance procedures for medical devices , further developing a supply chain system that meets global demands , and looking at whether federal health program drug payment policies influence drug shortages . whether congress needs a must - pass vehicle , next facing fda in 2017 , to achieve these legislative changes remains to be seen .