the house report ( h.rept . 112-494 ) stated: additionally , to address the immediate security needs in this hemisphere , the committee recommendation restores reductions proposed in the request for key countries in latin america . the committee believes it is critical to continue robust support for counternarcotics and law enforcement efforts , as well as assistance for rule of law and judicial reform activities in mexico , colombia , central america , and the caribbean to fight drug trafficking and violent crime before it reaches the borders of the united states . for carsi , the house report recommended the requested level of esf and $10 million above the request in incle . the house report also recommended the requested level of esf and $9 million above the request in incle for cbsi . the senate report , on the other hand , supported the requested levels for both regional security programs . while the house bill would have provided $5 million above the request in esf for democracy programs in cuba , the senate bill would have capped funding for such programs at the requested level . similarly , the senate report recommended $10 million above the request in da for conservation programs in the brazilian amazon while the house report made no reference to such programs . in addition , the senate bill would have provided $5.4 million above the request for the inter - american foundation , while the house bill would have funded the agency at the requested level . this report is an overview of u.s. assistance to latin america and the caribbean . it then provides a detailed look at the obama administration's fy2013 request for state department and usaid - related assistance to latin america and the caribbean , and describes support provided by other u.s. agencies in order to draw a more complete picture of u.s. assistance to the region . it also examines key latin america and caribbean funding provisions in the fy2013 foreign aid appropriations bills and potential issues for congressional consideration . the united states has long been a major contributor of foreign assistance to countries in latin america and the caribbean . u.s. assistance to the region spiked in the early 1960s following the introduction of president kennedy's alliance for progress , an anti - poverty initiative that sought to counter soviet and cuban influence in the aftermath of fidel castro's 1959 seizure of power in cuba . after a period of decline , u.s. assistance to the region increased again following the 1979 assumption of power by the leftist sandinistas in nicaragua . throughout the 1980s , the united states provided considerable support to the contras , who sought to overthrow the sandinista government , as well as to central american governments battling leftist insurgencies . u.s. aid flows declined in the mid - 1990s following the dissolution of the soviet union , the end of the central american civil conflicts , and the spread of electoral democracy throughout the region . u.s. foreign assistance to latin america and the caribbean began to increase once again in the late 1990s and remained on a generally upward trajectory through the past decade .