appendix a . historical funding trends and staffing levels the nixon administration established epa in 1970 in response to growing public concern about environmental pollution , consolidating federal pollution control responsibilities that had been divided among several federal agencies . congress has enacted an increasing number of environmental laws , as well as major amendments to these statutes , over three decades following epa's creation . annual appropriations provide the funds necessary for epa to carry out its responsibilities under these laws , such as the regulation of air and water quality , use of pesticides and toxic substances , management and disposal of solid and hazardous wastes , and cleanup of environmental contamination . epa also awards grants to assist state , tribal , and local governments in controlling pollution in order to comply with federal environmental requirements , and to help fund the implementation and enforcement of federal regulations delegated to the states . table 1 presents fy2008-fy2012 enacted appropriations and the president's fy2013 budget request for epa by each of the eight accounts . figure a - 1 presents a history of total discretionary budget authority for epa from fy1976 through fy2012 , and the president's fy2013 budget request , as reported by the office of management and budget ( omb ) in the "historical tables" accompanying the president's budget of the u.s. government , fiscal year 2013 . levels of agency budget authority prior to fy1976 were not reported by omb in the historical tables . in figure a - 1 , the levels of discretionary budget authority are presented in nominal dollars as reported by omb , and are adjusted for inflation by crs to reflect the trend in real dollar values over time . epa's historical funding trends generally reflects the evolution of the agency's responsibilities over time , as congress has enacted legislation to authorize the agency's programs and activities in response to a range of environmental issues and concerns . in terms of the overall federal budget , epa's annual appropriations have represented a relatively small portion of the total discretionary federal budget ( just under 1% in recent years ) . without adjusting for inflation , epa's funding has grown from $1.0 billion when epa was established in fy1970 to a peak funding level of $14.86 billion in fy2009 . this peak includes regular fiscal year appropriations of $7.64 billion provided for fy2009 in p.l . 111-8 and the emergency supplemental appropriations of $7.22 billion provided for fy2009 in p.l . however , in real dollar values ( adjusted for inflation ) , epa's funding in fy1978 was slighter more than the level in fy2009 , as presented in figure a - 1 . epa staff levels in its report ( h.rept . 112-589 ) accompanying h.r . 6091 as reported , the house committee expressed concerns about the distribution of epa regional "full time equivalents" ( ftes ) to headquarters , and directed the agency to bring the headquarters fte level in line with the regional levels . epa is also directed by the committee to cap its total ftes at no more than 16,594 , the fy2010 level , similar to direction provided in the fy2012 interior , environment , and related agencies conference report .