senators . although only 25 of 48 states applied for a convention , this effort is frequently credited with "prodding" the senate to join the house of representatives in proposing what became the 17 th amendment in 1912 . two article v convention campaigns of the 1960s - 1980s came even closer to the constitutional requirement , but were ultimately unable to attain applications from the legislatures of two - thirds of the states . during the last third of the 20 th century , two campaigns came close to achieving the constitutional threshold of 34 state applications for an article v convention . as such , the convention alternative would present a wide range of policy and procedural questions should congress ever be called on to consider or convene an article v assembly . if this were to occur , congress would not be without resources . this report has sought to identify and provide analysis of key issues for its consideration . in addition , other guideposts , if not simple answers , exist in the broad range of sources identified and cited in this report . these include the original intent of the founders , as preserved in the record ; historical examples and precedents , particularly from the last decades of the 20 th century ; and the large volume of scholarly writing on the subject . clearly intended by the framers as a balance to proposal of amendments by congress , it was included to provide the people , through applications by their state legislatures , with the means to call a convention having the authority to consider and propose changes to the constitution , particularly if congress proved incapable of , or unwilling to , initiate amendments on its own . it also has the distinction of being one of the few provisions of the constitution that has never been implemented . not least , congress could also avail itself of the considerable body of study and debate developed by its own members and staff during the more than two decades it gave serious consideration to the question of the article v convention alternative . the first sought a convention to consider an amendment authorizing states to use criteria other than strict equality of population in apportioning districts in one chamber of their legislatures . the second advocated a convention to consider an amendment to require a balanced federal budget under most circumstances . both campaigns ultimately failed to attain their goal . various reasons are cited for their failure , including second thoughts in state legislatures ; for the apportionment amendment , the death of senator everett dirksen , its principal advocate ; changing public attitudes concerning the issues ; and , in the case of the balanced federal budget amendment campaign , congressional legislation to address concerns over the persistent budget deficits . many advocates assert , however , that convention applications remain valid indefinitely and that those submitted at any time in the past still count toward the constitutional threshold . three decades have passed since the high - water mark of the balanced budget amendment convention campaign in the 1980s ; consequently , few current members of either chamber have had the occasion to consider the prospect of an article v convention .