appendix a . comparison of existing and proposed disposal facility criteria the first and second columns in table a - 1 list existing regulatory criteria applicable to msw landfills in 40 c.f.r . 258 and comparable standards , proposed by epa to be added under 40 c.f.r . part 257 , applicable to ccr landfills and surface impoundments . listed under each column are individual requirements specifying location restrictions , operating criteria , design criteria , groundwater monitoring and corrective action , closure and post - closure care , and financial assurance . table cells with an asterisk indicate the lack of a corresponding requirement between the two standards . when individual requirements are largely similar , only the regulatory heading is included . to address those concerns , when considering epa's proposal under subtitle d and legislative proposals to amend rcra , the most relevant question may be "would either approach change current state practices ? the answer is not clear . neither proposal would apply federally enforceable standards to owners and operators of ccr landfills or surface impoundments . epa's proposal would apply national standards to those facilities , but they would not be directly enforceable by epa . instead , it would be up to individual states to determine the degree to which they may adopt , implement , and enforce the standards . for example , a state may choose to apply epa's standards to new ccr disposal facilities , but not necessarily to existing facilities — those that epa has identified as being more likely to operate without necessary protections . the legislative proposal to amend rcra would create a ccr permit program that would give states broad discretion in determining how , when , and to which facilities they may apply new regulatory standards . in comments submitted by state agencies in the wake of epa's june 2010 proposal , most state agency officials argued that their own regulatory programs sufficiently address ccr management . it would seem unlikely that , absent an explicit federal directive to do so , a state would choose to implement a ccr permit program that would vary significantly from its current waste management program . when there is a significant difference between two requirements , additional information is provided to clarify that difference . broadly , the most significant differences pertain to the potential regulation of surface impoundments . for example , requirements that would provide protections specific to the disposal of liquids are not included in part 258 because bulk disposal of liquids is prohibited in msw landfills . in comparison , epa's june 2010 subtitle d proposal includes various requirements intended to address issues unique to the management of ccrs , particularly the accumulation of liquids in surface impoundments — with regard to both the higher potential risk of a catastrophic release associated with a structural failure and contaminant leaching from those units . the third column lists ccr permit program specifications included under the "minimum requirements" and "revised criteria" that would apply to the permit program in the proposed section 4011 of rcra . table b - 1 lists selected , relevant requirements in 40 c.f.r . part 239 and comparable elements of the proposed ccr permit program .