this was not necessarily always the case . the fbi reported in 1999 that "[d]uring the past 30 years , the vast majority — but not all — of the deadly terrorist attacks occurring in the united states have been perpetrated by domestic extremists. the u.s. government reacted to 9 / 11 by greatly enhancing its counterterrorism efforts . this report discusses how domestic terrorists broadly fit into this new counterterrorism landscape , a terrain that in the last 10 years has been largely shaped in response to terrorists inspired by foreign ideologies . this report focuses especially on how domestic terrorism is conceptualized by the federal government and issues involved in assessing this threat's significance . today ( perhaps in part because of the government's focus on international terrorist ideologies ) , it is difficult to evaluate the scope of domestic terrorist activity . for example , federal agencies employ varying terminology and definitions to describe it . also , domestic terrorism - related intelligence collection efforts have not necessarily received the same attention as similar efforts to counter foreign threats . in one 2008 study , state police agencies "overwhelmingly reported" dangerous domestic extremist groups present in their jurisdictions . beyond these issues , the obama administration's community outreach - driven strategy to quell terrorism - related radicalization in the united states focuses on individuals inspired by al qaeda . five themes speak to the possible threat posed by domestic terrorists . first , domestic terrorists likely have been responsible numerous incidents since 9 / 11 , and there appears to be growth in anti - government extremist activity as measured by watchdog groups in the last several years . second , a large number of those labeled as domestic terrorists do not necessarily use major terrorist tactics such as bombings or airplane hijackings . third , domestic terrorists — much like their violent jihadist analogues — are often internet savvy and use the medium as a resource for their operations . fourth , domestic terrorism can be seen as a somewhat decentralized threat often involving lone wolves and movements operating under the model of leaderless resistance . finally , prison has been highlighted as an arena in which terrorist radicalization can occur , and wse plays a role in the activities of several u.s. prison gangs . sovereign citizen theories have also taken root in u.s. prisons . congress may choose to consider issues in three areas regarding the federal role in combating domestic terrorism: ( 1 ) assessing this threat's scope , ( 2 ) the adequacy of domestic terrorism intelligence collection efforts , and ( 3 ) how domestic terrorism fits into the obama administration's efforts to counter radicalization that may lead to terrorism . as this report suggests , at least three factors may make it hard for policy makers to form a baseline evaluation of the domestic terrorism threat from publicly available information . first , federal agencies employ varying terminology to describe the threat . second , the federal government lacks a public and official method for either designating specific domestic groups as terrorists or formally and openly describing particular extremist movements as threats .