this proposal was not supported by congress . the transportation investments generating economic recovery ( tiger ) grant program originated in the american recovery and reinvestment act ( p.l . 111-5 ) , where it was referred to as national infrastructure investment . it is a discretionary grant program intended to address two criticisms of the current structure of federal transportation funding: that virtually all of the funding is distributed to state and local governments who select projects based on their priorities , making it difficult to fund projects that have national or regional impacts but whose costs fall largely on one or two states ; and that the federal funding is divided according to mode of transportation , making it difficult for major projects in different modes to compete for the limited amount of discretionary funding . the program provides grants to projects of regional or national significance in various modes on a competitive basis , with recipients selected by the federal dot . congress has continued to support the tiger program through the annual dot appropriations acts . there have been four rounds of tiger grants ( from arra funding , and from fy2010-fy2012 annual appropriations ) . the administration requested $500 million for fy2013 , the same amount provided in fy2012 . the house - passed bill did not provide any funding for the program , noting that the administration has not defined the selection criteria by which recipients are selected . the senate committee on appropriations recommended $500 million . this program was not included in the map - 21 authorization act . the fy2013 enacted bill funded tiger at the fy2012 level , $500 million ; after sequestration reductions and rescission , the program received $474 million . the eas program seeks to preserve air service to small communities whose level of ridership makes air service unprofitable by subsidizing the cost of that service . the costs of the program have more than doubled since fy2008 , in part because route reductions by airlines have resulted in an average of six new communities being added to the program each year . supporters of the eas program contend that preserving airline service to small communities was a commitment congress made when it deregulated airline service in 1978 , anticipating that airlines would reduce or eliminate service to many communities that were too small to make such service economically viable . supporters contend that subsidizing air service to smaller communities promotes economic development in rural areas . critics of the program note that the subsidy cost per passenger is relatively high , that many of the communities in the program have very few residents flying out of their airports , and that some of the airports receiving eas subsidies are little more than an hour's drive from major airports . the administration requested $114 million for the eas program . this appeared to be a cut from the fy2012 enacted figure of $143 million , but in fact the administration's request represented an increase over the fy2012 figure .