each of these laws is discussed below . 113-23 , the hydropower regulatory efficiency act of 2013 , contains a number of provisions that are intended to promote the development of additional select hydropower projects . section 3 amended the public utility regulatory policies act of 1978 ( purpa ) to redefine small hydropower as 10 mw or less . previously , purpa defined small hydropower as 5 mw or less . 113-23 permits ferc to grant an exemption for small hydropower projects . section 4 amended section 30 of the fpa by not requiring qualifying conduit hydropower projects to be licensed and by expediting the approval process . the law gives ferc 15 days to make an initial determination on the project's notice of intent , and it gives the public 45 days to contest the notice . previously , there was no explicit time limit by which ferc had to make a determination . the law allows ferc to grant an exemption for conduit projects with certain stipulations and for those projects with an installed capacity of 40 mw or less . previously , the fpa allowed ferc to issue an exemption only for generating capacities of 15 mw or less for nonmunicipal and 40 mw or less for municipal projects . section 5 of p.l . 113-23 amended section 5 of the fpa to allow preliminary permits to be extended once for two years . previously , the fpa allowed for the issuance of preliminary permits for three years with no extension . section 6 requires ferc to study the feasibility of issuing a license within a two - year period for projects at nonpowered dams and closed - loop pumped storage facilities . section 7 requires the secretary of energy to study various aspects of pumped storage facilities and to submit to congress a report with study results and any recommendations . 113-24 , the bureau of reclamation small conduit hydropower development and rural jobs act , made changes to the process by which reclamation permits nonfederal hydropower development at its projects ( see " nonfederal development at reclamation facilities ," above ) . lease of power privilege previously was possible only at reclamation facilities specifically authorized for hydropower development . 113-24 authorized this development for all reclamation projects ( eg , irrigation projects ) . it also clarified that reclamation's power resources office shall be the lead office to set policy and procedures for this type of hydropower development ( i.e. , not ferc ) , that local project operators shall be the first entities offered the chance to develop conduit hydropower , and that these projects shall receive categorical exclusions under the national environmental policy act of 1969 ( 42 u.s.c . ยง4321 et seq ) . 113-121 , the water resources reform and development act of 2014 , states that the approval and construction of nonfederal hydropower at corps facilities should be expedited . it required the secretary of the army to submit a biennial report describing the initiatives to encourage nonfederal hydropower development at corps facilities as well as the status , costs , and environmental impact of nonfederal hydropower projects associated with the corps .