these proposals are summarized briefly . many of them are addressed in more detail in other crs reports . note that many of the same issues that arise with a territorial tax would need to be addressed in some cases , such as dealing with the transition , and dealing with operations outside of cfcs . the administration also presented a framework for tax reform that mentioned five elements: the allocation of interest for deferred income ( first bullet point above ) , a tax on excess intangibles ( third bullet point ) , a minimum tax on foreign source income in low tax countries , disallowing a deduction for the cost of moving abroad and providing a 20% credit for costs of moving an operation from abroad to the united states . the minimum tax on foreign source income , which would be a potentially important provision , is not discussed in detail . a minimum tax that could be imposed in the framework of an effective territorial system is discussed below . a variety of more limited ways of reducing or partially eliminating deferral include eliminating deferral for specified tax havens , eliminating deferral in countries with tax rates that are below the u.s. rate by a specified proportion , eliminating deferral for income from the production of goods that are in turn imported into the united states , eliminating deferral for income from the production of goods that are exported to any other country from the foreign location , and requiring a minimum payout share . these provisions would partially achieve the goals of a general elimination of deferral . another approach to addressing income shifting , whether in the current system or a revised territorial system , is through formula apportionment . with formula apportionment , income would be allocated to different jurisdictions based on their shares of some combination of sales , assets , and employment . a deferral option is also included in the cbo budget options study and is estimated to raise $11.1 billion in revenue in fy2014 . the smaller revenue gain may reflect a provision that eliminates the current interest allocation provision for purposes of the foreign tax credit limit . it would tax income of foreign subsidiaries , while allowing foreign tax credits as in current law . current taxation would eliminate any disincentive to repatriate , and would also reduce the benefits and scope for profit shifting . cross - crediting would still be available . it would be more consistent with efficient resource allocation , although issues of shifting headquarters might need to be addressed further . as with territorial tax proposals , transition issues would arise which could be addressed in a fashion similar to that in the ways and means discussion draft . the revision would require the measurement of earnings under u.s. law , which could add complexity , although such measurement would also be needed for most base erosion measures as well . as with the territorial tax , issues would arise in extending the treatment to 10 / 50 corporations that have a large u.s. shareholder but are not controlled by a group of large u.s. shareholders , since information on earnings may not be available .