1066 , discussed above . an advantage of an increased federal role might be an increased consistency across states in housing or building codes , or in regulation of consumer products . indoor pollutants are many and varied . congress might choose this alternative if it finds that the programs are adequate to address any potential or acknowledged indoor pollution problems . on the other hand , any inadequacies or inefficiencies in the current system would be expected to persist . if congress wants help in understanding whether or not there is a need for current or additional federal programs addressing indoor environments , it might want to form a blue ribbon panel of scientists or stakeholders to examine the state of knowledge about indoor environments and pollutants and how they currently are regulated . a report could form the basis of future oversight hearings and perhaps also legislation . a third avenue might be to better coordinate current levels of federal involvement , as recommended by the 1997 presidential and congressional commission on risk assessment and risk management . the commission recommended legislation that would mandate a coordinated strategy by epa , cpsc , osha , and other federal agencies to address the issue , noting that while outdoor air pollution is extensively regulated , "many problems in offices , public buildings , and homes remain relatively unrecognized and unaddressed. the commission observed that a more effective and coordinated approach to dealing with this issue was unlikely to emerge without a mandate from the congress . alternatively , congress might conclude that enough already is known about the potential risks of indoor pollutants and that current knowledge justifies reducing federal support for , and conduct of , research and other programs . this option may be appealing if congress finds that the issue does not merit current efforts or that activities would be better coordinated and conducted by local or state government personnel or by the private sector . the advantages of reduced involvement would be the reduced costs to tax payers , fewer mandates to state and local governments , and possibly reduced distortion of the marketplace for building materials ( if such exists ) , which might be a more efficient guide to consumer preferences for new products and services . disadvantages might include reduced research and therefore less knowledge as a basis for the design , implementation , and evaluation of agency programs . depending on where cuts were made , agencies might become less effective at developing or disseminating information , coordinating with other agencies , or regulating indoor environments . or , to the degree that states , universities , and others may spend more to replace federal efforts , duplicative or inefficient efforts could result in lower cost - effectiveness and possibly a greater use of societal resources . however , if congress also curtailed federal activities and funding for controlling indoor environments , any inefficiencies due to reduced knowledge might be proportionately less significant .