appendix a . committee jurisdiction determining committee jurisdiction committee jurisdiction is determined by a variety of factors . paramount are house rule x and senate rule xxv , which designate the subject matter within the purview of each standing committee . house rule x and senate rule xxv , however , are both broadly written and the product of an era in which governmental activity was not as extensive , and relations among policies not as common or intertwined as now . house referral in 1974 , with the adoption of the committee reform amendments , the house authorized the speaker to refer measures to more than one committee , in a joint , split , or sequential manner . in 1995 , with the rules changes adopted in the 104 th congress , the speaker could no longer refer measures jointly ; he was authorized instead to designate a primary committee . congress addresses numerous water issues annually . issues range from responding to natural disasters , such as droughts and floods , to improving the nation's water resource and water quality infrastructure , and protecting fish , wildlife , and other aquatic resources . many congressional committees address these issues and are involved in legislating , funding , and overseeing the water - related activities of numerous federal agencies . predominance usually is determined by the extent to which a measure deals with a subject . however , there appear to be exceptions ; most notably , a measure containing revenue provisions is likely to be referred to the committee on finance , even where the subject does not appear to predominate . individual jurisdictional issues this section briefly discusses an example of water issues that are either within the jurisdiction of more than one committee or contested among committees . if the issue is clearly within the purview of one panel , it is not addressed in this section . jurisdiction over dams and land necessary for their development house rule x identifies several committees to which bills authorizing federal dam construction might be referred . the natural resources committee has jurisdiction over "irrigation and reclamation , including water supply for reclamation projects , and easements of public lands for irrigation projects , and acquisition of private lands when necessary to complete irrigation projects. as such , it has jurisdiction over most activities of the bureau of reclamation ( department of the interior ) . the committee on transportation and infrastructure is responsible for "flood control and improvement of rivers and harbors ... public works for the benefit of navigation , including bridges and dams ( other than international bridges and dams ) ... water power. consequently , most activities of the army corps of engineers fall under the jurisdiction of the house transportation and infrastructure committee . the committee on agriculture has jurisdiction over "water conservation related to activities of the department of agriculture. senate rule xxv also identifies several committees for which bills authorizing federal dam construction might be referred .