economic espionage is not so confined . here , "benefit means not only economic benefit but also reputational , strategic , or tactical benefit. moreover , unlike the theft offense , economic espionage may occur whether the defendant intends the benefit or is merely aware that it will follow as a consequence of his action . as in the case of trade secret theft , however , the benefit need not be realized ; it is enough that defendant intended to confer it . protective orders : it would be self - defeating to disclose a victim's trade secrets in the course of the prosecution of a thief . consequently , the eea authorizes the trial court to issue orders to protect the confidentiality of trade secrets during the course of a prosecution and permits the government to appeal its failure to do so . the government may not appeal an order to reveal information it has already disclosed to the defendant . nevertheless , in such instances , appellate review of a district court's disclosure order may be available through a writ of mandamus . extraterritoriality : the supreme court has said on a number of occasions that "[i]t is a longstanding principle of american law 'that legislation of congress , unless a contrary intent appears , is meant to apply only within the territorial jurisdiction of the united states.' with this in mind , congress specifically identified the circumstances under which it intended the economic espionage and theft of trade secrets provisions to apply overseas . either offense may be prosecuted as long as the offender is a u.s. national or an act in furtherance of the offense is committed within this country . the legislative history indicates that these are the only circumstances under which violations abroad may be prosecuted . organizations are fined more severely . they can be fined up $5 million , twice the loss or gain associated with the offense , or three times the value of the stolen trade secret , for trade secret theft . for economic espionage , the fines of organizations jump to a maximum of the greater of $10 million , three times the value of the trade secret , or twice the gain or loss associated with the offense . a court may assess the same sanctions for attempt or conspiracy to commit either offense , or for aiding or abetting the completed commission of the either offense . a sentencing court must order the defendants to pay victim restitution , and the government may confiscate any property that is derived from or used to facilitate either offense . the government may seek to enjoin violations , and , by virtue of amendments in the defend trade secrets act of 2016 , victims may be entitled to sue for double damages , equitable relief , and attorneys' fees . conduct that violates the eea's proscriptions may also violate other federal prohibitions , however . some , like the computer fraud and abuse act , in addition to imposing criminal penalties , likewise authorize victims to sue for damages and other forms of relief under some circumstances . elements , attempt and conspiracy: the trade secrets prohibition is the more complicated of the eaa's two criminal offenses .