fers was enacted in 1986 ( p.l . 99-335 ) and sought to mimic the policies put in place by its predecessor , csrs . consequently , the definition of a law enforcement officer under fers is similar to the definition under csrs and maintains enhanced retirement benefits for those personnel . for retirement purposes , most federal employees are covered under either the civil service retirement system , for those hired before 1984 , or the federal employees' retirement system , for those hired in 1984 or later . the majority of personnel pursuing enhanced benefits in the future would be covered under fers and would have most of the costs of their enhanced benefits covered by higher agency contributions . currently , agencies are required to contribute an additional 14.4% of basic pay for law enforcement personnel in comparison with regular fers employees . congress passed the civil service retirement act of 1920 ( p.l 66-215 ) to create a pension plan for civilian federal employees . the social security system followed in 1935 to create a retirement plan for private - sector workers . federal employees were excluded from social security until congress passed the social security amendments of 1983 ( p.l . 98-21 ) and the federal employees' retirement system act of 1986 ( p.l . a more generous retirement program was considered necessary to retain youthful individuals for career service . congress decided that these occupations should be composed of young men and women who possess the strength and endurance necessary to perform the required duties . enhanced retirement benefits help to maintain this type of workforce by permitting employees in these positions to retire earlier and accrue pension benefits faster during earlier years of service than regular civilian federal employees . many individuals and employee groups who work in law enforcement - related positions , but who have not qualified as law enforcement officers for retirement purposes , have sought enhanced benefits through legislation in recent congresses . incorporating additional occupations may address problems of attrition and perceived inequity across law enforcement - related positions . however , expanding access to enhanced retirement benefits also generates concerns over additional expenditures on federal retirement benefits . currently , the definition of a federal law enforcement officer ( leo ) for retirement purposes is limited to an employee who performs certain duties defined in statute under either the civil service retirement system ( csrs ) , which covers federal employees hired before 1984 , or the federal employees' retirement system ( fers ) , which covers federal employees hired in 1984 or later . individuals employed in positions that meet the statutory definition of a leo , as well as certain personnel who have obtained leo - equivalent benefits through direct legislation , are eligible to retire earlier with fewer years of service and receive a benefit accrual rate during the first 20 years of service that is higher than the benefit accrual rate for regular federal civilian employees . leos and employees who have enhanced retirement benefits also contribute more to their own benefits than regular civilian federal employees and are subject to a mandatory retirement age . the duties of law enforcement personnel place unique physical and psychological demands on individuals employed in those positions .