continuous process manufacturing ( cpm ) . this sector includes manufacturing facilities that continuously feed raw materials , often at high temperatures , through an industrial process . specific industries include paper ; chemicals ; petroleum ; rubber and plastic ; stone , clay , and glass ; and primary metals . fabrication and essential services ( fes ) . this sector includes all other manufacturing industries , plus utilities and transportation facilities such as railroads and mass transit , water and wastewater treatment , and gas utilities and pipelines . these three sectors accounted for almost 40% of u.s. gross domestic product in 2001 , but disruptions to especially the de and fes sectors impact other sectors of the economy through the services they provide . epri recognized that the economic cost of power outages was largely related to the length of the outage ( while noting even short duration outages of a few minutes could have large costs ) , and estimated the average cost of a one - hour outage for manufacturing and de firms at $7,795 per firm . while the estimate recognizes that typically most companies experienced a much smaller loss ( with a one - hour outage costing 56% of all de , cpm , and fes establishments less than $500 ) , the number was weighted by the much larger losses experienced by a few companies . an estimated 5% of establishments in these sectors incurred costs from a one - hour outage of $20,000 or more , with costs for individual establishments ranging as high as $1.5 million . epri estimated the annual cost of outages across all u.s. business sectors at $104 billion to $164 billion in 2001 . with epri estimating the average number of power outages in a year over five minutes at 43% ( see figure 3 ) , a reasonable estimate for the annual economic cost yields a possible $20 billion to $31 billion ( using the hines estimate of 44% of outages as weather - related ) as a lower range . on the higher end ( using mills's estimate of 78% of outages as weather - related ) , an estimate of the cost yields $35 billion to $55 billion for annual weather - related outage costs . the 2004 lbl report estimated ( in its base case ) economic costs of sustained power interruptions at $26 billion , with the outages resulting from all causes including weather . in recognition of uncertainties in the data , lbl stated that the true cost of sustained outages could be higher or lower by tens of billions of dollars . outages are largely a result of damage to distribution systems , which are generally exposed to the elements . storms can inflict damage to electric power delivery systems in a variety of ways . wind and rain from a hurricane - type event tends to cause different types of power system delivery failures than snow and ice . this section will look at various scenarios for reducing storm - related outages . in any discussion of storm - related power outages , two prominent themes emerge — preparation and recovery .