100-656 ) ; women ( p.l . 103-355 , the federal acquisition streamlining act of 1994 ) ; small businesses located within a historically underutilized business zone , or hubzone ( p.l . 105-135 ) ; and small businesses owned and controlled by a service - disabled veteran ( p.l . 106-50 , the veterans entrepreneurship and small business development act of 1999 ) . the current federal small business contracting goals are at least 23% of the total value of all small business eligible prime contract awards to small businesses for each fiscal year ; 5% of the total value of all small business eligible prime contract awards and subcontract awards to small disadvantaged businesses for each fiscal year ; 5% of the total value of all small business eligible prime contract awards and subcontract awards to women - owned small businesses ; 3% of the total value of all small business eligible prime contract awards and subcontract awards to hubzone small businesses ; and 3% of the total value of all small business eligible prime contract awards and subcontract awards to service - disabled veteran - owned small businesses . there are no punitive consequences for not meeting the small business procurement goals . however , the sba's small business goaling report is distributed widely , receives media attention , and heightens public awareness of the issue of small business contracting . for example , agency performance as reported in the sba's report is often cited by members during their questioning of federal agency witnesses in congressional hearings . as shown in table 5 , the fy2017 small business goaling report , using data in the federal procurement data system , indicates that federal agencies met the federal contracting goal for small businesses generally , small disadvantaged businesses , and service - disabled veteran - owned small businesses in fy2017 . federal agencies awarded 23.88% of the value of their small business eligible contracts ( $442.5 billion ) to small businesses ( $105.7 billion ) , 9.10% to small disadvantaged businesses ( $40.2 billion ) , 4.71% to women - owned small businesses ( $20.8 billion ) , 1.65% to hubzone small businesses ( $7.3 billion ) , and 4.05% to service - disabled veteran - owned small businesses ( $17.9 billion ) . the percentage of total reported federal contracts ( without exclusions ) awarded to those small businesses in fy2017 is also provided in the table for comparative purposes . in a related development , on november 17 , 2015 , the house passed h.r . 1694 , the fairness to veterans for infrastructure investment act of 2015 . others worry that requiring service - disabled veteran - owned small businesses to register in the vetbiz database and have their status verified by the va ( or the sba ) to be eligible for contracting preferences under the small business act may add to the paperwork burdens of small businesses . they seek alternative ways to address the need to reduce fraud in federal small business procurement programs that do not increase the paperwork requirements of small businesses .