what are their capabilities ? to what extent do these groups benefit from any local support ? what types of external support do they receive , if any ? , foreign — troops . how long this situation may be tolerated by mali's national authorities and military commanders — and what options they might have for addressing it — remains to be seen . mali faces multiple overlapping crises . a separatist rebellion launched in late 2011 by members of the northern - based minority ethnic tuareg community , known as the national movement for the liberation of azawad ( mnla ) , aggravated intra - military and political tensions in the country . in march 2012 , junior military officers overthrew a democratically elected government in a coup , a month ahead of scheduled national elections . the coup led mali's military and state presence in the north to collapse , effectively leaving a vacuum for armed groups . islamist extremist groups , who had initially fought alongside the separatists , took advantage of the ensuing chaos to expand their presence in mali's vast , saharan north . the civilian - led interim government that took office in the wake of the 2012 coup is headed by president dioncounda traoré , former speaker of the national assembly . it has suffered from internal divisions , military interference , and limited popular legitimacy . years of corruption and mismanagement also appear to have hollowed out many state institutions . high - level corruption , reportedly tied , in part , to criminal trafficking networks , contributed to public distaste for the government and to initial support for the coup against then - president amadou toumani touré . they also destroyed historic and cultural sites , including unesco world heritage - designated ancient mosques and tombs , and recruited child soldiers , among other abuses . france launched military operations in northern mali on january 11 , 2013 , after islamist fighters — following months of stalemate — suddenly advanced toward the south and defeated malian military forces in the central town of konna . france's decision marked an abrupt , major shift in international responses to the situation in mali , as policymakers had previously emphasized that any solution in mali had to be african - led . french president françois hollande justified the intervention based on the malian government's request for help , portraying french action as necessary to prevent mali's capital from falling into terrorist hands and to protect some 6,000 french residents . french troop reinforcements in bamako also appeared aimed at deterring actors who might try to further destabilize or attack mali's interim government . since then , french forces have made rapid gains in reclaiming cities and towns in the north . do aqim and associated groups in northern mali primarily pose a threat to regional security , or do they pose a more direct threat to the united states ? what has been the impact of international military operations in mali on the level of threat these groups pose to u.s. interests ? where might core terrorist actors move as they are pushed out of northern malian towns ? how are aqim and associated groups reacting to international military strikes ?