detainers were then issued for some of these aliens . the department of homeland security ( dhs ) emphasized that it prioritized "criminal aliens," those who posed a threat to public safety , and repeat immigration violators for removal through secure communities , and the former director of ice further instructed that , among "criminal aliens," the focus was to be upon those convicted of "aggravated felonies," as defined in the immigration and nationality act ( ina ) ; those convicted of other felonies ; and those convicted of three or more misdemeanors . however , it notes that detainers "are issued pursuant to sections 236 and 287" of the ina . section 236 authorizes or requires the detention of certain aliens pending their removal , while section 287 generally specifies the powers of immigration officers and employees ( as well as expressly authorizes the issuance of detainers for controlled substance offenses ) . these detainer regulations currently provide that "[a]ny authorized immigration officer may at any time issue a form i - 247 … to any other federal , state , or local law enforcement agency," and identify specific personnel authorized to issue detainers ( eg , deportation officers ; immigration inspectors ) . these personnel are the same personnel who are authorized to make warrantless arrests for violations of federal immigration law under certain conditions , as discussed below . in addition , the regulations: require that other agencies requesting the issuance of a detainer provide dhs with "all documentary records and information" related to the alien's status ; limit the period for which aliens may be held at dhs's request so that dhs may assume custody to 48 hours ( excluding weekends and federal holidays ) ; and specify that dhs is not financially responsible for an alien's detention unless it issues a detainer for , or assumes custody of , the alien . the standard detainer form ( form 1-247 ) has apparently been in use since at least 1984 , and has been amended several times , including in response to criticisms of the secure communities program . this form enables ice to notify another agency that it has ( 1 ) determined that an individual is an alien subject to removal based on certain grounds specified on the form ( eg , a prior felony conviction ) , or otherwise noted by immigration officials ; ( 2 ) initiated removal proceedings and served a notice to appear or other charging document on the alien ; ( 3 ) served a warrant of arrest for removal proceedings ; or ( 4 ) obtained an order of deportation or removal for the alien . it also allows ice to request that the other agency take one or more of the following actions: maintain custody of the subject for a period not to exceed 48 hours , excluding saturdays , sundays , and holidays , beyond the time when the subject would have otherwise been released from ... custody to allow dhs to take custody of the subject . provide a copy to the subject of th[e] detainer . notify [dhs] of the time of release at least 30 days prior to release or as far in advance as possible .