109-163 , as amended. ) there are five separate reporting requirements , one in the appropriations legislation ( a notification before funds are transferred ) and four in the authorization legislation ( one a notification before programs are initiated , one when guidance is issued , one when guidance and processes are fully operational , and one an annual report ) . section 8003 ( d ) of the fy2014 omnibus appropriations legislation ( p.l . 113-76 ) requires the state department to notify the appropriations committees 15 days prior to making any transfers from the incle , fmf , and pko accounts to the gscf in accordance with regular notification procedures , including a detailed justification , implementation plan , and timeline for each proposed project , but is not subject to prior consultation with the appropriations committees . section 8068 requires dod to notify the congressional defense committees in writing 30 days prior to making transfers from the operations and maintenance , defense - wide account to the gscf with the source of funds and a detailed justification , execution plan , and timeline for each proposed project . the fy2014 ndaa amended ndaa reporting requirements slightly . the authorizing legislation requires the secretaries of state and defense to notify specified congressional committees at four points . specified committees are the house and senate appropriations committees and armed services committees , the house committee on foreign affairs , and the senate committee on foreign relations . the secretary of state and the secretary of defense must notify the specified committees not less than 30 days before initiating an activity . no funds may be transferred into the fund until 15 days after congress is notified . the notification regarding the initiation of program activities is to include a detailed justification for the program , its budget , execution , plan and timeline , a list of other security - related assistance or justice sector and stabilization assistance being provided to that country that is related to or supported by that activity , and any other appropriate information . the secretaries of state and defense shall jointly submit a report to the specified committees no later than 15 days after the date on which guidance and processes for implementation of programs have been issued , and shall jointly submit additional reports not later than 15 days after future changes to guidance and processes . a related notification requirement mandates that the secretary of state , with the concurrence of the secretary of defense shall jointly notify congress 15 days after the date on which all necessary guidance has been issued and the processes for implementing programs "are established and fully operational. the secretaries of state and defense must jointly submit an annual report on programs , activities , and funding no later than october 30 of each year . for programs to be conducted under fy2012 funding , the secretary of state designated seven countries as recipients of gscf assistance: nigeria , philippines , bangladesh , and libya , as well as three central european countries , hungary , romania , and slovakia . the appropriate division of labor between the state department and dod , especially for security assistance , is a matter of debate .