presentation of dates . the legislative language in fdasia differs across titles and sections in how it refers to the timing of required actions . to achieve consistent presentation of timing , this appendix presents ( with very few exceptions ) time - specific requirements in date form . when fdasia provides an actual date , the appendix uses that date . when fdasia refers to an event , the date is calculated ; for example , when the legislative language reads "not less than 60 days before the start of the fiscal year," the appendix presents this as august 2 , the calculated number of days from october 1 . when a time - specific requirement is not pegged to a date or event ( eg , at least every five years ) , it is noted as such . when a requirement recurs annually , the table shows only the month and day that action must occur each year . for efficiency of presentation and overall view of timed requirements , when a time - specific requirement is defined by a range , the table lists the last day of the range . for example , tables in this appendix would list the timing reference as "july 9 , 2013," in each of the following three situations: comparison to fda implementation tracking chart on november 27 , 2012 , fda created a website that lists the "requirements with specific statutory dates set by congress" ; the agency intends to update the chart to "communicate its progress. comparing the information that fda posted with the material in this appendix reveals some differences in scope and level of detail . the main differences are as follows: the fda chart includes only deliverables for which fda is responsible . this appendix includes actions required of all federal entities . the fda chart includes actions specified in the letters from the secretary to congress that present the performance goals negotiated with industry for the user fee programs . this appendix includes only requirements specified in fdasia . the fda chart includes a column that fda will use to publicly track its progress as it completes each requirement . this appendix does not duplicate that effort . legal effect of deadlines as a matter of administrative law , the enforceability of statutory deadlines is determined primarily via private civil litigation against the agency for failure to comply with the deadline . although a court may compel an agency to take action when the agency has "unreasonably delayed," courts generally provide agencies deference in order to avoid dictating how an agency should allocate its limited resources . in telecommunications research & action center v. fcc ( trac ) , the circuit court of appeals for the district of columbia ( d.c . circuit ) established a set of factors to consider when determining whether an agency has delayed unreasonably in taking a required action . in trac , the d.c .