pursuant to s.con.res . 29 in the 114 th congress ( 2015-2016 ) , the 2017 inaugural ceremony will be held at the u.s. capitol , with the swearing - in ceremony on the west front steps and special events held in the rotunda and emancipation hall of the capitol visitor center . appointments are generally for the length of committee activities . for house committee members , however , reappointment is necessary because an intervening election occurs between initial appointment and the inaugural ceremony . the need to reappoint committee members does not generally apply to the senate , unless a senate committee member leaves the chamber in the intervening election . although the senate and house have had equal membership on the joint inaugural committee for more than a century , the committee has always been chaired by a senator . additionally , the panel has always included at least one member of senate committee on rules ( 1901-1945 ) , or the senate committee on rules and administration ( 1949-2009 ) . the repeated involvement of members of the senate rules committee or the committee on rules and administration in the work of the joint inaugural committee reflects some of the key responsibilities assigned to the committee . there is no evidence indicating that the house seriously challenged this reasoning until 1901 . since 1901 , when the first joint inaugural committee was authorized , membership on the committee has consisted of three senators and three members of the house of representatives . currently , appointments to the committee are made by the president of the senate and the speaker of the house respectively . since 1947 , pursuant to the legislative reorganization act of 1946 , the rules and administration committee — under senate rule xxv — has had jurisdiction over "[f]ederal elections generally , including the election of the president , vice president , and members of the congress. rule xxv further gives the committee authority over matters relating to the "payment of money out of the contingent fund of the senate or creating a charge upon the same," thereby granting the panel authority over the miscellaneous costs ( eg , capitol police security costs ) associated with the inauguration . prior to 1947 , the precise legislative responsibilities of committees were not enumerated in senate rules . committee jurisdictions were determined by committee name and by precedent . measures establishing the joint inaugural committee have never authorized the employment of specialized staff . between 1901 and 1992 , congress approved two quadrennial funding resolutions for the inauguration — one covering the expenses associated with the inaugural ceremonies , which stipulated the amount of funds being appropriated for the joint inaugural committee to make arrangements for the official ceremony on capitol hill ; and the other providing funds for the district of columbia to maintain public order and provide fire protection . the funds appropriated for the joint inaugural committee were used to construct the inaugural platform , to prepare seating for those attending the swearing - in of the president and vice president , and to reimburse other entities for salaries and expenses incurred in arranging the inaugural ceremonies .