some works . some falls short . some goes too far , in a legal arena that's notorious for its complications. these new provisions detail congressional attention to the issues of sexual assault , requiring more focus on prevention , reporting , judicial proceedings , and addressing the needs of victims . reference ( s ) : crs report r41874 , fy2012 national defense authorization act: selected military personnel policy issues , coordinated by [author name scrubbed] . crs point of contact: catherine theohary , x[phone number scrubbed] , or [author name scrubbed] , x[phone number scrubbed] . background: section 1146 of u.s.c . 10 allows members who are involuntarily separated during the period beginning october 1 , 2007 , and ending on december 31 , 2012 , to continue to use commissary and exchange stores during the two - year period beginning on the date of the involuntary separation . discussion: this change would extend the use of commissary and exchange privileges to those involuntarily separated beyond its original termination date in 2012 until 2018 . this benefit arguably eases the transition out of the military for those who otherwise would have remained in the service . reference ( s ) : none . crs point of contact: [author name scrubbed] , x[phone number scrubbed] . background: the military survivor benefit plan , or sbp , provides annuities to designated survivors ( usually the spouses ) of military personnel and retirees . personnel are automatically enrolled and can only reduce or eliminate coverage with the signed consent of the spouse . under the civil service retirement system , or csrs , a military retiree who becomes a federal employee can waive their military retired pay and have their military time credited to their civil service retirement . a military retiree who does so can halt participation in the military sbp only if the retiree opts to provide survivor benefits under csrs . csrs is a closed retirement system however , and retirees who now enter the civil service are covered by the federal employees retirement system ( fers ) . prior to enactment of section 641 , the law did not provide a sbp opt out option for retirees under fers . discussion: this change would create parity between csrs and fers retirees . reference ( s ) : crs report rl31664 , the military survivor benefit plan: a description of its provisions , by [author name scrubbed] . crs point of contact: [author name scrubbed] , x[phone number scrubbed] . background : tricare is a health care program serving uniformed service members , retirees , their dependents , and survivors . 4310 , as passed by the house, does not include the administration's 2013 budget proposals to raise premiums for military retirees using a three - tier model based on retirement pay brackets , to index the tricare catastrophic cap to the national health expenditure , and to introduce enrollment fees for tricare standard / extra and tricare for life . the administration's proposal would have increased the annual enrollment for working age retirees in the tricare prime family option between $31 and $128 per month , with those in the upper - income bracket seeing the larger increase . discussion: the enacted bill did not adopt the administration's proposals .