if congress were to eliminate the cap , it would have to make up the amount of the cvf through offsets . 98-473 ) to provide funding for state victim compensation and assistance programs . since 1984 , voca has been amended several times to support additional victim - related activities . these amendments established within the cvf discretionary grants for private organizations ; the federal victim notification system ; funding for victim assistance staff in the federal bureau of investigation ( fbi ) and executive office of u.s . attorneys ( eousa ) ; funding for the children's justice act program ; and assistance and compensation for victims of terrorism . in 1988 , the office for victims of crime ( ovc ) was formally established within the department of justice ( doj ) to administer the cvf . as authorized by voca , the ovc awards cvf money through formula and discretionary grants to states , local units of government , individuals , and other entities . the ovc also distributes cvf money to specially designated programs , such as the children's justice act program and the federal victim notification system ( see figure 1 ) . the ovc's mission is to enhance the nation's capacity to assist crime victims and to improve attitudes , policies , and practices that promote justice and help victims . according to the ovc , this mission is accomplished by ( 1 ) administering the cvf , ( 2 ) supporting direct services for victims , ( 3 ) providing training programs for service providers , ( 4 ) sponsoring the development of best practices for service providers , and ( 5 ) producing reports on best practices . until fy2016 , cvf money had not been used to fund grant programs outside of those authorized by voca ; however , in the fy2016 and fy2017 appropriations acts , cvf funds were transferred to the office on violence against women ( ovw ) to be used for specified grant programs authorized under the violence against women act . federal spending can be divided into the budget categories of discretionary spending , mandatory spending , and net interest . 110-181 ) included a provision mandating that the attorney general transfer from the emergency reserve of the cvf "such funds as may be required" to cover the costs of special masters appointed by u.s. district courts in civil cases brought against state sponsors of terrorism . the addition of new programs , increases in funding to other programs funded by the cvf , and new management and administration costs cause a reduction in funding available for victim assistance formula grants and discretionary grants . congress may choose to review the allocation formula to determine if changes should be made to reduce the impact of fluctuations in obligated funds on these grants . since 1984 , voca has been amended several times to support additional victim - related activities and accommodate the needs of specific groups of victims , such as child abuse victims and victims of terrorist acts . congress may choose to continue amending voca to further accommodate the needs of additional special populations , such as victims of elder abuse and rural victims .