in some cases , the service is provided by the same company that owns the track . however , since shippers' needs do not correspond to railroads' track ownership , freight operators trade trackage or haulage rights and share revenue from the shipper . hypothetically , if two rail networks have different ptc systems because they do not currently share track or services , it may be cost prohibitive to implement a new service over these two lines . similarly , one company could upgrade or modify its ptc system , forcing further investment by other companies using its track . also , if the radio spectrum licenses are owned by certain railroads or a consortium of railroads , they could dictate leasing prices to operate necessary ptc systems on that spectrum for a new railroad or service which is not part of the consortium . control of spectrum and interoperability issues with ptc could be used as tools to prevent new services on existing lines or even using an interoperable spectrum on new lines . it projected annual maintenance costs of $850 million . in recent years , fixed - capital investment by u.s. railroads has been around $15 billion annually , of which about $10 billion has been for structures and $5 billion for equipment . the estimated capital cost of meeting the ptc mandate is thus almost equal to the railroads' total capital spending in a single year . the four largest railroad companies account for almost all of the estimated 60,000 miles of class i track that fall under the ptc mandate . in 2017 , csx estimated its cost of installing ptc to be $2.4 billion , of which $1.8 billion had been expended through 2016 , while as of 2018 union pacific estimated its total cost for ptc to be $2.9 billion , of which $2.3 billion had been spent by the end of 2016 . smaller freight companies often share track with the class i railroads . while this presents interoperability challenges , there is opportunity to use the ptc type approvals from the larger companies' development efforts to save cost . this is also the case with shared passenger rail in the northeast corridor . despite this advantage , the infrastructure cost alone for just two of the five largest transit agencies operating on the corridor , metro - north in the new york area and the southeastern pennsylvania transportation authority in the philadelphia area , has been estimated at $350 million and $100 million , respectively . as the fra has stated ( see text box ) , the expense of ptc could constrain commuter rail development , diverting commuters to less safe forms of transportation . commuter railroads' cost for installing ptc is likely to be borne primarily by state or local governments . in addition to capital costs , operating and maintenance costs will increase as well . this could be a barrier to both railroad expansion and startup services . another barrier to market entry could arise from the need for interoperability and spectrum compatibility . the possibility that ptc could impede competition may be of particular concern for short line and regional railroads which operate on class i track .