likewise , in j.l . v. mohawk central school district , doj intervened in a lawsuit filed by a transgender male student who alleged that the school district had violated title ix and the equal protection clause of the u.s. constitution by failing to take action to remedy harassment based on gender stereotypes . the school district and doj eventually reached a court - approved settlement agreement that provided a number of remedies to address discrimination on the basis of sex , gender identity , gender expression , and sexual orientation . the stated purpose of the legislation ( h.r . 846 / s. 439 in the 114 th congress ) is to ensure that students are free from discriminatory conduct such as harassment , bullying , intimidation , and violence . snda appears to be patterned on title ix of the education amendments of 1972 , which prohibits discrimination on the basis of sex in federally funded education programs or activities , although snda does differ from title ix in several important respects . in the 113 th congress , snda was included as part of legislation to reauthorize the elementary and secondary education act ( esea ) . similar legislation to reauthorize the esea is pending in the 114 th congress , and it is possible that snda could be incorporated into one of these bills during the legislative process . this report begins by discussing current laws that prohibit discrimination in education , and continues with an analysis of the specific provisions contained in snda , including provisions relating to coverage , prohibited acts , and enforcement and remedies under the proposed legislation . under current law , no civil rights statute explicitly prohibits discrimination in schools on the basis of sexual orientation or gender identity , although there are several civil rights statutes that bar discrimination in education on other grounds . in addition to title ix , the applicable federal civil rights statutes that currently prohibit discrimination in schools include title vi of the civil rights act of 1964 ( cra ) , which prohibits discrimination on the basis of race , color , or national origin in federally funded programs or activities ; section 504 of the rehabilitation act of 1973 , which prohibits discrimination on the basis of disability in federally funded programs or activities ; title ii of the americans with disabilities act of 1990 ( ada ) , which prohibits discrimination on the basis of disability by state or local governments ; title iv of the cra , which bars discrimination in public schools on the basis of race , color , sex , religion , or national origin ; and the equal educational opportunities act , which prohibits states from denying equal educational opportunities based on race , color , sex , or national origin . the last two statutes were largely designed to combat segregation in public schools . although none of these civil rights statutes explicitly prohibits discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation or gender identity , there may be instances in which such discrimination may also be a form of sex discrimination that violates title ix .