credits are either nonrefundable or refundable . by definition , the value of nonrefundable tax credits cannot exceed a taxpayer's income tax liability . in contrast , refundable tax credits can be larger than a taxpayer's income tax liability , with the taxpayer receiving the difference ( or part of the difference in the case of partially refundable tax credits ) as a cash payment from the irs . as a result of this distinction , refundable tax credits can be claimed by taxpayers with little or no income tax liability , which includes many low - income tax filers . the existing refundable tax credits include the earned income tax credit ( eitc ) ; the additional child tax credit ( actc ) , which is the refundable portion of the child tax credit ; the american opportunity tax credit , which is a partially refundable credit for tuition and related expenses ; the health coverage tax credit , which provides a credit for health insurance costs of qualifying individuals who receive trade adjustment assistance ( taa ) or pension benefits under a plan taken over by the pension benefit guaranty corporation ( pbgc ) ; the credit for tax withheld on wages ; the credit for tax withheld at source for nonresident aliens and foreign corporations ; the credit for fuel excise taxes paid on fuel used for nontaxable uses ; and the credit for overpayment of tax . additionally , a premium assistance credit , provided under the patient protection and affordable care act ( p.l . 111-148 ) , will go into effect in 2014 . there are also several refundable credits that have recently expired . these are the first - time homebuyer credit , the "recovery rebate" credit in the economic stimulus act of 2008 ( 2008 stimulus credit ) , the making work pay credit available in 2009 and 2010 , and the adoption expenses credit , which was refundable for 2010 and 2011 . selected credits are summarized in appendix a . the credits listed in the last four bulleted points above are essentially methods by which taxpayers receive refunds for overpayment of taxes . the other refundable credits can be broadly categorized into those whose value depends on the taxpayer's earnings and those whose value is based on the taxpayer's expenditures for a particular action or good , such as higher education or homeownership . currently , the two largest refundable tax credits — the eitc and actc — fall into the former category and comprise an estimated 95% of the total amount of refundable credits claimed in 2009 . these credits effectively subsidize low - wage work , providing additional money for each dollar of wages . in addition , both credits help mitigate the federal taxes that low - income workers pay . in many cases , these workers may not have sufficient income to incur an income tax liability , but they do pay payroll taxes ( i.e. , the taxes on wages that fund social security benefits under the old - age , survivors , and disability insurance ( oasdi ) program and the medicare hospital insurance ( hi ) program ) . the report concludes with a discussion of selected policy options .