this is the result of a number of trends . citizens throughout latin america and the caribbean have elected ideologically diverse leaders , bringing an end to the post - cold war policy consensus . at the same time , many countries in the region have enjoyed considerable economic growth , grown more confident in addressing their challenges , and diversified their commercial and diplomatic relations . these developments have enabled countries in the region to pursue more independent foreign policies that are less deferential to the united states . u.s. policymakers have responded to the united states' declining ability to advance its policy preferences within the oas in a number of ways . some members of congress , frustrated by the organization's inaction on the political crisis in venezuela , contend that the oas is failing in its mission to support democracy and human rights in latin america . they have called on the u.s. government to use its influence in the organization to compel stronger action on these issues and occasionally have sought to withhold funding from the organization . others argue that oas actions continue to align closely with u.s. priorities in many cases and that the oas should not be deemed ineffective solely based on its inability to resolve a few high - profile challenges . they have called for reforms to strengthen the organization . as congress continues to debate the utility of the oas for advancing u.s. policies and considers appropriations and other legislation related to the organization , it might examine oas activities in the hemisphere and the extent to which those activities align with u.s. objectives . this report briefly discusses the history of the oas and its principal institutional bodies ; examines the organization's funding and current priorities ; and analyzes a number of policy issues that have drawn congressional interest in recent years , including the application of the inter - american democratic charter , the challenges facing the inter - american human rights system , the management and budget of the oas , and the potential reintegration of cuba into the inter - american system . in 2014 , the general assembly adopted a "strategic vision of the oas," which reiterates that the four core pillars of the organization's mission are strengthening democracy ; promoting and protecting human rights ; advancing integral development ; and fostering multidimensional security . those objectives are "predominantly aligned with the high - level strategic goals for the western hemisphere" of the u.s. department of state and the u.s. agency for international development ( usaid ) . congress plays an important role in determining u.s. policy toward the oas . as noted previously , the united states provided more than 44% of the organization's funding in fy2017 . congress appropriates funds for the assessed contribution of the united states , as well as voluntary contributions to support specific projects in the hemisphere . congress also is involved in the development of inter - american treaties , as any conventions negotiated by the executive branch must be submitted to the senate for its advice and consent to ratification . moreover , congress is charged with providing oversight of how u.s. funds are spent .