certain individuals will be exempt from the individual mandate . , performing its functions on the internet ) . it may be governed by a public agency , a private entity , or a hybrid organization . "customers" can include individuals and businesses . most private health insurance plans sold through exchanges must include a comprehensive set of benefits . the law specifies standards for the types and levels of coverage that can be offered through exchanges . beginning in 2014 , most individuals are required to have health insurance or potentially pay a penalty for noncompliance . generally , individuals will be required to maintain "minimum essential coverage" for themselves and their dependents . the insurance companies ( "issuers" ) that choose to sell their products through an exchange may be required to comply with consumer protections , such as offering insurance to every qualified applicant . the exchange must identify the employee , indicate the employee's eligibility , explain that the employer may be subject to penalty , and notify the employer of the right to appeal the determination . this reform not only expanded eligibility to a group that generally is not eligible for medicaid ( low - income childless adults ) , but also raised medicaid's mandatory income eligibility level for certain existing groups to 133% of the fpl . states were required to do this mandatory expansion as a condition of receipt of medicaid federal financial participation . given that premium credits would be available through all exchanges at the same time as this medicaid expansion , the law envisioned that all individuals with income up to 400% fpl would have access to subsidized coverage , regardless of their state of residency . on june 28 , 2012 , the united states supreme court issued its decision in national federation of independent business v. sebelius . the court held that the federal government cannot terminate current medicaid program federal matching funds if a state refuses to expand its medicaid program to include non - elderly , non - pregnant adults under 133% of the federal poverty level . if a state accepts the new aca medicaid expansion funds , it must abide by the new expansion coverage rules , but , based on the court's opinion , it appears that a state can refuse to participate in the expansion without losing any of its current federal medicaid matching funds . exchanges , however , are not issuers ; rather , exchanges contract with issuers who will make insurance products available for purchase through exchanges . essentially , exchanges are designed to bring together buyers and sellers of insurance , with the goal of increasing access to coverage . this rather broad definition allows for a great deal of latitude , and therefore variance , in the number and scope of responsibilities covered in a particular exchange . for example , the role of an exchange may be more or less administrative: facilitating the sale and purchase of health insurance . an administrative - only exchange may function similar to websites that allow individuals to find airline travel options and purchase tickets ( eg , kayak ) .