many companies operate pipelines in both countries . these threats are discussed in the following sections . the federal program for u.s. pipeline security began under the department of transportation ( dot ) immediately after the terror attacks of september 11 , 2001 . the aviation and transportation security act of 2001 ( p.l . 107-71 ) , which established the transportation security administration within the dot , authorized the agency "to issue , rescind , and revise such regulations as are necessary" to carry out its functions ( ยง101 ) . tsa was transferred to the department of homeland security ( dhs ) , newly created under the homeland security act of 2002 ( p.l . homeland security presidential directive 7 maintained dhs as the lead agency for pipeline security , and instructed the dot to "collaborate in regulating the transportation of hazardous materials by all modes ( including pipelines ) . the implementing recommendations of the 9 / 11 commission act of 2007 ( p.l . 110-53 ) directs tsa to promulgate pipeline security regulations and carry out necessary inspection and enforcement if the agency determines that regulations are appropriate ( ยง1557 ( d ) ) . thus , tsa has primary responsibility and regulatory authority for the security of natural gas and hazardous liquid ( eg , oil , carbon dioxide ) pipelines in the united states . pipeline security activities at tsa are led by the pipeline security division ( psd ) within the agency's office of security policy and industry engagement ( ospie ) . the psd is staffed by 13 employees funded out of tsa's general budget . although tsa has regulatory authority for pipeline security under p.l . 110-53 , its activities to date have relied upon voluntary industry compliance with the agency's security guidance and best practice recommendations . this guidance includes a number of general cybersecurity provisions . under its corporate security review program , tsa visits the largest pipeline and natural gas distribution operators to review their security plans and inspect their facilities to evaluate whether each company is following the intent of its security guidance . pipelines are also included in dhs's multi - modal cybersecurity initiatives , such as its control system security program ( cssp ) . tsa also has established a public / private partnership - based cybersecurity program supporting the national infrastructure protection plan . the agency's initial focus was on raising cybersecurity awareness and performing outreach to the various transportation modes , including pipelines . the interstate natural gas association of america maintains its own extensive cyber security guidelines for natural gas pipeline control systems . the american petroleum institute likewise maintains an industry standard for oil pipeline control system security . pipeline operators have scheduled participation in dhs - sponsored control systems cybersecurity training and also participate in the dhs industrial control systems joint working group . in addition to these efforts , the department of energy operates the national scada test bed program , a partnership with idaho national laboratory , sandia national laboratories , and other national laboratories which addresses control system security challenges in the energy sector . among its key functions , the program performs control systems testing , research and development ; control systems requirements development ; and industry outreach .