the first is absolute but … the second cannot be . conduct remains subject to regulation for the protection of society. the history of the court's free exercise jurisprudence indicates that religious beliefs cannot excuse "compliance with an otherwise valid law prohibiting conduct that the state is free to regulate. the court has upheld laws proscribing behavior that may be compelled by some religious beliefs , including polygamy laws , child labor laws , sunday - closing laws , conscription laws , and tax laws , as well as controlled substances laws . snda's prohibition against discrimination would be a law of general applicability . it would apply broadly to regulate the behavior of all students , regardless of their religious affiliation . it would not impact only a particular religious group , nor would it restrict actions taken only because of religious belief . for example , a student with no religious affiliation who opposes homosexuality would be equally affected by the enactment of snda as would a student whose opposition of homosexuality stemmed from his or her religious beliefs . regardless of the source of animus toward a particular sexual orientation or gender identity , discrimination resulting from that animus would be prohibited . furthermore , snda would not require acceptance of all sexual orientations or gender identities . it only would require that individuals refrain from discriminating against students based on sexual orientation or gender identity . in other words , snda would regulate behaviors , not beliefs , consistent with first amendment requirements . the u.s. supreme court has considered challenges to school policies regulating the use of schools and school resources under a combination of constitutional and statutory rules discussed above . under the court's jurisprudence , public schools generally cannot deny religious groups access to the schools or the schools' resources if the same facilities or resources are made available to nonreligious groups . that is , while the policies ensure that individual students are not discriminated against , their application arguably effects discrimination against student groups that seek to exercise their right for selectivity in membership . intended to ensure that students are free from discriminatory conduct such as harassment , bullying , intimidation , and violence , the proposed student non - discrimination act ( snda ) would prohibit discrimination on the basis of actual or perceived sexual orientation in public elementary and secondary schools . however , the tenets of some religions disapprove of certain sexual orientations or gender identities , and some religious groups may seek legal protections to ensure that their ability to exercise those religious beliefs would not be infringed if snda were enacted . to ensure the continued protection of these groups' existing rights , section 9 ( b ) of snda states: "nothing in this act shall be construed to alter legal standards regarding , or affect the rights available to individuals or groups under , other federal laws that establish protections for freedom of speech and expression , such as legal standards and rights available to religious and other student groups under the first amendment and the equal access act. therefore , under snda , protections afforded by the first amendment and the equal access act discussed in this report would apply without change .