figure 15 illustrates the results . the figure indicates that in situ oil sands operations have a substantially higher energy yield — energy produced per disturbed land ( measured in petajoules per hectare ) — than other sources . however , when natural gas use is included in the estimate , in situ operations' energy yield decreases substantially , making its energy yield equivalent to conventional oil development from california , but still greater than oil sands mining operations in canada . how do the keystone xl operating parameters compare to other dilbit pipelines ? the nrc collected operating parameter data from five canadian pipeline operators transporting dilbit . the highest reported operating temperature was 122°f and the highest reported operating pressure was 1,440 psig . thus , both the "expected" maximum temperature ( 135°f ) and the potential maximum operating pressure ( 1,600 psig ) of the keystone xl pipeline would exceed operating parameter data presented in the nrc report . it is uncertain whether or not these potential temperature and pressure differences are a cause for concern . dos states that the proposed pipeline would satisfy the department of transportation's pipeline and hazardous materials safety administration ( phmsa ) regulations ( 49 cfr part 195 ) that apply to hazardous liquid pipelines . in addition , keystone agreed to implement 57 additional measures ( "special conditions" ) developed by phmsa . in consultation with phmsa , dos determined that incorporation of those conditions "would result in a degree of safety over any other typically constructed domestic oil pipeline system under current code and a degree of safety along the entire length of the proposed pipeline system , similar to that required in [high consequence areas ( hcas ) ] as defined in 49 code of federal regulations ( cfr ) 195.450. . dos compares the special conditions with existing regulatory requirements in appendix b to the 2014 feis . the degree of safety provided by the additional 57 measures has been a subject of debate . the primary author of the 2011 environmental groups' report argued that only 12 of these conditions actually differ in some way from minimum requirements . oil spill frequency and volume estimates for the keystone xl project have been a subject of debate during the permit process . comparing various estimates is difficult , because the estimates may or may not 1. include different years of underlying data ; 2. apply to different pipeline segments ( eg , the 875-mile northern u.s. portion or the entire 1,938-mile pipeline from canada to the gulf coast ) ; 3. apply to different components of the pipeline ( eg , the mainline or the mainline and supporting equipment , such as tanks and valves ) ; and 4. include additional assumptions or adjustments . in the 2014 feis , dos used phmsa data to analyze crude oil pipeline spill incidents that occurred between 2002 and 2012 . dos stated that "although the results were not a direct indicator of the nature of possible incidents that could occur in association with the proposed [keystone xl pipeline] , they could be used to provide insight into what could potentially occur with respect to spill volume , incident cause , and incident frequency.