appendix a . background on conflict and armed actors in eastern drc armed conflict has plagued eastern drc since the mid - 1990s , notably in the border region adjacent to uganda , rwanda , and burundi — primarily the provinces of north kivu , south kivu , and eastern orientale . this conflict has spawned a large number of armed militias , some politically oriented and some primarily criminal . conflict in the area has varied roots and causes , but is , in large part , an artifact of two wars that began in the east . the first followed the mid - 1994 takeover of state power in rwanda by the ethnic tutsi - led rwandan patriotic front ( rpf ) , which ended the rwandan genocide . in the wake of the genocide , rwandan ethnic hutu militia forces and elements of the rump ousted hutu - led government fled rwanda into eastern zaire , along with large numbers of hutu refugees , and settled in border camps . this influx fueled pre - existing local ethnic tensions , sometimes violent , and competition over land and resources , trends which were aggravated by persistent predation by various zairian state security forces . the exiled hutu militia forces controlled and used the refugee camps as a rear base for cross - border attacks into rwanda . these forces , sometimes together with other local ethnic militias and the zairian armed forces ( faz ) , also launched attacks on zairian tutsis , the banyamulenge . in response , in 1996 , an rpf - backed , largely banyamulenge force broke up the camps and forced a mass repatriation of the bulk of refugees to rwanda . recalcitrant militant hutu elements and large numbers of accompanying refugees fled deeper into zaire , pursued by the rpf - backed force , which also skirmished with faz elements . simultaneously , leaders of the rpf - allied force joined with several obscure or defunct zairian rebel groups and other restive elements to form the alliance of democratic forces for the liberation of congo - zaire ( afdl ) in october 1996 . led by laurent - désiré kabila and backed by several neighboring governments , the afdl marched across zaire and ousted the regime of mobutu sese seko , zaire's leader since 1965 . after seizing the capital , kinshasa , in may 1997 , they assumed state power . a second civil war began in august 1998 . it was sparked by a military rebellion in the east that was ostensibly motivated by concerns over corruption and poor governance under kabila , but was underpinned by ethnic divisions within the afdl . in subsequent months , the war burgeoned , spawning the creation of numerous new congolese armed factions and prompting extensive intervention by the militaries of neighboring states opposed to or supportive of the kabila government . kabila was assassinated in early 2001 and succeeded by his son , joseph kabila , drc's recently re - elected president . beginning in 1999 , a series of peace accords was signed . they eventually led to the deployment of a u.n. peacekeeping mission and the creation of an interim congolese government , based on a 2002 peace accord .