113-6 reported by dhs . they are available for obligation and included in the president's budget to calculate the gross budget authority . appendix b. dhs appropriations in context federal government - wide homeland security funding since the terrorist attacks of september 11 , 2001 , there has been an increasing interest in the levels of funding available for homeland security efforts . the office of management and budget , as originally directed by the fy1998 national defense authorization act , has published an annual report to congress on combating terrorism . beginning with the june 24 , 2002 , edition of this report , homeland security was included as a part of the analysis . in subsequent years , this homeland security funding analysis has become more refined , as distinctions ( and account lines ) between homeland and non - homeland security activities have become more precise . this means that while table b - 1 is presented in such a way as to allow year - to - year comparisons , they may in fact not be strictly comparable due to the increasing specificity of the analysis , as outlined above . with regard to dhs funding , it is important to note that dhs funding does not comprise all federal spending on homeland security efforts . in fact , while the largest component of federal spending on homeland security is contained within dhs , the dhs homeland security budget for fy2012 accounted for nearly 52% of total federal funding for homeland security . the department of defense comprised the next highest proportion at nearly 26% of all federal spending on homeland security . the department of health and human services at 6% , the department of justice at nearly 6% , and the department of state at more than 3% rounded out the top five agencies in spending on homeland security . these five agencies collectively accounted for approximately 93% of all federal spending on homeland security . it is also important to note that not all dhs funding is classified as pertaining to homeland security activities . the legacy agencies that became a part of dhs also conduct activities that are not homeland security related . therefore , while the enacted fy2012 budget bills and existing law included total homeland security budget authority of $35.1 billion for dhs , the total budget authority for dhs was $52.5 billion . moreover , the amounts shown in table b - 1 will not be consistent with total amounts shown elsewhere in the report . instead , they are counted as negative outlays . dhs net discretionary budget authority , or the total funds that are appropriated by congress each year , is composed of discretionary spending minus any fee or fund collections that offset discretionary spending . some collections offset a portion of an agency's discretionary budget authority . other collections offset an agency's mandatory spending . these mandatory spending elements are typically entitlement programs under which individuals , businesses , or units of government that meet the requirements or qualifications established by law are entitled to receive certain payments if they establish eligibility . the dhs budget features two mandatory entitlement programs: the secret service and the coast guard retired pay accounts ( pensions ) .