pursuant to h.r . 2309 , level twos could not accrue deferred compensation in years when usps expenditures exceed revenues . usps noted in its financial statements that it may be difficult to compare the pay of usps executives to that of private sector employees because of usps's unique mission , size , and scope . the pmg headed a service with 645,950 full and part - time employees as of september 30 , 2011 and revenues of $65.7 billion in fy2011 . although there are no government agencies or private sector companies that perform duties identical to that of usps , it may be helpful to examine the pay rates of public and private - sector managers at entities that perform some identical services , provide some identical products , require a similar managerial skills , or are of a similar size . examining the pay rates of these individuals may provide congress with a broader context of usps managerial pay . the 112 th congress has introduced legislation that would reduce or otherwise limit the compensation of postal executives and officers . both the house and senate proposals are components of bills that , in their entirety , seek to improve the postal service's condition . broadly speaking , usps's present financial troubles are caused by falling revenues and rising operating costs . in recent years , both the economic downturn and the widespread adoption of electronic communication have eroded postage sales . the usps's operating costs have increased , in part , to the postal accountability and enhancement act ( paea ) , which requires usps to prefund its future retirees' health benefits at a cost of approximately $5.6 billion per year . federal law also obligates usps to provide a wide range of services over a large geographic area six days per week at affordable and uniform prices . this "universal service obligation," as the prc has noted , costs the usps approximately $4.4 billion per year . meanwhile , the value of the usps's monopoly ( as the sole postal service provider ) , has fallen ( because of the decline in mail volume ) and generates perhaps $3.5 billion in annual revenues . usps executives are in an unusual position . they operate an entity with substantial legally conferred advantages ( eg , usps does not pay tax ) , but they have limited control over many of the factors that drive usps's revenues and costs . this makes it complex to assess the performance of usps executives and align their pay accordingly . whether the usps runs a profit or deficit in any one year is not entirely dependent upon the actions of the usps's top executives . congress may decide that current usps executive pay rates are at the optimum level to attract appropriate candidates to usps's executive roles — those who can balance usps's autonomy , legal obligations , and oversight requirements . in that case , usps would be authorized to pay up to 12 of its critical senior executives compensation greater than that of the vice president — and in some cases the president — ranking the pmg and other senior executives at usps among the highest paid federal employees .