note that this case predates the methodology test . can a group espousing a viewpoint be characterized as educational ? if so , does it have to provide factual information to support its statements ? relatedly , is there some standard for truthfulness and accuracy ? this report discusses the legal definition of the term "educational," as well as the constitutional implications of that definition . there is no statutory definition of the term "educational" in the irc . rather , the term is defined by a treasury regulation . it defines "educational" to encompass both ( 1 ) individual instruction "for the purpose of improving or developing his capabilities," and ( 2 ) "[t]he instruction of the public on subjects useful to the individual and beneficial to the community. the regulation goes on to address the heart of the matter about the term's scope: an organization may be educational even though it advocates a particular position or viewpoint so long as it presents a sufficiently full and fair exposition of the pertinent facts as to permit an individual or the public to form an independent opinion or conclusion . on the other hand , an organization is not educational if its principal function is the mere presentation of unsupported opinion . the regulation also provides examples of educational organizations , including schools of every educational level ; groups that hold public forums and lectures ; and museums and zoos . in 1986 , the internal revenue service ( irs ) developed the "methodology test" to supplement the regulation's "full and fair exposition" standard . the test assists in determining whether the method used by an organization to communicate a particular viewpoint or position is educational . under the test , a method is not educational if it fails to provide a "factual foundation" for the position or viewpoint or "a development from the relevant facts that would materially aid a listener or reader in a learning process. the irs has identified four factors that lead to the conclusion the method is not educational: a significant portion of the group's communications consists of the presentation of viewpoints or positions that are unsupported by facts ; facts that purport to support the viewpoints or positions are distorted ; the group's presentations make substantial use of inflammatory and disparaging terms and express conclusions based more on strong emotional feelings rather than objective evaluation ; and the presentation's approach is not aimed at developing the audience's understanding of the subject matter because it does not consider their background or training . absent exceptional circumstances , the presence of any one of these factors indicates the organization's method of communicating its views does not meet the criteria to be "educational. there is relatively little case law or irs rulings on the "full and fair exposition" test . a group advocating for the use of alternative schools was found to have met the test when it ( 1 ) made publicly available copies of all the briefs , including those of the opposing parties , filed in relevant legal actions ; ( 2 ) encouraged those with different viewpoints to submit articles to its newsletter ; and ( 3 ) provided information on a subject that was useful and beneficial to the public .