in response to the reconciliation instructions in h.con.res . 112 , the six committees reported their recommendations to the house budget committee , which assembled them into a single reconciliation bill ( h.r . 5652 ) that was passed by the house on may 15 , 2012 . the bca , enacted in august 2011 , provided for increases in the debt limit and established procedures designed to reduce the federal budget deficit . two components of the bca are relevant to understanding the cbo "current law" baseline for human resources programs , as it is presented in this report . first , title i of the bca established enforceable limits on discretionary spending for fy2012 through fy2021 . for fy2012 and fy2013 , the law provided separate amounts for discretionary spending in the "security" and "nonsecurity" categories . "security" was defined broadly to include the departments of veterans affairs ( va ) , homeland security ( dhs ) , and state , in addition to the department of defense and certain other activities ; and "nonsecurity" was defined as everything else . for fy2014 and subsequent years , no distinction was made between security and nonsecurity ; that is , title i of the law established a single discretionary spending limit for each of those years . second , the bca established a joint select committee on deficit reduction , tasked with developing legislation by november 23 , 2011 , to achieve $1.5 trillion in deficit reduction over the fy2013-fy2021 period . if congress failed to pass such legislation by january 15 , 2012 , reducing the deficit by at least $1.2 trillion , a series of automatic spending reductions would be triggered , specified in section 302 of the act . in fact , the joint committee did not meet its deadline and the necessary legislation was not enacted . thus , under current law , the first automatic spending reductions are scheduled to take effect on january 2 , 2013 . these automatic procedures include sequestration of mandatory spending for each of fy2013-fy2021 , a one - year sequestration of discretionary spending for fy2013 , and lower discretionary spending limits for fy2014-fy2021 . in addition to being lowered , the original discretionary spending limits ( discussed above ) are redefined so that security now consists only of budget function 050 ( which is primarily the department of defense ) . spending reductions are to be equally divided between security and nonsecurity , which means that half the reductions triggered by failure of the joint committee process will come primarily from the department of defense , and the other half will come from the remainder of the federal budget . it should be noted that a significant amount of nonsecurity spending is either exempt from the sequestration process or otherwise subject to a special rule that limits the size of the reduction . in its overall current law baseline estimates and projections , cbo incorporated the discretionary spending limits imposed by title i of the bca ( referred to in this report as the "original bca spending limits" ) and the additional spending reductions triggered by failure of the joint committee process ( referred to as the "additional bca spending reductions" ) .