, a "gratuity" ) . ยง2635.202 ( c ) ( 2 ) . it appears that the existing prohibition on "solicitations" of gifts would reach only solicitations which are restricted by the general rule , that is , solicitations of gifts from "prohibited sources," or given "because of the employee's official position. since the president is not flatly prohibited from accepting gifts from the general public , such a gift made to the president personally , and accepted , may be retained by him when he leaves office . gifts coming to the white house that are not intended for the president or first lady personally , however , but rather are given with the intent to be made for the "white house," or otherwise made to the government of the united states , and personal gifts not retained by the president or first lady , are catalogued , distributed , or disposed of by the united states . "furnishings," for example , may be accepted by the national park service for use in the white house ; "historic material" may be accepted by the archivist for the archives or presidential libraries ; and other gifts for the united states , or ones not retained by the president , may be transferred to the general services administration for disposition , storage , or sale . in addition to restrictions on the receipt of gifts , the president is required to publicly disclose personal financial information , including personal gifts over minimal amounts ( $350 as of this writing ) which have been received by him and his immediate family . these public disclosure reports are required each may 15 th , and upon leaving office , under the provisions of the ethics in government act of 1978 , as amended . despite the permissibility of the receipt and acceptance of gifts by the president and the first lady from the american public , certain acceptances of private gifts have in the past engendered some public and press criticism , and thus the receipt of particularly lavish or excessive gifts , even if free of legal liability , may not be free from political or public relations consequences . the underlying statutory restriction enacted in 1989 in many respects merely codified similar gift standards which had already been applicable to all executive branch employees by way of executive orders and regulations since 1965 . the current law , codified at 5 u.s.c . ยง7353 ( a ) , prohibits any federal officer or employee from soliciting or receiving any gift of any amount from a prohibited source , that is , from someone who is seeking action from , doing business with , or is regulated by one's agency , or whose interests may be substantially affected by the performance or nonperformance of one's official duties . the gift unit , therefore , sees to the disposition of most of these items . some are transferred to the national archives , and eventually join head of state gifts as part of a presidential library museum collection .