1734 and $500 million each under s. 2232 ) . similarly , under s. 2178 the director of omb would have the authority to require agencies to sell properties that are not excess or surplus . if agencies are holding properties that are valuable , and which they have not declared excess — the first step in the disposal process — then these bills may provide a mechanism by which those properties may be brought to the market and possibly generate greater net proceeds than sales have in recent years . an analytical discussion of the same provisions follows table 1 . each of the bills analyzed in this report establishes procedures for selecting federal properties to sell and for the distribution of sales proceeds . generally , each of the bills would apply net proceeds towards further real property disposals and reducing the federal deficit or debt . it is not clear , however , that much revenue might be generated under each bill , given the lack of even the most basic data needed for analysis . for example , it is not known how many excess , surplus , and underutilized properties are held by each agency , how much it would cost to bring each property to market , and the estimated fair market value of individual properties . frpp data show that sales have not generated significant net proceeds — the amount of revenue remaining after the costs of bringing the property to market are deducted — in recent years . for example , in fy2010 , the government sold 466 properties that generated in $57 million in net proceeds , and in fy2009 the government sold 2,228 properties that generated $50 million in net proceeds . the costs of bringing properties to market — whether they are due to environmental remediation , a backlog of needed repairs , or historic preservation requirements — or the undesirable location of unneeded properties are among reasons that so little profit is generated through sales . the proposed bills may increase sales revenue , however , by bringing properties to market that are in more desirable locations or less costly to prepare for sale . 1734 , for example , would both require the civilian property realignment commission to recommend at least five properties that are not identified as excess or surplus — and therefore not subject to disposal requirements — but which have relatively high fair market value ( $500 million total under h.r . 665 would limit the scope of its real property disposal pilot program to properties that are declared excess or surplus , but it might also increase sales revenue and net proceeds by bringing the 15 properties most likely to sell at a high market value to be auctioned . if agencies invest their real property funds in bringing these properties to market as soon as possible , then valuable properties which might otherwise have been conveyed or slowly moving through the screening process would be up for sale weeks , months , or even years sooner than under the current process .