6241 , the stop online sales ammunition act of 2012 . the results from this investigation present a marked contrast from the earlier gao investigation . the city of new york's investigation examined 125 private sellers from 14 states who advertised on 10 different websites . investigators indicated to these private sellers that they "probably couldn't pass a background check. of the 125 private sellers , 77 agreed to sell a gun to someone who said he could not pass a background check . while these investigations were conducted several years apart and were both limited in scope , results from the gao investigation could be interpreted as undermining the contention that the use of the internet to facilitate firearm transactions will result in increased illegal activity with respect to ffls . in contrast , the city of new york's investigation could give credence to the observation that the internet increases the potential for abuse by private sellers to make unlawful sales of firearms to prohibited purchasers . in addition to these long - existing concerns regarding the sale of firearms over the internet , concerns have also been raised with respect to online ammunition sales , especially in light of reports that the suspected gunman in the colorado movie theater shootings purchased at least 6,000 rounds of ammunition online . in response to this , senator frank lautenberg and representative carolyn mccarthy introduced s. 3458 and h.r . primarily , this legislation would reinstitute the ammunition regulation that had been repealed when fopa was passed in 1986 . it would require an individual who wishes to sell ammunition to be a licensed dealer , irrespective of whether such business is conducted with the principal objective of livelihood and profit , because the amendment does not include the phrase "engaged in the business. accordingly , the bill would arguably prevent any secondary sales of ammunition , that is , sales between non - ffls , an action that is currently permitted with respect to secondary sales of firearms . although a licensee selling ammunition would not be required to conduct a nics background check under the bill , the licensee would be required to examine a valid photo identification of the transferee before completing the transfer . it would also make it unlawful for a licensee to directly transfer or deliver ammunition to any non - licensee and would require licensees to keep track of ammunition transfers to the same extent that they keep track of firearm transfers . these requirements would have the likely effect of requiring the seller and buyer to meet in person to complete the transaction . furthermore , one component of the bill that was not a part of the original ammunition regulations from 1968 is the requirement that licensees prepare a report of multiple sales for federal and local authorities whenever the licensee disposes of more than 1,000 rounds of ammunition to a non - licensee during any five consecutive business days . it is this latter fact that has become the subject of heightened scrutiny in the aftermath of the tragic mass shooting that occurred in a colorado movie theater in july 2012 .