the supreme court granted certiorari . the va may also appeal a cavc decision . for years , the 120-day deadline was viewed as a procedural requirement , and thus subject to equitable tolling — that is , missing the deadline did not automatically preclude review by the cavc . rather , it was applied only when circumstances precluded a timely filing despite the exercise of due diligence , such as ( 1 ) a mental illness rendering one incapable of handling one's own affairs or other extraordinary circumstances beyond one's control , ( 2 ) reliance on the incorrect statement of a va official , or ( 3 ) a misfiling at the regional office or the board . however , his notice of appeal was filed 15 days after the 120-day filing deadline had expired . the cavc , in a 2-1 decision , relied on the supreme court's bowles v. russell decision and dismissed his appeal for lack of jurisdiction due to the missed deadline . the court of appeals for federal claims concurred with the cavc , noting that the 120-day deadline was jurisdictional , and thus mandatory . the court reviewed whether "a veteran's failure to file a notice of appeal within the 120-day period should be regarded as having 'jurisdictional' consequences. the court unanimously determined that the deadline was not jurisdictional and that missing the deadline does not necessarily preclude the cavc from hearing an appeal . the court noted that congress had taken great care to ensure that the system for awarding veterans benefits greatly favors veterans . thus , the court determined that congress did not intend the 120-day deadline to be a jurisdictional rule . however , the court did state that the deadline is an "important procedural rule" and remanded the case to the federal circuit to determine whether the appellant's "case falls within any exception to the rule. therefore , although the court established that the deadline was not mandatory , it provided no guidance for when a case could still be heard even after the deadline was missed . the cavc , in bove v. shinseki , issued a ruling that provides context to when the court would still hear an appeal even after the deadline is missed . the cavc , prior to its decision in henderson v. shinseki , already had a test for determining when equitable tolling would be permissible . therefore , it returned to its previous jurisprudence on the issue . it stated , the doctrine of equitable tolling has generally established parameters , and over time decisions of the federal circuit and this court have addressed those parameters in the context of appeals to this court . thus , for example , equitable tolling was not applied when failure to file was due to general negligence or procrastination . the cavc held that if an appellant accidentally files the notice of appeal at the wrong location — for example , at the bva instead of with the cavc — but the notice of appeal is otherwise timely , equitable tolling is appropriate .