the tpp draws congressional interest on a number of fronts . congress would have to approve implementing legislation for u.s. commitments under the agreement to enter into force . brunei joined negotiations in 2005 , and the trans - pacific strategic economic partnership ( p - 4 ) agreement was concluded in 2006 . in march 2008 , the united states joined the negotiations to conclude the still outstanding investment and financial services provisions . president bush notified congress of his intention to negotiate with the existing p - 4 members on september 22 , 2008 , and with other countries , australia , peru , and vietnam , on december 30 , 2008 . after a period of reflection on u.s. trade policy , the obama administration decided to continue with the tpp negotiations . on november 14 , 2009 , president obama committed the united states to engage with the tpp countries "with the goal of shaping a regional agreement that will have broad - based membership and the high standards worthy of a 21 st - century trade agreement. president obama formally notified congress of his administration's intention to enter into negotiations with the tpp countries on december 14 , 2009 . that notification set off a 90-day timeline under the now - expired 2002 trade promotion authority ( tpa ) legislation , for congressional consultations prior to the beginning of negotiations . in october 2010 , tpp participants agreed by consensus to the inclusion of malaysia as a negotiating partner . the negotiating partners announced a framework for the agreement at the sidelines of the asia - pacific economic cooperation ( apec ) ministerial in honolulu , hi , november 8-13 , 2011 . thereafter , canada , japan , and mexico started to consult with the existing tpp partners on joining the negotiations . after several months of intense bilateral consultations with each of the current tpp countries , those countries agreed by consensus to the inclusion of mexico and canada and they began participating as negotiating partners in december 2012 . japan continued to debate internally the question of joining the negotiations , with prime minister abe announcing japan's official interest in march 2013 . after concluding bilateral consultations , japan began to fully participate in the tpp negotiations in july 2013 . in early 2014 , south korea began consultations with the tpp negotiating partners over the possibility of joining , but at the time of this writing has yet to make a formal request to join the negotiations . it remains unclear whether the current 12 partners would permit another country's participation before concluding the initial agreement , although the united states seems to favor waiting until the current negotiations are completed . there is as yet no formal limit to the potential membership of the tpp , aside from excluding those countries unwilling to commit to the ambition of the proposed fta .