per the d.c . circuit decision and as agreed to in a september 4 , 2012 , consent decree , epa is to finalize its decision regarding the pm naaqs by december 14 , 2012 . the june 2012 pm naaqs proposal is the culmination of epa's statutorily required review of the naaqs under the clean air act ( caa ) based on studies available through mid - 2009 and recommendations of epa staff and a scientific advisory panel ( clean air scientific advisory committee , or casac ) established by the caa . the agency initiated the review not long after the 2006 promulgation of the pm naaqs . epa staff reassessed scientific studies considered in setting the 2006 pm naaqs revisions , reviewed and analyzed extensive subsequent research , and considered public comments and recommendations of the casac . based on the scientific evidence considered , epa administrator lisa p. jackson signed the proposal that would tighten the current standard primarily by lowering the annual health - based ( "primary" ) standard for fine particles smaller than 2.5 microns ( pm 2.5 ) . the proposal includes options for new secondary standards to address visibility impacts in urban areas associated with pm 2.5 , but would not modify the standards for inhalable coarse particles smaller than 10 microns or pm 10 . because some farming and livestock practices contribute to particulate matter emissions , the agricultural community and some members have maintained a particular interest in epa's consideration of pm 10 and the potential impacts on agricultural operations . as per statutory scheduling requirements under the caa , the final designation of areas ( primarily counties ) as nonattainment for any revised pm standards would not be determined until the end of 2014 , and states would have until at least 2020 to achieve compliance . in its regulatory impact analysis ( ria ) accompanying the proposed rule assessing the costs and benefits of proposed revisions to the pm naaqs , epa estimated that strengthening the pm 2 . 5 annual standard would add further similar health benefits anticipated with the promulgation of the 2006 pm naaqs . others have suggested that potential health benefits of tightening the pm naaqs might be higher than epa's estimates . on the other hand , tighter standards could impose additional compliance requirements on communities , states , industry , and others , at what some stakeholders and members contend will be a substantial economic cost . epa expects that requirements and emission reductions associated with existing and recently promulgated federal regulations under the caa will significantly allay impacts of complying with the proposed revised pm standards , and anticipates that virtually all counties will meet the standards as proposed in 2020 . several recent and pending epa regulations implementing the various pollution control statutes enacted by congress have garnered vigorous oversight during the 112 th congress . members have expressed concerns , in hearings , through bipartisan letters commenting on proposed regulations , and through introduced legislation that would delay , limit , or prevent certain epa actions .