in connecticut dept . of public safety v. doe , the court found no due process infirmity in the connecticut sex offender registration regime in spite of its failure to afford offenders an opportunity to prove they were not dangerous . doe suffered no injury from the absence of a pre - registration hearing to determine his dangerousness , in the eyes of the court , because the system required registration of all sex offenders , both those who were dangerous and those who were not . connecticut dept . of public safety forecloses the assertion that offenders are entitled to a pre - registration "dangerousness" hearing ; the relevant question under sorna is prior conviction not dangerousness . in lambert v. california , the court dealt with the issue of sufficiency of notice . there , the court held invalid a city ordinance that required all felony offenders to register within five days of their arrival in the city . the court explained that "[w]here a person did not know of the duty to register and where there was no proof of the probability of such knowledge , he may not be convicted consistently with due process. since "by the time that congress enacted sorna , every state had a sex offender registration law in place," attempts to build on lambert have been rejected , because the courts concluded that offenders knew or should have known of their duty to register . suggestions that differences between state and federal requirements result in impermissible vagueness have fared no better . to qualify as a violation of substantive due process , a governmental regime must intrude upon a right "deeply rooted in our history and traditions," or "fundamental to our concept of constitutionally ordered liberty. perhaps because the threshold is so high , section 2250 and sorna have only infrequently been questioned on substantive due process grounds . "the 'right to travel' ... embraces at least three different components . it protects the right of a citizen of one state to enter and to leave another state , the right to be treated as a welcome visitor rather than an unfriendly alien when temporarily present in the second state , and , for those travelers who elect to become permanent residents , the right to be treated like other citizens of that state. section 2250 , it has been contended , violates the right to travel because it punishes those who travel from one state to another yet fail to register , but not those who fail to register without leaving the state . the courts have responded , however , that the right must yield to compelling state interest in the prevention of future sex offenses . the eighth amendment bars the federal government from inflicting "cruel and unusual punishment. a punishment is cruel and unusual within the meaning of the eighth amendment when it is grossly disproportionate to the offense . the courts have refused to say that sentences within section 2250's 10-year maximum are grossly disproportionate to the crime of failing to maintain current and accurate sex offender registration information .