appendix a . data sources and major publications federal stem education analysts rely on a number of sources and major publications for data about the federal stem education effort and the condition of stem education in the united states and around the globe . this appendix includes links to sources and publications where readers can find the most up - to - date stem education data and information . national and international assessments national assessment of educational progress ( naep ) — the naep is the largest nationally representative and continuing assessment of u.s. k - 12 students . there are two naep assessments: main naep and long - term trends ( ltt ) . the main naep administers assessments in 12 subject areas , including mathematics and science . the ltt assesses mathematics and reading . in 2013 ed launched a pilot naep assessment in technology and engineering literacy . that assessment will be fully operational in 2014 . more information about these assessments is available at ltt mathematics — http: / / nationsreportcard.gov / ltt_2008 / , main naep mathematics — http: / / nces.ed.gov / nationsreportcard / mathematics / , main naep science — http: / / nces.ed.gov / nationsreportcard / science / , and main naep technology and engineering literacy ( tel ) — http: / / nces.ed.gov / nationsreportcard / tel / moreabout.aspx . trends in international mathematics and science study ( timss ) — timss is an international test that assesses the mathematics and science achievements of u.s. 4 th and 8 th grade students in a manner that is comparable across countries . more information about timss is available at http: / / nces.ed.gov / timss / . program for international student assessment ( pisa ) — pisa assesses the reading , mathematics , and science literacy of 15-year - old students in dozens of industrialized and developing nations . more information about pisa is available at http: / / nces.ed.gov / surveys / pisa / . federal programs and inventories u.s. government accountability office , science , technology , engineering , and mathematics education: strategic planning needed to better manage overlapping programs across multiple agencies ( gao - 12-108 ) — this 2012 gao report on federal stem education programs includes an inventory of federal stem education programs and policy recommendations . no single fact or statistic can wholly capture the condition of stem education in the united states and for a variety of reasons the question "what is the condition of stem education in the united states ? may be unanswerable . however , some trends appear to have held over time and in the most general sense , the condition of stem education in the united states may be characterized as having more or less held constant or improved over the course of the last four decades . this is not the end of the story , though . looking at stem education from this broad perspective disguises trends that concern many analysts and drive policy in this area . among these concerns are persistent achievement gaps between various demographic groups , u.s. student performance on international mathematics and science tests , foreign student enrollments in u.s. institutions of higher education , global stem education attainment , u.s .