some have referred to this as the "fiscal cliff. choosing how to address these issues will have a significant impact on the size of the budget deficit and the pace of economic recovery going forward . further changes to other spending and revenue policies could also address some of the longer - term drivers of projected budgetary imbalance , while simultaneously impacting the economy . this report provides a brief overview of the major tax and spending policy changes set to take effect under current law at the end of 2012 or early in 2013 . collectively , these policies have been referred to by some as the "fiscal cliff. the report also includes links to other crs reports which provide more information and analysis of the individual provisions discussed below . a variety of revenue and spending provisions are set to expire around the end of calendar year 2012 , including the bush tax cuts and other related tax provisions , extended emergency unemployment benefits , the social security payroll tax reduction , the "doc fix," and other tax extenders . if congress and the president allow all of these measures to expire as scheduled under current law and let the spending cuts under the budget control act ( bca ) take effect ( see discussion below ) , the budget deficits beginning in fy2013 will gradually fall as a percentage of gross domestic product ( gdp ) and are projected to remain at sustainable levels through fy2022 . the decline in projected budget deficits is a result of declines in spending levels and increases in revenue levels as a percentage of gdp , relative to the levels seen over the past few fiscal years . under current law , the budget deficit is estimated to fall $502 billion between fy2012 and fy2013 ( see table 1 ) as a result of fiscal policy changes set to take place at the end of 2012 and early in 2013 . this estimated deficit reduction assumes that current law will be implemented as scheduled . comprehensive tax reform that is revenue - neutral would not directly contribute to a longer - term deficit reduction strategy . in addition to the policies discussed above , there are several other policy items that congress may consider late in 2012 or early in 2013 . many budget analysts are concerned about future levels of federal debt and acknowledge that the current spending and revenue collection cannot continue at current or projected future levels . however , making significant changes to spending or revenue policies at this time may be harmful to the ongoing economic recovery . the effects on the economy of certain policies enacted to combat the economic downturn , such as extended emergency unemployment benefits and the spending and revenue provisions of the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 ( p.l . 111-5 ) , are waning under current law . this has resulted in some renewed debate over whether additional stimulus may be needed .