107-56 , sec . 1016 ( e ) ) defined critical infrastructure as: systems and assets , whether physical or virtual , so vital to the united states that the incapacity or destruction of such systems and assets would have a debilitating impact on security , national economic security , national public health or safety , or any combination of those matters . alternatively , congress could consider making the voluntary standards mandatory , at least for those assets and systems judged to pose the greatest risks . however , the recent inability of congress to find consensus on cybersecurity standards for privately held critical infrastructure would indicate such an effort would also raise significant debate . if one accepts that dhs has made progress in incorporating resilience into its policies and goals , a subsequent question could be "what is dhs doing programmatically to improve the resilience of critical infrastructures ? the u.s. patriot act ( p.l . dhs has identified 18 sectors of the economy that they believe possess such systems and assets . among these are electric power generation and distribution , drinking water , communications and information systems , oil and gas production and distribution , transportation systems , and banking and finance . dhs's 2009 national infrastructure protection plan defined resilience as "the ability to resist , absorb , recover from , or successfully adapt to adversity or a change in conditions. in a homeland security context , a change of conditions implies a terrorist attack , a natural hazard , such as hurricane or earthquake , or a technological failure , such as a dam collapse or a serious accident at a nuclear power plant . reducing the potential risks associated with the loss of critical infrastructure resulting from a terrorist , natural hazard , or technological disaster ( hereinafter referred to collectively as all - hazard events ) is a key element in the nation's homeland security strategy and a topic of continued interest in congress . despite this somewhat amorphous depiction of department efforts to support resiliency , a few programs do explicitly take resilience into consideration . to date , congress has taken primarily an oversight role in regard to critical infrastructure resilience , holding hearings and requesting reports from its congressional support agencies . to the extent that resilience can contribute to reducing that risk , congressional interest extends to the policies and programs associated with promoting resilience . this report focuses on the resilience of critical infrastructure . the resilience of a community , a region , or the nation as a whole is also important to homeland security , and depends in part on the resilience of critical infrastructure , but also involves a broader range of elements , behaviors , and social - economic relationships that are beyond the scope of this report . as cited earlier , assistant secretary robert stephan stated that "it is fair to say that there is resilience built into practically everything that the department of homeland security does.