the court rejected the d.c . circuit's interpretation that the "'distraction' of members and their staffs from legislative tasks is a principal concern of the clause" and , thus , distraction alone can trigger the clause's protection . rather , the court stated that the risk of legislative distraction can only prompt the clause's protection when the underlying investigation being conducted concerns a privileged legislative act . the knowledge by a member that the f.b.i . can make an unannounced raid on his legislative office to read and rummage through every document or email is bound to discourage congress from the muscular check against the executive that the speech or debate clause was calculated to foster . representative jefferson raised these speech or debate clause arguments when he sought to have the search declared unconstitutional and the seized materials returned to his possession . in addition to raising many of the arguments discussed above , representative jefferson argued , inter alia , that execution of the search warrant "guaranteed that the executive would be in possession of material that relates to the member's legislative duties. the motion asserted that those actions , coupled with the exclusion of representative jefferson's counsel and the house general counsel from even viewing the search process , violated his speech or debate clause privilege . the doj argued in its reply brief that because it was only interested in obtaining non - legislative materials , the use of a filter team provided sufficient protection of the privilege under the speech or debate clause . the doj appeared to be arguing that the clause's language "shall not be questioned at any other place" merely protects members from having information relating to legislative acts used against them in a criminal proceeding . the doj's filing suggested that the past practice of using subpoenas to obtain documents and allowing the house general counsel's office initially to review and assess the privilege was simply a matter of "comity. the doj also argued that representative jefferson's position "would effectively extend speech or debate immunity to clearly unprivileged materials by making it impossible to execute a search warrant in any place containing even one privileged document. the doj's argument seemed to emphasize that the actual prosecution team never had access to any privileged information . therefore , it argued , the speech or debate clause was not violated . responsive data were to be turned over to the filter team . responsive , potentially privileged computer documents were to be recorded in a log to be given to counsel , along with copies of the documents . the filter team would then request the court to review the potentially privileged records . the purpose of the speech or debate clause protection is to insulate members and the legislature from intimidation by the executive or the judiciary and reinforce the separation of powers among the co - equal branches . allowing the fbi , an executive branch entity , to make the initial legal and constitutional determinations of which documents seized from a member's congressional office are protected by the clause arguably endangers congress's autonomy and exposes it to future intimidation by the executive .