reclamation regulations ( 43 c.f.r . ยง423.30 ) allow firearm possession in compliance with federal , state , and local law on reclamation lands and waterbodies , with two exceptions: possession is not permitted at or in a reclamation facility , and prohibitions and regulations may apply in designated special - use areas . unlike the corps' current regulations , these reclamation regulations distinguish between facilities , lands , and waterbodies . at reclamation facilities ( eg , buildings , dams , electric power facilities , switchyards , recreation facilities , fish and wildlife facilities ) , firearms are prohibited . at reclamation lands and waterbodies , firearms are allowed to the extent provided by applicable federal , state , and local law . therefore , the possession of loaded firearms by private individuals is allowed at most of a reclamation project's land and water footprint , whereas current corps regulations allow such possession only in areas designated for hunting and shooting at corps projects . reclamation regulations ( 43 c.f.r . ยง423.30 ( b ) ) restrict discharge of a weapon unless for hunting or at an authorized shooting or archery range ; discharge must also be in compliance with federal , state , and local law . as previously noted , corps regulations do not explicitly address the discharge of weapons . reclamation regulations ( 43 c.f.r . ยง423.32 ) permit hunting on reclamation lands and waterbodies in accordance with federal , state , and local laws unless the area has been closed for public use or has been designated as a special - use area . in november 2001 , in section 1 of the reclamation recreation management act of 1992 ( p.l . 107-69 ) , congress provided criminal penalties for violation of regulations to maintain law and order and protect persons and property at reclamation projects and lands . law enforcement at reclamation projects can be provided by doi armed law enforcement officers or by other law enforcement personnel through cooperative agreement or contract . reclamation and doi utilize a variety of personnel for security and public safety at reclamation projects: federal special agents provided through doi's law enforcement authority and uniformed guards acting as special policemen with law enforcement authority , an armed security response task force that does not have law enforcement authority , armed state and local law enforcement personnel , and personnel from private security companies for both armed and unarmed functions . the vast majority of criminal offenses occurring on reclamation property , nonetheless , are handled by state police , sheriff's offices , or local law enforcement . the corps can issue firearms warnings or citations . at reclamation projects ( in some contrast to nps and nwrs units , which have federal personnel with more law enforcement functions ) , reclamation rangers function much like corps rangers ; both do not have significant law enforcement authority or carry firearms . many corps projects function as popular recreation sites in addition to providing navigation , flood damage reduction , hydropower , and other benefits .