appendix b . in a given fiscal year , the budgetary cost of a loan program , not the individual loans , was its net cash flow . this equaled new loans made plus any administrative expenses associated with these loans ( rarely recognized in the loan accounts ) less any loan fees , repayments of principal , and payments of interest . the federal acceptance of a contingent liability when a loan guarantee was provided was not included in the federal budget because no cash flow occurred . the administrative costs of a guarantee program were outlays in the fiscal year in which they occurred . some guarantee programs charge fees to the recipient , and these fees were considered offsetting collections . any federal outlays necessary to compensate lenders for any default losses covered by a federal guarantee were not shown in the budget until they were actually paid . credit budget in january 1980 , the office of management and budget introduced a federal "credit budget" to help monitor and control the growth of federal credit , including new direct loan obligations and new loan guarantee commitments . federal credit data appendix c. budgetary treatment of federal credit before fy1992 before the implementation of the federal credit reform act of 1990 , the unified budget treated federal credit in two different ways . generally , the unified budget measured credit by its cash flows . after 1980 , it included a separate credit budget that measured and selectively controlled gross credit flows . unified budget the federal unified budget used cash - basis accounting . before fy1992 , a new federal direct loan was treated as a budget outlay in the current fiscal year , and repayments of principal and payments of interest were treated as offsetting collections ( negative outlays ) in the future fiscal years in which they occurred . if a loan recipient paid a fee , this fee was treated as an offsetting collection . loan defaults reduced repayments of principal and interest , and therefore offsetting collections . administrative expenses were reported as outlays . federal credit was measured at the time that the government signed a binding contract to provide credit assistance . initially , the credit budget consisted of nonbinding targets . before fy1992 , limits in the credit budget were included in the budget resolution and in annual appropriation acts for discretionary credit programs but not mandatory credit programs . ( 3 ) if program l is a discretionary loan program , an appropriations bill for the fiscal year is passed by congress and signed into law by the president . this bill includes an appropriation of ( in this example ) $100 million for the subsidy budget authority of program l. within agency a , this $100 million is appropriated to the credit program account for program l. furthermore , this appropriations bill must include an estimate of the dollar amount of new direct loan obligations supported by the subsidy budget authority appropriated to agency a for program l. for example , if program l has an estimated subsidy rate of 20% , the dollar amount of new direct loan obligations supportable would be $500 million .