the exception documents a contrary component of the tradition . congress has expressly approved the use of the armed forces in extraordinary circumstances or where federal manpower to enforce the law was seen as inadequate . striking the balance between rule and exception has never been easy , but failure to do so has often proven unfortunate . while federal marshals could no longer avail themselves of military assistance to arrest individuals charged with offenses against the united states , he stressed that wherever a combination existed to resist the enforcement of the laws , the president always could invoke the insurrection act . he further made note of the already sizable list of exceptions to the prohibition . others have viewed the act as having a deleterious effect on the nation's commitment to civilian law enforcement . while soldiers serving on a posse remained subordinate to civilian rules and law enforcement officers , troops called out under the insurrection act came to be viewed as an independent military force enforcing something like martial law , if not engaging in all - out war . today , however , the act is widely regarded as the embodiment of the american tradition of anti - militarism . despite early efforts on the part of the executive branch to get the provision repealed or amended , the posse comitatus act has remained essentially unchanged since its passage . congress has , however , authorized a substantial number of exceptions and has buttressed the act with an additional proscription against use of the armed forces to make arrests or conduct searches and seizures . the posse comitatus act raises at least three constitutional questions: ( 1 ) to what extent does the posse comitatus act track constitutional requirements , beyond the power of the president or congress to adjust or ignore ? ( 2 ) to what extent do the powers which the constitution vests in the president limit the power of congress to enact the posse comitatus act or any other provision restricting the president's discretion to involve the armed forces in civilian affairs ? ( 3 ) what specifically are the military law enforcement activities "expressly authorized in the constitution" for purposes of the act ? in addition to any express constitutional exceptions , the use of the armed forces to execute federal law does not violate the posse comitatus act when ( 1 ) an act of congress expressly authorizes use of part of the army or air force as a posse comitatus or otherwise to execute the law ; ( 2 ) the activity in question does not involve use of part of the armed forces covered by the proscription ; or ( 3 ) the activity in question does not constitute "execution of the law. the most significant impact of the posse comitatus act is attributable to compliance by the armed forces . as administrative adoption of the act for the navy and marines demonstrates , the military has a long - standing practice of avoiding involvement in civilian affairs which it believes are contrary to the act . if the rule is too unforgiving , a shays's rebellion may go unchecked . if exceptions are too generously granted , a boston massacre or kent state tragedy may follow .