are they trolls , too ? and what is to stop npes from becoming distributors ? they could buy competing products wholesale ( perhaps products where they have secured licenses ) and sell them . other commentators have questioned how the shield act's bond requirement would work in practice: how would the "full costs" amount of the required bonds be determined at the beginning of each , separate suit , when different defendants will employ different defense strategies , and incur different "full costs" ? will the bond amount be the subject of legal opinions of counsel , or of expert opinions ? what banks , sureties , or insurance companies would offer to provide shield act bonds to npes ? assuming that some financial institutions would , in fact , offer to provide shield act bonds , what amount and type of collateral would be required and , more importantly , how would typically asset - free , judgment - proof npes provide that collateral ? commentators have suggested a number of legislative avenues to address pae activity . it bears emphasis that pae activity has been concentrated in the realm of it , primarily on patents related to software , the internet , and electronics . due to the component - driven and intangible nature of it , as well as indications that patents are less essential to promoting innovation in it than in other industries , such as pharmaceuticals , some observers urge congress to undertake targeted reforms and leave the other realms of the patent system as they are . this could entail distinctions based on type of patent or the industry area , an approach already taken by the shield act . however , such precision may be precluded , or at least constrained , by an international agreement . article 27.1 of the agreement on trade - related aspects of intellectual property rights ( "trips" ) , administered by the world trade organization ( wto ) , requires that patents "be available and patent rights enjoyable without discrimination as to ... the field of technology. but some observers have argued that this provision "does not strictly require a 'single level of ip protection for all technologies or industries.' in fact , a wto panel "rejected a strict interpretation of article 27.1 prohibiting any differentiation between fields of technology," and the "accepted view is that 'the pejorative concept of discrimination must be distinguished from differentiation for legitimate reasons .' nevertheless , congress may need to carefully examine whether any changes it desires to make to the patent system would be inconsistent with its international obligations . improving notice where it currently fails is a relatively uncontroversial and high - priority goal of some patent reform advocates . but why should a court get to decide what is enough ? and what do we do about start - ups who have patents but have not yet commercialized their invention ? this only makes sense ; by being resellers , they can claim that the competition of the infringing product is harming their sales business .