medicaid is a federal and state partnership . 27 ) and its resolutions for the previous four years have included converting medicaid to a block grant as an illustrative example for achieving budget savings . the fy2016 senate budget resolution ( s.con.res . 11 ) proposes to convert medicaid for the "low - income , working - age , able - bodied adults" and children to a capped allotment like chip . also , in february 2015 , senators richard burr and orrin hatch along with representative fred upton released the patient choice , affordability , responsibility , and empowerment ( care ) act , which is a policy proposal that would convert medicaid to a capped allotment . table a - 1 provides the most recent medicaid expenditures for each state , including both the federal and state shares of spending on benefits , administrative services , and total medicaid expenditures . , the federal share or the federal financial participation ) of each state's medicaid program costs . federal medicaid funding is an open - ended entitlement to states , which means there is no upper limit or cap on the amount of federal medicaid funds a state may receive . medicaid expenditures account for a significant and growing portion of total health expenditures in the united states . expansions of eligibility account for much of medicaid's expenditure growth over time , and the aca medicaid expansion is expected to significantly increase medicaid expenditures over the next few years . however , medicaid expenditures also are influenced by economic , demographic , and programmatic factors . in addition , there is considerable variation in medicaid spending from state to state due to demographic differences , state policy choices , utilization of services , and provider payment rates . medicaid is the largest source of general revenue - based spending on health services ( even when compared to medicare ) because a sizable portion of medicare spending is funded by a dedicated revenue source . medicaid constitutes a significant portion of the federal budget , and federal medicaid expenditures are expected to increase significantly over the next 10 years due to the aca medicaid expansion . as a result , medicaid could be a focus of potential deficit reduction or other legislative proposals affecting the federal budget . both the house and senate fy2016 budget resolutions included proposals to reform medicaid financing . the house budget resolution for fy2016 ( h.con.res . these medicaid expenditures exclude expenditures in the territories and spending for state medicaid fraud control units , medicaid survey and certification of nursing and intermediate care facilities , and the vaccines for children program . medicaid is a means - tested entitlement program that finances the delivery of primary and acute medical services as well as long - term services and supports . the states are responsible for administering their medicaid programs , and medicaid is jointly financed by the federal government and the states . in fy2014 , medicaid is estimated to have provided health care services to 65 million individuals at a total cost of $494 billion ( including federal and state expenditures ) . participation in medicaid is voluntary , though all states , the district of columbia , and the territories choose to participate .