congressional policymakers have a variety of options before them . they may decide that the current policy framework serves as a good starting point and allow the executive branch to further develop and implement the proposed policies . alternatively congressional policymakers might increase oversight activities and direct the administration , either through hearings , report language , or legislation , to take specific actions to address scientific or security concerns . policymakers faced with assessing dual - use issues are particularly challenged by the multi - disciplinary nature of dual - use activities . dual - use issues cut across traditional policy areas , involving simultaneous consideration of security , scientific , health , export , and international policy . some stakeholders believe the research results should not have been published . they assert that broad dissemination of such research results increases the likelihood that a highly contagious form of the virus will be introduced , either accidently or deliberately , into the human population . others state that the public health benefits from such research outweigh concerns regarding malicious use . the h5n1 influenza research case study highlights the general tensions among stakeholders and the ramifications of various federal actions and policies . the controversy surrounding the decisions to publish these manuscripts highlights deficiencies in the federal decision - making processes related to dual - use life science research . the federal government moved first to restrict publication of the manuscripts . following additional discussions and deliberations , the federal government recommended publishing modified versions of the manuscripts . in addition , the debate about the publication of scientific research with potential security implications cuts across multiple policy issues . these include federal support of research , maintenance of homeland security , and the flow of research information , and may require simultaneous consideration of security , science , health , export , and international policy . because of the complexity of these issues , analysis according to one set of policy priorities may adversely affect other policy priorities . in addition , the controversy surrounding the decision to publish these experiments has demonstrated flaws in the existing mechanisms to identify and balance the potential public benefits and security trade - offs . congress has acted in the past to restrict access to pathogens where it deemed the potential risk of their misuse posed a greater threat than the benefits arising from unrestricted access . congressional policymakers may decide that research results in some areas pose similar risks and may move to impose similar limits through a variety of mechanisms . conversely , congressional policymakers may determine the risks of information exchange insufficient to warrant additional regulation . this report describes the underlying controversy , the potential benefits and harms of publishing these manuscripts , the actions taken by domestic and international stakeholders , and options to improve the way research is handled to minimize security concerns . the ongoing controversy regarding the appropriateness of funding research on ( and publishing the results of ) h5n1 influenza transmissibility serves as a case study for the broader challenges of balancing the potential benefits and potential harms from such research .