( see figure 1 . ) although the work was slated to be completed within a year , political gridlock and local resistance prevented significant progress on the agreement , a pattern that would repeat itself on a range of okinawa basing issues in subsequent years . efforts to adjust the u.s. military presence in japan were given new impetus in 2002 by the defense policy review initiative ( dpri ) , a bilateral initiative to enhance the u.s. - japan security alliance . through the dpri talks , the united states and japan reviewed u.s. force posture , examined opportunities for practical cooperation , and developed common strategic objectives . the 2005 security consultative committee ( scc ) joint statement listed 19 areas for alliance transformation , such as improving interoperability , shared use of military and civilian facilities in japan , and cooperation on ballistic missile defense . the 2005 statement endorsed the realignment of u.s. marines from okinawa to guam and the relocation of futenma air station operations to a new base on the shoreline of cape henoko . the implementation plan for the dpri is laid out in the may 2006 "u.s. - japan roadmap for realignment implementation," a document that was endorsed in three subsequent scc joint statements . the roadmap established the "linkages" that had been a central point of debate until 2012: ( 1 ) that the third marine expeditionary force ( iii mef ) relocation from okinawa to guam was dependent on "tangible progress toward completion" of the henoko base at camp schwab and japanese financial contribution to the development of facilities on guam ; and ( 2 ) that land return for areas south of kadena air base was dependent upon completion of the relocation of iii mef personnel and dependents from futenma to the frf and guam . in april 2012 , washington and tokyo signed an agreement that endorsed the henoko frf but removed the linkage between construction of a new facility and relocation of the marines to guam . since the u.s. and japanese governments first agreed to relocate mcas futenma in the 1990s , outside experts have proposed several alternative plans . some proposals have called for a similar runway in another part of okinawa prefecture . other concepts would entail building a large heliport , instead of the offshore runways , on an existing u.s. base . one option that periodically has received serious attention is to integrate the functions of mcas futenma into the large kadena air base on okinawa . there have also been proposals to construct a wholly offshore facility , either floating or supported by stilts . according to reports , the u.s. and japanese governments considered many of these alternatives before settling on the current henoko frf plan as the best option . in the postwar period , alliance security arrangements largely have been negotiated between political - military elites in washington and tokyo , often ignoring local concerns . even as democratic practices deepened and the anti - base movement became more empowered , many leaders in tokyo were unable or unwilling to invest enough political capital to reduce the strains of hosting foreign troops on okinawans .