the communication's timing is only one factor to consider . because of this mismatched intersection between tax and campaign finance law , it is possible that an issue advocacy communication might , depending on its timing and content , be an electioneering communication under feca , but not be treated as campaign intervention under the irc . thus , it appears that just because a group reports an ad as an electioneering communication to the federal election commission ( fec ) , this does not necessarily mean the ad would be treated as campaign intervention for purposes of the irc . the opposite is true as well — not all campaign activity under the irc will necessarily be reported to the fec . what is less clear is what happens when an ad merely refers to a candidate . guidance released by the irs shows that in any situation that falls short of express advocacy , this issue does not lend itself to bright - line rules . the focus is essentially on whether the activity exhibits a preference for or against a candidate . any activity that is truly issue advocacy would not be subject to these limitations . some 501 ( c ) groups — primarily 501 ( c ) ( 3 ) charitable organizations , including houses of worship , charities , and educational institutions — are prohibited under the irc from engaging in any campaign intervention . they are , however , allowed to take positions on policy issues and conduct an insubstantial amount of lobbying . others types of 501 ( c ) s — primarily 501 ( c ) ( 4 ) social welfare organizations , 501 ( c ) ( 5 ) labor unions , and 501 ( c ) ( 6 ) trade associations — may engage in campaign intervention . a treasury regulation defines candidate as "an individual who offers himself , or is proposed by others , as a contestant for an elective public office , whether such office be national , state , or local. when thinking about activities that the tax world might consider to be "issue advocacy" or "campaign intervention," the campaign finance world might be concerned about whether the relevant activities are "independent expenditures" or "electioneering communications. it seems clear that any "independent expenditure," which by definition involves expressly advocating for or against a candidate , is per se campaign intervention for purposes of the irc . "electioneering communications" present a trickier situation . feca defines them as broadcast , cable , or satellite communications that refer to a federal candidate and are made within 60 days of a general election or 30 days of a primary . as discussed above , there is no analogous bright - line standard in the irc for determining whether communications that merely refer to a candidate are campaign intervention . the irc does not define the term other than to say it "includ[es] the publishing or distributing of statements" on behalf of or in opposition to a candidate . as to what types of activities are campaign intervention , the regulation adds little besides specifying they include "the publication or distribution of written or printed statements or the making of oral statements on behalf of or in opposition to such a candidate.