, there were no exemptions ) . this amount was stipulated in the bca itself . the remaining $984 billion is to be divided equally across each of the nine years , resulting in annual cuts of approximately $109 billion . approximately $55 billion of these annual reductions will affect defense spending and $55 billion will affect non - defense spending . some in congress have objected to the mechanism by which spending would be cut in these years and have proposed alternatives to these reductions . however , in order to modify the deficit reduction process contained in the bca , congress and the president would have to enact legislation to cancel or replace the automatic reductions . this report provides information on the levels of deficit reduction if the bca's automatic cuts are implemented as under current law and contrasts that with the alternative proposals offered by some members of congress and president obama . this report also discusses specific determinations made by the office of management and budget regarding the exempt / non - exempt status of certain programs , as well as a discussion of information to be disclosed regarding the fy2013 bca sequester impact . on january 2 , 2013 , a set of "across - the - board" reductions in non - exempt programs are set to take effect via a sequestration process . these cuts will affect the remainder of fy2013 and will occur unless congress and the president act to cancel the cuts . between fy2014 and fy2021 , the dollar amount of the cuts will remain the same , though the cuts will be implemented in a different way . therefore , both the percentage reduction and resulting dollar amount of the reductions within specific accounts as listed in the report are likely to change if the sequester were to be implemented on january 2 , 2013 . second , the classifications of certain accounts as exempt or non - exempt had not yet been determined ; federal administrative expenses being one example . once final determinations are made , any changes to the size of the sequestrable base would alter the size of the reductions . third , omb also stated that it was unable to show the amount of the reductions at the ppa level due to the time constraints imposed by the sta . therefore , the reductions in the report are shown at the budget account level , which often can contain several ppas . in addition to the sta , the bca requires omb to submit a report containing information regarding the calculations and reductions required under the automatic process , including the fy2013 sequestration , on january 2 , 2013 , and with the president's budget submission each year thereafter . no other reporting requirements are included in the bca itself . however , omb has issued responses to questions raised by members of congress regarding certain sequestration implementation issues . in a may 25 , 2012 , letter to house budget committee chairman paul ryan , omb's acting director jeffrey zients wrote that the administration had determined , reiterating from an earlier letter , all programs administered by va , including veterans' medical care , were exempt from sequestration .