other illustrations abound . a bill now in congress would demand renegotiation of existing collective bargaining agreements between the postal service and its employees if such agreements contain a specified provision . under the troubled asset relief program , the united states required chrysler and general motors to terminate certain dealership contracts as a condition of obtaining financial assistance . following 9 / 11 , congress enacted the aviation and transportation security act under which security screening at u.s. airports was transferred from private to federal hands , indirectly negating security services contracts between private security services and airlines . in 1988 and 1990 , congress statutorily blocked prepayment of certain mortgage contracts on low - income housing , which prepayment had been expressly allowed in those contracts . and in 2008 amendments to the medicare statutes , congress terminated a number of equipment and supply contracts previously entered into by the united states . this report surveys the legal theories that may be invoked by aggrieved contract parties to obtain redress in these situations — that is , when new federal statutes interfere with contracts entered into pre - enactment . the effort is to give congress some advance warning as to when such interferences , in bills before congress , may result in legal challenge . for public contracts , the usual legal challenge is via a breach of contract claim , though claims that contract rights have been "taken," requiring compensation under the fifth amendment takings clause , are often joined . for private contracts , the breach theory is not available since by definition the united states is not a party to the contract . here , takings claims predominate . one point warrants spotlighting . breach , takings , and similar claims have no place if the federal statute applies only to contracts entered into after enactment . in the case of a statute whose application becomes clear only after regulations construing it are issued , claims based on contract interference have no place when the contract is entered into after the regulations take effect . in either case — post - enactment or post - regulation — the decisive principle is that parties are presumed to contract with knowledge of the law existing at the time . congressional drafters can ensure a prospective - only interpretation of a statute by explicitly so stating in bill text . absent an explicit statement , a prospective - only reading of a statute may be adopted , but is not guaranteed , under the general presumption that , lacking clear indication otherwise , statutes should be read to apply prospectively only . protection of settled expectations is essential to ordered society , certainly to the conduct of business . thus , contract law protects the settled expectations of parties to contracts . at the same time , government must have latitude to address new problems , even if that means interfering with settled expectations in existing contracts . thus , contracts generally are said to confer no immunity against future legislation . stated the supreme court: "contracts , however express , cannot fetter the constitutional authority of congress.