more may do so as the process proceeds . the obama administration has been proceeding in negotiating the tpp as if trade promotion authority ( tpa ) , which expired on june 30 , 2007 , were in force . tpa is the authority that congress gives to the president to enter into trade agreements that can receive expedited legislative consideration . the administration has been adhering to consultation requirements and notification deadlines that have been an integral part of previous tpa or fast - track statutes . on april 24 , then - acting ustr demetrios marantis notified congress of the united states to begin negotiations with japan as part of the tpp . the tpp is the leading u.s. trade policy initiative of the obama administration and a pillar of its efforts to "rebalance" u.s. foreign policy priorities toward the asia - pacific region by playing a more active role in shaping the region's rules and norms . as the second - largest economy in asia , the third - largest economy in the world , and a key link in the global supply chain , japan's participation would be pivotal to the credibility and viability of the tpp as a regional trade arrangement . the inclusion of japan would expand the amount of u.s. trade and foreign investment that the tpp would cover if implemented . for japan , participation in the tpp could potentially transform its economy by providing unprecedented access to the japanese market for foreign exporters and investors . it could also force tokyo to confront structural economic problems that have long impeded economic growth . it would also symbolize japan's continued position as an economic power in east asia , an image that has been tarnished by decades of economic stagnation and the growth of china . japan's participation in the tpp has important implications for the u.s. - japan relationship . for example , it already has renewed a focus on long - standing issues , such as access to japan's markets for autos , agricultural products , and insurance , which have remained irritants in the relationship . new issues will undoubtedly also be raised in the process . the tpp is an evolving regional free trade agreement ( fta ) . it was originally formed as the trans - pacific strategic economic partnership — an fta now in effect among singapore , new zealand , chile , and brunei ( the so - called "p - 4" ) . in the fall of 2008 , the united states , along with australia , peru , and vietnam , joined the negotiations to accede to the arrangement . malaysia joined as the ninth negotiating partner in october 2010 . on november 14 , 2009 , president obama committed the united states to engage with the tpp countries to transform the original p - 4 pact into a regional arrangement with broad - based membership and "the high standards worthy of a 21 st century trade agreement. after several months of discussions , the nine partners announced a framework for the agreement in time for the ministerial meeting of the asia - pacific economic cooperation ( apec ) forum in honolulu , hawaii , which was held november 8-13 , 2011 .