the sga establishes reporting requirements for grantees . grantees must provide quarterly financial reports , quarterly progress reports , and annual performance reports . the statutory provisions of taaccct are somewhat general . dol has not established regulations related to the program , so the department's solicitation for grant applications ( sga ) clarifies many details . to present the most up - to - date information possible , this report will focus on program elements and applicant requirements as they are conveyed in the most recent sga , issued in april 2014 . statute establishes basic requirements for grant proposals and general criteria for choosing grantees . the law also specifies that dol will promulgate guidelines for the submission of grant proposals . these guidelines have been issued through sgas and both clarify and expand upon the requirements established in statute . statute requires dol to report annually to the senate committee on finance and the house committee on ways and means on each taaccct grant awarded and the impact of each award on taaw - eligible workers . the last annual performance report will serve as the grant's final performance report and should include annual and cumulative information on the grant's activities . single institution grantees will submit data directly to dol . consortium member institutions will submit reports to the consortium's lead institution , which will compile data and submit a single report to dol . the sga specifies that each taaccct application must also include a budget , design , and implementation plan for a third - party evaluation of the proposed project . all evaluation designs must include ( 1 ) impact or outcome analysis of participants in grant - funded activities , and ( 2 ) implementation analysis . grantees must also participate in a national evaluation that will be conducted by a contractor on behalf of dol . the first sga for taaccct funding was issued by dol in january 2011 and closed in april 2011 . dol announced the grantees under this sga on september 27 , 2011 . among the grantees were 17 single institution applicants , 18 single - state consortia , and 5 multi - state consortia . each state received at least $2.5 million in funding either directly or as their share of a grant to a multi - state consortium . the second sga was issued in february 2012 and closed may 24 , 2012 . dol announced the grantees on september 19 , 2012 . among the grantees were 27 community college and university consortia and 27 individual institutions . in its announcement , dol stated that the 25 states without a winning submission for an individual institution would each be contacted to develop a qualifying project that would be awarded $2.5 million . the third sga was issued in april 2013 . the health care and education reconciliation act of 2010 ( p.l . 111-152 ) provided four years of annual mandatory funding through fy2014 . additional details are in the " legislative and funding histories " section at the end of this report . dol announced the grantees september 18 , 2013 . the grants included 23 awards to individual institutions and 20 awards to consortia .