this section addresses these questions . it can choose not to act , allowing the waiver initiative to move forward . it can bar the waiver initiative and retain the current rules . it can re - open the debates over welfare - to - work and craft new tanf work performance standards . congress can also craft its own program of welfare - to - work experimentation . that is , it can address any legal , procedural , and substantive objections to the obama administration's waiver initiative through legislation that would allow for new welfare - to - work experiments with congressionally prescribed goals and within congressionally prescribed boundaries . first , it discusses some of the goals set forth by the administration in its announcement of the waiver initiative , focusing on three goals: testing alternative strategies , measuring employment outcomes , and program integration . it then discusses what goals others ( states , policymakers ) might also wish to achieve in altering tanf's welfare - to - work rules . the tanf work participation standards are one of the central features of the welfare reforms that culminated in the mid - 1990s . since the 1996 law , states have historically sought additional flexibility in terms of the activities that count toward the standards . some in congress have seen proposals to grant that flexibility as weakening the work requirements that result from the standards , or at least weakening the tie to work activities as opposed to educational activities . in that regard , the current debate over the obama administration's waiver initiative can be seen as a continuation of a long - running debate on the degree that participation standards should emphasize work as compared with education and training . the waiver initiative's emphasis on measuring outcomes raises both philosophical and technical questions . the emphasis on work in welfare programs grew in part out of an argument that if society had an obligation to help low - income persons , recipients also had obligations and a basic societal obligation to work or to prepare for work . a focus that is solely on outcomes — whether a welfare - to - work strategy succeeds in moving families off the rolls and into jobs — removes some of the focus on engaging recipients in activities to meet their obligations . however , the performance of tanf work programs has also been criticized on other grounds . the official tanf work participation rate has hovered around 30% — well below the statutory target of 50% , as "credits" have permitted states to meet the standards with lower levels of engagement . participation in activities that represent supported work — subsidized employment and on - the - job training — has been relatively low for those on the assistance rolls . participation in activities that closely resemble work – work experience and community service — has likewise been relatively low . despite the fact that states can count vocational educational training for only one year in a lifetime of a recipient , it is the third most common activity behind working in a regular unsubsidized job while on the rolls and job search and readiness .