both crs provided funding only through this means . but there is no procedural requirement as to its form . continuing appropriations are also occasionally provided through a bill . if appropriations are not enacted for a fiscal year through a regular appropriations act or a cr , a "funding gap" occurs until such appropriations are provided . when a funding gap occurs , federal agencies may be directed to begin a "shutdown" of the affected programs and activities . agencies are generally prohibited from obligating or expending federal funds in the absence of appropriations . congress has enacted one or more crs in all but three of the 43 fiscal years since fy1977 . further information is available in table 2 of this report . in total , 186 crs were enacted into law during the period covering fy1977-fy2019 , ranging from zero to 21 in any single fiscal year . on average , about four crs were enacted each fiscal year during this interval . table 3 and figure 1 of this report provide more information on this aspect of crs . this report provides an overview of the components of crs and information about congressional practices related to their use . the first section of this report explains six of the typical main components of crs: coverage , duration , funding rate , restrictions on new activities , anomalies , and legislative provisions . the second section discusses the enactment of regular appropriations acts prior to the start of the fiscal year and the number of crs enacted , beginning with fy1977 , which was the first fiscal year that began on october 1 . the third section provides information on the variation in the number and duration of crs enacted each fiscal year after fy1997 — the most recent fiscal year in which all regular appropriations were enacted before the start of the new fiscal year . finally , the fourth section of this report discusses the features of the 15 "full - year crs" that provided funding through the remainder of the fiscal year . for further information , see table 4 in this report . a list of all crs enacted between fy1977 and fy2019 is provided at the end of this report in table 5 . this report has been updated from the previous january 2016 version to include information on fy2017 , fy2018 , and fy2019 . congress has included six main components in crs . first , crs provide funding for certain activities ( coverage ) , which are typically specified with reference to the prior or current fiscal year's appropriations acts . second , crs provide budget authority for a specified duration of time . this duration may be as short as a single day or as long as the remainder of the fiscal year . third , crs typically provide funds based on an overall funding rate . fourth , the use of budget authority provided in the cr is typically prohibited for new activities not funded in the previous fiscal year . fifth , the duration and amount of funds in the cr , and purposes for which they may be used for specified activities , may be adjusted through anomalies .