it is divided into three parts . as background , the first section discusses free trade zones worldwide . the second section focuses on the u.s. ftz program — its history , administrative mechanism , structure , growth and industry concentration , and benefits and costs . the third section focuses on current issues for congress relating to the u.s. ftz program . current zone - related issues for congress reflect the supply - chain role of free trade zones in a complex , increasingly integrated world . between 1997 and 2006 , the number of free trade zones worldwide quadrupled , and the number of workers employed in them tripled . for ftzs in the united states , the direction of growth is the same as for world export processing zones , but the expansion has been more modest , with relatively little growth in employment . between 1997 and 2012 , the overall increase in zone use , along with the particular expansion by the oil sector , has resulted in a decrease in the number of firms using zones , ( from 3,600 to 3,200 ) . however , it has also resulted in an increase in employment ( from 310,000 to 370,000 ) and a nearly four - fold increase in the current dollar value of merchandise received / shipped . ( see table a - 2 . ) reasons previously identified by the oecd as supporting the growth of world export processing zones as policy tools could continue: ( 1 ) the increasing emphasis on export - oriented growth ; ( 2 ) the increasing emphasis on foreign direct investment - oriented growth ; ( 3 ) the transfer of production of labor intensive industries from developed to developing countries ; and ( 4 ) the growing international division of labor and incidence of global production networks . major factors which , in the future , could increase the use of free trade zones around the world , including u.s. ftzs , are ( 1 ) continuing improvements in technology , which will extend recent advancements in communication tools , computer capabilities , and the transport industry ; ( 2 ) advancements and improvements in security monitoring ; ( 3 ) new efficiencies for zone users including advancements in automated , electronic tracking of goods and services traded internationally ; and ( 4 ) external trends . possible external trends that could give a significant boost to u.s. ftzs , specifically , could include those events or forces that would encourage a return of basic manufacturing to the united states and a boost to u.s. exports . if all trade barriers and security issues were eliminated between all countries , exports and imports could move as easily among countries as between u.s. states . as a result , the need for the zones worldwide would be greatly diminished . however , as long as international tariff and non - tariff barriers remain , along with the need for heightened security to deal with issues such as terrorism and money laundering , the u.s. ftz system and other zone programs abroad are likely to continue and even , possibly , expand . congressional issues have both u.s. and worldwide aspects .