what does nfib mean for congress's taxing power ? the framers' debates provide little clarity . second , the court emphasized that congress's taxing power is not unlimited since it would not support punitive regulatory measures . third , the court explained that the taxing power , while greater than the commerce power , "does not give congress the same degree of control over individual behavior" since it only involves "requiring an individual to pay money into the federal treasury. some might take issue with the first point , particularly since the one example the majority cited was capitations , an arguably unique type of tax . further , those who are opposed to a broad interpretation of congress's taxing power may find little comfort in the limiting principles found in the majority's opinion . on the other hand , as noted , the court expressly left unanswered the question of when exactly a tax crosses the line to become a regulatory penalty no longer supported by the taxing power , while emphasizing that "[i]t remains true ... that the 'power to tax is not the power to destroy while this court sits.' thus , because the court analyzed the mandate under its "narrowest interpretation of the taxing power," how the court might interpret the outer limits on that power is unresolved . from its earliest days , the supreme court has interpreted the term relatively narrowly . the court has found that direct taxes include capitations and real property taxes at a minimum . the court has also suggested that other types of taxes might be direct , although it did not find any such examples until the pollock case in 1895 . in pollock , the court struck down the unapportioned income tax act of 1894 after finding parts of it — the taxes on income from real and personal property — were direct taxes . the pollock decision was subject to substantial criticism and led to the adoption of the sixteenth amendment in 1913 . while pollock has not been expressly overruled , the court moved away from its analysis in subsequent cases , upholding a variety of unapportioned taxes on the basis they were excise taxes . in nfib v. sebelius , the court easily dismissed this issue , finding that the individual mandate is not a "direct tax" since that term has only been recognized to include capitations ( taxes imposed on each person in a jurisdiction ) and real and personal property taxes . the court explained that "[a] tax on going without health insurance does not fall within any recognized category of direct tax. the court defined capitations as "taxes paid by every person , 'without regard to property , profession , or any other circumstance ,'" and emphasized that the mandate provision's "whole point" is "it is triggered by specific circumstances," specifically "earning a certain amount of income but not obtaining health insurance. the court concluded by noting the provision is clearly not a tax on ownership of land or personal property . at the outset , it must be emphasized that the taxing power has always been recognized as being broad . further , the court has approved tax provisions even when they have a regulatory ( i.e.