appendix a . instances reported under the war powers resolution this appendix lists reports presidents have made to congress through early 2017 as the result of the war powers resolution . each entry contains the president's reference to the war powers resolution . the reports generally cite the president's authority to conduct foreign relations and as commander in chief ; each entry indicates any additional legislative authority a president cites for his action . several of the reports listed for the period since 1991 , in particular , are reports regarding ongoing operations previously reported by the president , rather than completely new instances of use of the u.s. military overseas . ( 1 ) danang , vietnam . on april 4 , 1975 , president ford reported the use of naval vessels , helicopters , and marines to transport refugees from danang and other seaports to safer areas in vietnam . his report mentioned section 4 ( a ) ( 2 ) of the war powers resolution and authorization in the foreign assistance act of 1961 for humanitarian assistance to refugees suffering from the hostilities in south vietnam . monroe leigh , legal adviser to the department of state , testified later that the president "advised the members of the senate and house leadership that a severe emergency existed in the coastal communities of south vietnam and that he was directing american naval transports and contract vessels to assist in the evacuation of refugees from coastal seaports. ( 2 ) cambodia . on april 12 , 1975 , president ford reported the use of ground combat marines , helicopters , and supporting tactical air elements to assist with the evacuation of u.s. nationals from cambodia . the report took note of both section 4 and section 4 ( a ) ( 2 ) of the war powers resolution . on april 3 , 1975 , the day the president authorized the ambassador to evacuate the american staff , he directed that the leaders of the senate and house be advised of the general plan of evacuation . on april 11 , the day he ordered the final evacuation , president ford again directed that congressional leaders be notified . ( 3 ) vietnam . on april 30 , 1975 , president ford reported the use of helicopters , marines , and fighter aircraft to aid in the evacuation of u.s. citizens and others from south vietnam . the report took note of section 4 of the war powers resolution . on april 10 , the president had asked congress to clarify its limitation on the use of forces in vietnam to insure evacuation of u.s. citizens and to cover some vietnamese nationals , but legislation to this effect was not completed . on april 28 , the president directed that congressional leaders be notified that the final phase of the evacuation of saigon would be carried out by military forces within the next few hours . ( 4 ) mayaguez .