there are several purposes to the warn act . notices provide workers with time to seek alternative employment , arrange for retraining , and otherwise adjust to the prospect of employment loss . the act also provides notice to state dislocated worker units so that services can be provided promptly to the affected employees and to local governments so they can adjust to upcoming changes in their local labor market . although "retraining" appears in its title , the warn act does not authorize or fund training activities . as such , it is not possible to easily identify how many warn act notifications were issued in a particular timeframe , nor is there a simple procedure for identifying how many notifications were followed by an applicable mass layoff or plant closing . in 2003 , the government accountability office ( gao ; then the general accounting office ) released a report in which it obtained information on warn notices from state dislocated worker units and then matched them to mass layoff and plant closure data from the bureau of labor statistics . the report found that of the 5,349 warn notices issued , only 717 ( 13% ) could be matched to a specific mass layoff or plant closing . the report also identified 1,257 additional events that appeared to require notification under the warn act in which it could not find a corresponding layoff notice filed with the state . the department encourages employers to give notice in all circumstances . workers affected by layoffs covered by the warn act may be eligible for training services under the dislocated worker provisions of the workforce investment act ( wia ) or , if their job loss is attributable to foreign competition , trade adjustment assistance for workers ( taa ) . regulations , however , prohibit employers from regularly issuing warn act notices so as to perpetually be in compliance with the law in the event of a mass layoff or plant closure . the warn act requires covered employers to provide 60 calendar days' notice prior to qualified employment losses affecting 50 or more employees . the act is at title 29 , chapter 23 of the u.s. code ( 29 u.s.c . in addition to establishing criteria and notification procedures for applicable layoffs and plant closures , the warn act also encourages procedures for layoffs that may not require formal notification: it is the sense of congress that an employer who is not required to comply with the notice requirements of section 2102 of this title should , to the extent possible , provide notice to its employees about a proposal to close a plant or permanently reduce its workforce . regulations have reiterated and expanded upon this sentiment: notice in ambiguous situations . it is civically desirable and it would appear to be good business practice for an employer to provide advance notice to its workers or unions , local government and the state when terminating a significant number of employees . in practical terms , there are some questions and ambiguities of interpretation inherent in the application of warn to business practices in the market economy that cannot be addressed in these regulations .