this is not true . the act contains a moratorium only on state and local governments imposing "multiple or discriminatory taxes on electronic commerce," as well as new taxes on internet access services . as a result of this law , a state may not , for example , impose a tax on electronic commerce that is not imposed on similar transactions made through other means ( such as traditional "brick and mortar" stores ) . it remains permissible , however , for a state to impose a sales or use tax that is administered equally without regard to whether the sale was face - to - face , mail order , or internet . for more information on the act , see crs report r43800 , taxation of internet sales and access: legal issues , by [author name scrubbed] and crs report r43772 , the internet tax freedom act: in brief , by [author name scrubbed] . the second misperception is that the u.s. constitution prohibits states from taxing internet sales . states have the power to tax their residents who purchase goods or services on the internet , even when the seller is located outside the state and has no real connection with it . however , if the seller does not have a constitutionally sufficient connection ( "nexus" ) to the state , then the seller is under no enforceable obligation to collect the tax and remit it to the state . in this situation , the purchaser is still generally responsible for paying the use tax , but few comply and the tax revenue goes uncollected . as a result of this low compliance rate and the increasing amount of internet commerce , states have been motivated to develop new ways — "amazon laws" — to capture uncollected use taxes , while still complying with the u.s. constitution . the report first examines the constitution's requirements as to state laws that impose use tax collection obligations on remote sellers . it then looks at how these requirements apply to state "amazon laws. as discussed below ( " state "amazon laws" " ) , some states have enacted legislation aimed at collecting use taxes from internet sales by imposing tax collection or notification requirements on internet retailers . these laws potentially implicate two provisions of the u.s. constitution: the fourteenth amendment's due process clause and the dormant commerce clause . the clauses have different purposes , and a state's imposition of tax obligations on a retailer may be acceptable under one and not the other . the focus for due process is whether imposition of the obligation or liability is fair , while the concern under the dormant commerce clause is whether it unduly burdens interstate commerce . together , these clauses impose two requirements relevant for analyzing state "amazon laws": ( 1 ) each requires there be some type of nexus between the state and remote seller before the state can impose obligations on the seller ; and ( 2 ) the dormant commerce clause prohibits states from discriminating against out - of - state sellers .