id . the court declared that ms. miers was legally required to testify after being issued a valid congressional subpoena and ordered ms. miers and mr. bolten to produce all subpoenaed nonprivileged documents . additionally , while stopping short of ordering production of a full privilege log , the court did require the executive to provide more detailed descriptions of all documents withheld on the basis of executive privilege . id . the appeals court stayed the district court order pending appeal , but the appeals court never issued a ruling on the merits because an accommodation was reached before it could take up the case . following the expiration of the 110 th congress and the arrival of a new administration , the parties reached an agreement in march 2009 . the executive provided some of the requested documents to the committee and ms. miers was permitted to testify , under oath , in a closed , but transcribed , hearing . on april 9 , and may 5 , 2008 , the house oversight and government reform committee issued three subpoenas total to the administrator of the environmental protection agency ( epa ) and the office of information and regulatory affairs of the office of management and budget ( oira ) . the subpoenas sought documents related to epa's promulgation of regulations serving national ambient air quality standards for ozone on march 12 , 2008 . another subpoena requested communications between the epa and oira concerning the agency's decision to deny a petition by california for a waiver from federal preemption to enable the state to regulate greenhouse gas emissions from motor vehicles . on june 19 , 2008 , the attorney general advised the president that 25 of the documents covered by the subpoena would be properly covered by an assertion of executive privilege . on june 20 , 2008 , the epa administrator advised the chairman of the committee that he had been directed by the president to assert executive privilege with respect to the withheld documents . the committee did not pursue a contempt action . removal and replacement of u.s . attorneys ( 2008 ) . on july 10 , 2008 , karl rove , a former white house deputy chief of staff , refused to comply with a subpoena requiring his appearance before the house judiciary committee's subcommittee on commercial and administrative law , claiming absolute immunity on the basis of white house and doj opinions and directions . by a vote of 7-1 , the subcommittee rejected his claims of privilege . on july 30 , 2008 , the full judiciary committee approved a report recommending that mr. rove be cited for contempt by the house . the full house never voted on the contempt citation . mr. rove was permitted to testify as part of the accommodation reached between the executive and the house at the conclusion of the miers / bolten dispute discussed above . special counsel's investigation of revelations of cia agent's identity . on july 16 , 2008 , the president directed the attorney general ( at the behest of the attorney general ) to assert executive privilege with respect to a house oversight and government reform committee subpoena to doj .