appendix a . agenda for apec meetings in vladivostok , russia appendix b. u.s. trade with apec trade with the 20 other apec members constitutes a major component of u.s. merchandise trade . the top 3 u.s. trading partners in 2011 are apec members , as are 6 in the top 10 . the following table lists the u.s. exports , imports , total trade and balance of trade with each of the 20 other apec members . secretary of state hillary clinton will represent the united states . as host , russia has identified food security , supply chain reliability , and fostering innovative growth through cooperation as priorities for the meetings , in addition to apec's general goals of trade and investment liberalization and regional economic integration . a major backdrop for the meeting will be the status of the ongoing trans - pacific partnership ( tpp ) negotiations and the potential implications for apec's future ; all of the tpp - negotiating nations are apec members . the u.s. priorities in vladivostok are to build on the accomplishments made during the 19 th apec economic leaders' meeting held in honolulu on november 12-13 , 2011 ; and to cooperate with russia on the elements of the 2012 agenda for which the two nations share a common perspective . the asia - pacific economic cooperation ( apec ) was founded in 1989 for the purpose of promoting trade and investment liberalization in the asia - pacific as a means of fostering sustainable economic growth and prosperity in the region . apec currently has 21 members: australia , brunei , canada , chile , china , hong kong ( officially hong kong , china ) , indonesia , japan , malaysia , mexico , new zealand , papua new guinea , peru , the philippines , russia , singapore , south korea , taiwan ( officially chinese taipei ) , thailand , the united states , and vietnam . apec is one of a few international organizations in which both china and taiwan are members . the heightened u.s. engagement in the asia - pacific region has raised questions about apec's continued role and relevance in u.s. foreign policy , particularly given the growing number of alternative regional events or organizations at which the united states can present its views . the obama administration has stated that the "rebalancing" of u.s. foreign policy towards asia has a significant economic component , but there are a plethora of economic and trade groupings in the region . the obama administration frequently has portrayed apec as the premier economic and trade organization in the asia - pacific region , and views the eas as the main geopolitical association in the region . this view is not shared by all of the other members of these two associations . the obama administration has also actively pursued progress in the ongoing tpp negotiations , promoting the potential trade agreement as a stepping stone for creating the ftaap envisioned by apec . on occasion , the trade liberalization measures proposed to apec by the united states in its individual action plan ( iap ) have required changes in u.s. trade laws ( such as the lowering of tariff rates ) or trade policy .