appendix a . selected program funding table . the version of h.r . 933 as enacted incorporates $383.0 million worth of house - passed additions to the amounts requested for three armored vehicle programs , as follows: the budget requested $74.4 million for to support the fielding of m - 1 tanks that had been upgraded to the so - called "m - 1a2sep" version , which incorporates improvements to the power train , communications gear , and night - vision equipment . the final appropriations bill would add $181.0 million to upgrade additional tanks . 933 would nearly double — to $288.2 million , from $148.2 million requested — funding to upgrade bradley armored troop carriers with improved night vision equipment , digital communications gear , and power train modifications . the bill would add $62.0 million to the $107.9 million requested for m - 88a2 hercules tank recovery vehicles — tracked vehicles designed to tow to safety a disabled 70-ton abrams tank . the enacted version of the appropriations bill — like the house - passed and senate committee - reported versions of h.r . 5856 — would provide $639.9 million , as requested , to continue development of the army's ground combat vehicle ( gcv ) , which is intended to replace the bradley armored troop carrier . in its report on h.r . 5856 , the senate appropriations committee had questioned the emphasis the army was placing on the gcv , considered in the context of its overall spending plans for modernization of its armored combat vehicle fleet . under current army plans , the senate committee said , the gcv would account for about 10% of the army's entire fleet of combat vehicles . in the fy2013 budget request , it accounts for more than 70% of the total amount requested for modernization of the ground combat fleet . over the five - year period fy2013-fy2017 , gcv would absorb more than 80% of the service's projected spending on combat vehicle modernization . the committee directed the army to provide to congress the results of a business case analysis — currently underway — of its combat vehicle fleet modernization plans . in their respective reports on h.r . 5856 , the appropriations committees of both the house and senate decried the administration's plan to reduce the number of warships projected for funding in fy2013-fy2017 compared with the navy's previous five - year plan . both committees warned that the projected reduction in shipbuilding would increase costs and weaken the nation's shipbuilding industrial base . the house committee also contended that the administration's plan was inconsistent with its increased emphasis on u.s. military power in the pacific region , where naval forces would play a particularly significant role . congressional action on appropriation of funds for selected naval systems is summarized in table a - 6 . following are highlights . like the armed services committees of the house and senate , the house and senate appropriations committee had objected to the administration's plan to buy one virginia - class attack submarine and one aegis destroyer in fy2014 , rather than two ships of each type , as had been planned . 933 as enacted — like the senate committee - reported versions of h.r .