amend . iii , and noted that "a well - regulated militia , being necessary to the security of a free state , the right of the people to keep and bear arms , shall not be infringed," u.s. const . amend . ii . the constitution , on the other hand , explicitly permitted the congress to provide for calling out the militia to execute the laws , suppress insurrection , and repel invasion , u.s. const . art . soon after congress was first assembled under the constitution , it authorized the president to call out the militia , initially to protect the frontier against "hostile incursions of the indians," and subsequently in cases of invasion , insurrection , or obstruction of the laws , in aid of a state government or where federal law met resistance . these authorities were used to put down the "whiskey rebellion" and other armed resistance to the revenue laws , labor strikes and race riots , and bands of desperados in the territories . congress in some cases specifically authorized the use of the armed forces to execute civilian laws in cases that did not amount to insurrection , including enforcement of embargoes and the neutrality laws . the president's authority to call upon the state militia to aid in putting down insurrections is reminiscent of the authority enjoyed by the sheriff at common law to call upon the posse comitatus . in the beginning , the two were comparable but unrelated . even though congress empowered the president to call out the militia to overcome obstructions to law enforcement , it continued to vest the federal equivalent of the sheriff , the federal marshal , with the power to call forth the posse comitatus in performance of his duties . in addition , congress sometimes authorized recourse to the posse comitatus for the enforcement of particular statutes . under the fugitive slave act , for instance , owners whose slaves had escaped to another state were entitled to an arrest warrant for the slaves and to have the warrant executed by federal marshals . the marshals in turn might "summon and call to their aid the bystanders , or posse comitatus of the proper county ... [and] all good citizens [were] commanded to aid and assist in the prompt and efficient execution of this law , whenever their services may be required , as aforesaid , for that purpose," 9 stat . attorney general caleb cushing declared that the "bystanders" contemplated by the fugitive slave act might include members of a state militia even when not in federal service , and they did encompass members of the armed forces by virtue of their duties as citizens as part of the posse comitatus . following the civil war , the use of federal troops to execute the laws , particularly in the states that had been part of the confederacy , continued even after all other political restrictions had been lifted . in response , congress passed the posse comitatus act as part of an army appropriations bill in 1878 .