organizations are fined more severely . they can be fined up $5 million , twice the loss or gain associated with the offense , or three times the value of the stolen trade secret , for trade secret theft . for economic espionage , the fines of organizations jump to a maximum of the greater of $10 million , three times the value of the trade secret , or twice the gain or loss associated with the offense . a court may assess the same sanctions for attempt or conspiracy to commit either offense , or for aiding or abetting the completed commission of the either offense . a sentencing court must order the defendants to pay victim restitution , and the government may confiscate any property that is derived from or used to facilitate either offense . the government may seek to enjoin violations , and , by virtue of amendments in the defend trade secrets act of 2016 , victims may be entitled to sue for double damages , equitable relief , and attorneys' fees . conduct that violates the eea's proscriptions may also violate other federal prohibitions , however . some , like the computer fraud and abuse act , in addition to imposing criminal penalties , likewise authorize victims to sue for damages and other forms of relief under some circumstances . the eea's economic espionage and theft of trade secret offenses share many of the same elements . there are four principal differences . the theft of a trade secret must involve the intent to benefit someone other than the owner . it must involve an intent to injure the owner . and , it must involve a trade secret "that is related to or included in a product that is produced for or placed in interstate or foreign commerce. economic espionage , on the other hand , must involve an intent to benefit a foreign entity or at least involve the knowledge that the offense will have that result . it does not require an intent to injure the owner . and , it applies to any trade secret , notwithstanding the absence of any connection to interstate or foreign commerce . finally , economic espionage is punished more severely . the maximum term of imprisonment is 15 years rather than 10 years , and the maximum fine for individuals is $5 million rather than $250,000 . for organizations , the maximum fine is the greater of $10 million or three times the value of the trade secret rather than $5 million . as in the case of stealing trade secrets , the maximum permissible fine may be higher if twice the amount of the gain or loss associated with the offense exceeds the otherwise applicable statutory maximum . and the crime is likewise a rico and , consequently , a money laundering predicate offense . section 1831 condemns: i .