table 2 . major provisions of title ii . this table covers provisions for adult education and literacy activities . table 3 . major provisions of title iii . this table covers changes to the wagner - peyser act of 1933 , which was also amended in title iii of wia . wagner - peyser provides authorization for the employment service . table 4 . major provisions of title iv of wia and title v of h.r . this table addresses amendments to the rehabilitation act of 1973 , in particular to the vocational rehabilitation and other employment - related provisions of that act , which authorizes various employment services for individuals with disabilities . title i of the workforce investment act — workforce investment systems — authorizes the establishment of a one - stop delivery system through which state and local wia training and employment activities are provided and through which certain partner programs must be coordinated . title i also authorizes funding for the three major state formula grant programs ( adult , youth , and dislocated worker ) , job corps ( a dol - administered program for low - income youth ) , and several other national programs that are directed toward subpopulations with barriers to employment ( eg , native americans ) . 4297 takes a fundamentally different approach from current law to the federal role in the delivery of workforce development services by consolidating multiple programs into a single block grant that is allocated to states by formula . at the same time , h.r . 4297 maintains the one - stop delivery system as the delivery mechanism for employment and training services . the adult education and family literacy act ( aefla ) is the current law that authorizes funds supporting programs related to basic education ( i.e. , instruction at the secondary school level and below ) for individuals who are beyond school age , not enrolled in school , and lacking a high school diploma or equivalent . the program also funds educational services for english learners . the largest portion of aefla funds are grants to states that are subsequently allotted to local entities that conduct educational programs . 4297 reauthorizes title ii programs through 2018 . it limits the annual authorized appropriation level to fy2012 levels and changes several aefla provisions to emphasize the relationship between adult education and employment . aefla is also amended to align with the new wia performance indicators . title iii of the workforce investment act — workforce investment - related activities — makes amendments to the wagner - peyser act of 1933 ( 29 u.s.c . 49 et seq .

 ) , which authorizes the employment service ( es ) . the es is the central component of most states' one - stop delivery systems , as es services are universally accessible to job seekers and employers and es offices may not exist outside of the one - stop delivery system . although the es is one of the required partners in the one - stop delivery system , its central mission — to facilitate the match between individuals seeking work and employers seeking workers — makes it critical to the functioning of the workforce development system under wia .