the text of h.r . 4607 and a number of other bills related to rulemaking were incorporated into h.r . 4078 , the red tape reduction and small business job creation act , which was passed by the house on july 26 , 2012 . s. 2368 was referred to the senate committee on homeland security and governmental affairs upon introduction , and the senate did not take further action . the midnight rule relief act would have established a moratorium on the proposal or finalization of certain types of rules during the period between a presidential election day and inauguration day of a president's final term in office . specifically , if enacted , it would have prevented an outgoing president from proposing or finalizing certain "major" rules during the covered period . the exceptions would have included certain rules with statutory or judicial deadlines ; rules exempted by the president to be necessary for various reasons including national security ; and deregulatory measures aimed at repealing an existing rule . in the 114 th congress , representative tim walberg and senator joni ernst introduced the midnight rule relief act of 2016 ( h.r . 4612 and s. 2582 , respectively ) on february 25 , 2016 . on june 10 , 2016 , the house committee on oversight and government reform reported h.r . 4612 , and the text reported was considered , with some modifications , as an amendment to h.r . 4361 , the government reform and improvement act of 2016 , and passed by the house on july 7 , 2016 . s. 2582 was referred to the senate committee on homeland security and governmental affairs upon introduction , and the senate has not taken further action at the time of writing of this report . if enacted , the midnight rule relief act would prevent certain proposed and final rules from being issued during a "moratorium period" following the election of a new president . the rules that would be precluded from issuance would be "major" rules and rules that would trigger the analytical requirements of the regulatory flexibility act ( i.e. , those rules that may have a significant economic impact on a substantial number of small entities ) . the bill contains a number of exceptions , such as rules that are required to be issued under statute , rules for which the president issues an executive order determining that the rule is necessary for certain reasons specified in the bill , or rules that are deregulatory in nature ( i.e. these two options are discussed in detail below . several midnight rulemaking bills have been introduced into recent congresses that corresponded with a presidential transition ( or potential transition , as was the case in the 112 th congress , which coincided with the presidential election of 2012 ) . companion bills entitled the midnight rule relief act of 2012 ( h.r . 4607 and s. 2368 ) were introduced by representative reid ribble and senator ron johnson , respectively , in the 112 th congress . , a rule that would repeal an existing rule ) . in addition , representative darrell issa introduced h.r .