provisions of h.r . 2996 were incorporated in the consolidated and further continuing appropriations act , 2015 ( h.r . 83 ) as title vii . in general , some prefer an approach that reduces costs and other burdens on manufacturers , such as reducing taxes , regulations , and frivolous lawsuits . others prefer an expanded direct role for the federal government . this could include increasing federal funding for manufacturing r&d , providing grants and loan guarantees for domestic manufacturing , and , in some cases , subsidizing production of products for which there are deemed positive benefits for the nation that cannot be captured by the manufacturer ( economists refer to such benefits as positive externalities ) . with a range of options that might be pursued to improve the competitive position and strength of u.s. manufacturing , some contend that the nnmi should be given high priority due to its perceived benefits ( eg , advancing research discoveries toward market - ready technologies ) . others may believe that the nnmi is not the right approach to bolstering u.s. manufacturing . some may assert that the role envisioned for the nnmi should be performed by the private sector ; that the federal government should not favor or subsidize particular companies , industries , or technologies ; that the nnmi would be ineffective or counterproductive ; that the funds that would go to the nnmi should be used to support manufacturing in other ways ; that the funds should be used for different federal functions altogether ; or that the funds should be directed toward deficit reduction . some may believe that the nnmi is , in part or in whole , duplicative of other federal programs , such as the manufacturing extension partnership ; or , as a new and separate program , represents an increasing fragmentation of federal efforts to help manufacturers . some may question whether additional federal funding will produce more innovation and whether and how the u.s. manufacturing base will effectively absorb such innovations . the preliminary design report asserts that there are "notable distinctions" between the nnmi and federal manufacturing - related programs such as the nsf's industry & university cooperative research ( i / ucrc ) and engineering research centers ( erc ) , nist manufacturing extension partnership program , and other federal investments focused on basic and applied early stage research . among the characteristics of the nnmi identified in the report that set it apart from other federal efforts: the scale of investment in each center , the specific focus on manufacturability and manufacturing processes and technologies ; reliance on industry leadership , in partnership with other stakeholders ; the significant industry co - investment which will "force [institutes] to have a pragmatic focus on industrially relevant technologies" ; and the nnmi's education and workforce training approach that seeks to make community colleges an integral part of the effort . congress may wish to explore the likely importance and effectiveness of these differentiating characteristics . while the preliminary design report provides a broad outline of the functions that the network would serve and some of the roles of the federal government in the national network , other questions remain .