the president's budget is a set of recommendations . congress is not required to adopt the recommendations contained within the president's budget . nevertheless , the budget is one of the president's most important policy tools . though it is not legally binding , the president's budget initiates the congressional budget process and provides congress with recommended spending levels for agency programs , projects , and activities funded through the annual appropriations acts . 67-13 ; 42 stat . 20-27 ) established the modern executive budget process . prior to its enactment , executive budgeting was highly decentralized . at that time , agencies submitted their budget estimates to congress individually , either directly or through the secretary of the treasury , with varying levels of involvement or direction by the president . the president's budget submission is a multi - volume set of documents , which may vary in size and composition from administration to administration . this section briefly discusses the components of the president's budget submission to congress , and highlights some of the formal and informal interactions between congress , the president , omb , and agencies . once appropriations and other budgetary legislation have become law , federal agencies are responsible for executing the budget . the president , omb , and agencies execute the budget by collecting , obligating , and expending federal resources in accordance with the budgetary laws that have been enacted . the president , omb , and agencies also possess limited authority to make spending adjustments after appropriations and other spending legislation have been enacted . the previous section provided an overview of the budget execution procedures that the president , omb , and agencies utilize under normal conditions . under existing law , there are additional executive budgetary procedures that are triggered under specific , less common circumstances . under the antideficiency act , agencies are generally prohibited from obligating or spending funds prior to the enactment of their appropriations . a funding gap occurs when full - year or interim appropriations are not enacted by the start of the fiscal year . a funding gap may also occur at other times during the fiscal year if an agency's interim appropriations ( i.e. , a continuing resolution or cr ) , expire and an additional cr is not subsequently enacted . during a funding gap , the only budgetary resources that may be obligated or expended are those that will be used to provide for excepted activities , such as those involving "the safety of human life or the protection of property. during periods when enactment of full - year or interim appropriates seems uncertain , omb may instruct executive agencies to prepare for funding gaps and government shutdowns . circular a - 11 provides general guidance on how executive agencies should proceed if their regular appropriations or crs are not enacted or if their existing crs have expired . for example , circular a - 11 instructs agencies to develop shutdown plans that identify "excepted" activities which will continue and "non - excepted" activities which will be terminated in the event of a funding gap . in addition , the circular instructs agencies to determine which of their employees will be subject to furlough and which will be retained .