addendum . at this point , the reader is referred to section iii.a. liability after american electric power co. , inc. v. connecticut ," which discusses yet another litigation barrier: federal displacement of common - law - based climate change claims by the clean air act . this barrier , announced by the supreme court in 2011 , now makes it unnecessary for courts to reach the standing and political question issues in the case , allowing them to avoid the abstruse questions raised by those defenses . proactive responses to climate change are usually grouped under one of two headings: mitigation and adaptation . this section treats some of the legal issues raised by mitigation . sections iv and v compile some of the legal issues associated with adaptation . based on consensus predictions as to the many harms that climate change may cause , one may safely predict that liability lawsuits will be filed . this report previously mentioned the standing hurdle looming before climate change plaintiffs , especially those that are not states , and the political question hurdle . following are some additional issues in liability actions . the previous section touched on a few adaptation measures specifically related to sea level rise . this section continues with additional adaption measures that raise legal issues . united nations high commissioner for refugees antonio guterres has said: "climate change is today one of the main drivers of forced displacement , both directly through impact on environment — not allowing people to live any more in the areas where they were traditionally living — and as a trigger of extreme poverty and conflict. climate - related migrants , however , are not considered a "protected class" of people in international law or u.s. immigration law , nor is there a specific legal framework or entity responsible for their displacement . in international law , the foundational document is the 1951 convention relating to the status of refugees , which defines "refugee" as a person who "owing to a well - founded fear of being persecuted for reasons of race , religion , nationality , membership of a particular social group , or political opinion , is outside the country of his nationality. this definition is unlikely to embrace climate change refugees since they do not suffer "persecution," and certainly not for the stated reasons . in addition , it is widely held that for the foreseeable future , most people displaced by climate change will stay within their own countries , and thus fall outside the definition of refugee because not "outside the country of [their] nationality. similarly , the united states has long held to the principle that it will not return a foreign national to a country where his life or freedom would be threatened , but this principle does not encompass economic or environmental migrants . the immigration and nationality act ( ina ) requires foreign nationals seeking asylum or refugee status to demonstrate a well - founded fear that , if returned home , they will be persecuted based upon the five characteristics listed in the convention ( above ) .