ann . there is a one party consent exception for those acting under color of law ( police officers ) , and a general all party consent exception of those not acting under color of law , i d. the florida rules of professional conduct declare that a lawyer shall not "... commit a criminal act that reflects adversely on the lawyer's honesty , trustworthiness or fitness as a lawyer in other respects," rule 8.4 ( b ) . haw aii formal opinion no . 30 ( 1988 ) ( this opinion is no longer listed among those currently in effect by the disciplinary board of the hawaii supreme court ) : "inquiry has been made concerning the ethical propriety of the electronic recording by a lawyer of a conversation between the lawyer and another person without that person's prior knowledge and consent.... [e]ven if such conduct is not illegal , it offends the traditional high standard of fairness and condor which should characterize the practice of law and must be deemed improper , except in the special situations mentioned below... . therefore no lawyer should record or cause to be recorded any conversation , whether by taps or other electronic device , without the consent or prior knowledge of all parties to the conversation . has an attorney engaged in unethical conduct when he or she secretly records a conversation ? the practice is unquestionably unethical when it is done illegally ; its status is more uncertain when it is done legally . the issue is complicated by the fact that the american bar association ( aba ) , whose model ethical standards have been adopted in every jurisdiction in one form or another , initially declared surreptitious recording unethical per se and then reversed its position . moreover , more than a few jurisdictions have either yet to express themselves on the issue or have not done so for several decades . a majority of the jurisdictions on record have rejected the proposition that secret recording of a conversation is per se unethical even when not illegal . a number endorse a contrary view , however , and an even greater number have yet to announce their position . federal and state law have long outlawed recording the conversation of another . most jurisdictions permit recording with the consent of one party to the discussion , although a few require the consent of all parties to the conversation . both the aba's code of professional responsibility ( dr 1-102 ( a ) ( 3 ) ) and its successor , the model rules of professional conduct ( rule 8.4 ( b ) ) , broadly condemn illegal conduct as unethical . they also censure attorney conduct that involves "dishonesty , fraud , deceit or misrepresentation. in 1974 , the aba concluded in formal opinion 337 that the rule covering dishonesty , fraud , and the like "clearly encompasses the making of recordings without the consent of all parties. thus , "no lawyer should record any conversation whether by tapes or other electronic device , without the consent or prior knowledge of all parties to the conversation. the opinion admitted the possibility that law enforcement officials operating within "strictly statutory limitations" might qualify for an exception .