there are exceptions . first , the "evidence could have been lost because 'the percentage of alcohol in the blood begins to diminish shortly after drinking stops , as the body functions to eliminate it from the system.' yet in addition in that case , because "'time had to be taken to bring the [injured] accused to the hospital and to investigate the scene of the accident , there was no time to seek out a magistrate and secure a warrant.' the supreme court recognized one such exception in schmerber v. california , a case that involved a warrantless blood test ordered for a drunk driving suspect . later state courts were unable to agree on whether the rate at which alcohol disappears from the blood alone constitutes exception or whether other factors must be considered . the police stopped tyler mcneely for speeding and driving erratically . is a dog sniff at the front door of a suspected grow house by a trained narcotics - detection dog a fourth amendment search requiring probable cause ? last term in jones , five justices declared that a fourth amendment "search" occurs when "the government obtains information by physically intruding on a constitutionally protected area. this term , the court declared that a search occurs when the police obtain information on the basis of the performance of a drug - sniffing dog on the front porch of a private house . although the answer might seem something of a departure from the court's past treatment of dog sniffing cases , those cases relied upon the "expectation of privacy rationale" rather than the alternative jones "property intrusion" rationale . has the florida supreme court decided an important question in a way that conflicts with established fourth amendment precedent of the u.s. supreme court by holding that an alert by a well - trained narcotics - detection dog certified to detect illegal contraband is insufficient to establish probable cause to search a vehicle ? the florida supreme court's jardines decision was perhaps not surprising in light of its earlier decision in harris . it refused to accept a trained drug - detection dog's positive reaction as per se probable cause in harris . instead , it listed a host of criteria under which a trained dog's alert might be considered probable cause . neither the per se standard nor the florida court's list seemed consistent with the "totality of the circumstances" standard that the united states supreme court had favored . whether , under michigan v. summers , 452 u.s. 692 , 705 ( 1981 ) , the detention of an individual who has just left the premises to be searched under warrant is permissible when the individual is detained out of view of the house as soon as practicable . the fourth amendment prohibits unreasonable searches and seizures . searches and seizures are presumptively unreasonable , unless they are conducted pursuant to a warrant issued by a neutral magistrate upon a sworn showing of probable cause . nevertheless , there are circumstances under which authorities enjoy limited authority to detain an individual without a warrant and with less than probable cause to believe the individual has committed a crime . one such instance occurs when officers seek to execute a search warrant .