the taxpayers . the same concerns arise for some who observe the environment in which large banks operate . the argument is that large banks such as jp morgan are under pressure to make profits by investing in higher yielding but riskier securities in an environment in which there is muted demand for conventional commercial loans . many of their potential corporate customers are hoarding their cash . and who gets left holding the bag if that happens ? an additional incentive to search for higher yield is said to come from the fact that safe investment alternatives like investment - grade government bonds currently have such low yields that it is hard for banks to profit from the yield spread between them and their deposits . in sum , it is argued that banks such as jp morgan face heightened pressures to invest in riskier but potentially higher rewarding securities . on the other hand , at least two arguments have been advanced to refute the notion that jp morgan's losses have any bearing on the likelihood of problematic losses at other large banks . one argument is that , time after time , banks' greatest exposure to losses has come from their loan making , not the kinds of trades that appear to have led to jp morgan's losses . the other argument is that , since the financial panic , the banking system has generally become significantly better capitalized . risk management involves the identification , analysis , assessment , control , avoidance , minimization , or elimination of unacceptable risks . sound risk management is considered to be an integral part of bank safety and soundness . a key responsibility of bank regulators such as occ is evaluating bank management's ability to identify and control risk . the importance of sound bank risk management has been underscored by federal reserve chairman ben bernanke , who observed that , in addition to adequate bank management of its capital and liquidity , "the third key element of safe and sound banking ... is effective risk management . the [financial] crisis exposed the inadequacy of the risk - management systems of many financial institutions. the large reported trading losses at jp morgan , a firm that enjoyed a reputation for quality risk management , have undermined its reputation and raised questions about the true nature of the bank's risk management . in response to a question about the possible meaning of the bank's losses , treasury secretary tim geithner responded , "i think this failure of risk management is just a very powerful case for financial reform. based on media accounts and pending the conclusion of the various ongoing investigations into the cio's trades , this report undertakes several tasks in this section . the report summarizes two developments that may have contributed to shortcomings in the risk management of jp morgan's cio and its trades: ( 1 ) mr. dimon's alleged emphasis on profit - making and attendant risk taking in the cio ; and ( 2 ) alleged potentially lax and ineffective oversight of trading at the cio .