reaction to the opinion 337 was mixed . the view expressed by the texas professional ethics committee was typical of the states that follow the aba approach: in february 1978 , this committee addressed the issue of whether an attorney in the course of his or her practice of law , could electronically record a telephone conversation without first informing all of the parties involved . the committee concluded that , although the recording of a telephone conversation by a party thereto did not per se violate the law , attorneys were held to a higher standard . the committee reasoned that the secret recording of conversations offended most persons' concept of honor and fair play . has an attorney engaged in unethical conduct when he or she secretly records a conversation ? the practice is unquestionably unethical when it is done illegally ; its status is more uncertain when it is done legally . the issue is complicated by the fact that the american bar association ( aba ) , whose model ethical standards have been adopted in every jurisdiction in one form or another , initially declared surreptitious recording unethical per se and then reversed its position . moreover , more than a few jurisdictions have either yet to express themselves on the issue or have not done so for several decades . a majority of the jurisdictions on record have rejected the proposition that secret recording of a conversation is per se unethical even when not illegal . a number endorse a contrary view , however , and an even greater number have yet to announce their position . federal and state law have long outlawed recording the conversation of another . most jurisdictions permit recording with the consent of one party to the discussion , although a few require the consent of all parties to the conversation . both the aba's code of professional responsibility ( dr 1-102 ( a ) ( 3 ) ) and its successor , the model rules of professional conduct ( rule 8.4 ( b ) ) , broadly condemn illegal conduct as unethical . they also censure attorney conduct that involves "dishonesty , fraud , deceit or misrepresentation. in 1974 , the aba concluded in formal opinion 337 that the rule covering dishonesty , fraud , and the like "clearly encompasses the making of recordings without the consent of all parties. thus , "no lawyer should record any conversation whether by tapes or other electronic device , without the consent or prior knowledge of all parties to the conversation. the opinion admitted the possibility that law enforcement officials operating within "strictly statutory limitations" might qualify for an exception . therefore , attorneys should not electronically record a conversation without first informing that party that the conversation was being recorded . the only exceptions considered at that time were "extraordinary circumstances with which the state attorney general or local government or law enforcement attorneys or officers acting under the direction of a state attorney general or such principal prosecuting attorneys might ethically make and use secret recordings if acting within strict statutory limitations conforming to constitutional requirements," which exceptions were to be considered on a case by case basis . ... [t]his committee sees no reason to change its former opinion .