for example , p.l . 111-22 , the homeless emergency assistance and rapid transition to housing ( hearth ) act , directed hud to "create a new formula for determining needs in the distribution of homeless assistance grants. these proportions are representative of most years . in years when the appropriations process is completed without a continuing resolution , the national board has typically announced its awards , and notified the ssa committees of the amount of funds available to them , in late november . in fy2011 , fema's appropriations were not passed and signed into law until april 15 , 2011 , and efs award announcements were made on july 15 , 2011 , then the latest date for award announcements in the program's history . fema attributed the delay to language in the continuing resolution ( cr ) for that year which fema interpreted to mean that it could not fund programs , such as the efs program , that award most of its available funding at the beginning of the fiscal year . section 109 of the cr ( p.l . 111-242 ) stated: notwithstanding any other provision of this act , except section 106 , for those programs that would otherwise have high initial rates of operation or complete distribution of appropriations at the beginning of fiscal year 2011 because of distributions of funding to states , foreign countries , grantees , or others , such high initial rates of operation or complete distribution shall not be made , and no grants shall be awarded for such programs funded by this act that would impinge on final funding prerogatives . in the past , fema had sought , and was allotted , all program funds under previous crs so that funding could be provided to social service providers during the winter months . in fy2012 , efs program funding was delayed , once again , due to language in the five crs enacted for the fy2012 budget prohibiting the distribution of funds that would impinge on final funding prerogatives . the national board announced its fy2012 awards on august 15 , 2012 , more than seven months after the final appropriations act for fy2102 ( p.l . 112-74 , the consolidated appropriations act , 2012 ) was signed into law , and more than 10 months after the first cr for fy2012 ( p.l . 112-33 , the continuing appropriations act , 2012 ) was enacted . the national board requires jurisdictions to meet a minimum number of individuals unemployed threshold to be considered for funding . the current threshold is 300 unemployed individuals . once that threshold is met , jurisdictions must also meet an unemployment rate threshold and / or a poverty rate threshold to qualify for funding . the national board "adopted this combined approach in order to more effectively target funds for high - need areas and to allocate these funds rapidly and fairly.