appendix a . intolerable. some in the advocacy community , invoking the "responsibility to protect" concept , contend that the international community should do more to protect civilians — namely increase diplomatic pressure to negotiate immediate humanitarian access . should khartoum continue to impede access , though , some proponents have urged collective measures such as imposing sanctions , establishing safe zones and / or no - fly zones , or deploying a protection force to the two states . some have called for international actors to deliver aid across the borders of south sudan and ethiopia into the afflicted areas with or without sudan's permission , as congress first authorized the u.s. government to do in sudan in 1999 . the u.n. security council remains divided on how to respond to sudan's ongoing violations of human rights and unsc resolutions . proposals to extend the arms embargo and ban offensive military flights beyond darfur would likely be opposed by some on the council . similarly , the deployment of a u.n. - mandated force to the two states without khartoum's consent appears improbable , unless a ceasefire is reached . there appears to be little appetite for foreign military intervention , such as the implementation of a no - fly zone , an option once advocated for darfur by individuals now in the obama administration . russia and china , which abstained from voting to authorize a no - fly zone for libya in 2011 , now appear adamantly opposed to the concept in other conflict situations , such as syria , viewing it as a potential vehicle to pursue regime change . should sudan and south sudan fail to make further progress on negotiations , and should khartoum continue to delay implementation of the tripartite proposal for humanitarian access , the security council may be inclined to impose economic sanctions on one or both parties . some members of the 112 th congress have proposed additional punitive measures on sudan . the sudan peace , security , and accountability act of 2012 , h.r . 4169 , which has been referred to committee , would direct the president to develop a strategy to end serious human rights abuses and promote peace and democratic reform in sudan . it would impose sanctions on any person or government found to contribute to sudan's capacity to commit abuses through the transfer of military equipment and on any icc member state that fails to execute an icc arrest warrant . while the relationship between washington and juba , which has been characterized by president obama and secretary clinton as a "partnership," is markedly warmer than that with khartoum , it too is tempered by concerns about human rights abuses and corruption . the united states has invested considerable foreign assistance resources to lay the foundation for development of south sudan . tensions between khartoum and juba threaten that progress . under austerity measures , juba has allocated more than half its budget to security , much of which goes to salaries for soldiers and maintaining readiness . some observers view this as emblematic of patronage to a bloated military at the expense of development priorities that are being met in part with u.s. assistance funds .