for example , h.r . 244 , the consolidated appropriations act for fiscal year 2017 , provided that appropriations for house committees remain available until december 31 , 2018 . this report is organized into three sections . the first provides an overview of the committee funding process in the house and analyzes funding levels since 1996 . the second reviews house floor and committee action on committee funding in the 115 th congress . the final section provides illustrations of the rules and regulations that structure the use of committee funds , and analyzes actual committee funding spending patterns during six previous years . contemporary funding for house committees ( except for the committee on appropriations ) follows a two - step process of authorization and appropriation . operating budgets for all standing and select committees of the house continued or created at the beginning of a new congress ( except for the committee on appropriations ) are authorized biennially pursuant to an omnibus committee funding resolution , and appropriations are included in the legislative branch appropriations bill . the committee on house administration held a hearing on committee expense requests on february 15 and 16 , 2017 . chairs and ranking members from each standing and select committee ( except the committee on appropriations ) testified on their budget requests . representative gregg harper , chair of the panel , indicated that the committee had "worked to strike the right balance" in providing funds for committees while remaining conscious of costs . during the hearing , the chairman and the ranking minority member , representative robert brady , reiterated the long - standing expectation that committee resources would reflect a distribution of two - thirds of the committee staff to the majority , and one - third to the minority , and a similar distribution of nonstaff resources . in their testimony , most committee chairs and ranking minority members explicitly acknowledged mutually satisfactory arrangements had been reached regarding the distribution of committee staff and other resources . on march 7 , 2017 , h.res . 173 , providing for the expenses of certain committees of the house of representatives in the 115 th congress , was introduced and referred to the committee on house administration . on march 8 , 2017 , the committee on house administration marked up h.res . 173 , which was reported to the house by voice vote . in the second session of the 115 th congress , on march 7 and june 26 , 2018 , the committee on house administration considered committee resolutions 115-9 and 115-19 , respectively . these resolutions allocated funds from the reserve fund for unanticipated expenses , established by h.res . in both instances , the committee agreed to the resolution by voice vote and without amendment . in accordance with the regulations contained in the committee handbook , "committee funds are provided to pay ordinary and necessary expenses incurred by committee members and employees in the united states. ordinary and necessary expenses are defined as "reasonable expenditures in support of official committee business that are consistent with all applicable federal laws , rules of the house of representatives , and regulations of the committee on house administration.