examples include the biotechnology and semiconductor industries . industries that tend to have higher than average effective tax rates include retail , food services , and utilities . research has also shown that , in recent years , effective tax rates reported to shareholders on earnings statements by the most profitable u.s. companies have declined . this decline has occurred despite the fact that the statutory corporate tax rate has remained constant at 35% . the decline in effective tax rates for large u.s. corporations over time can largely be explained by increased international activity , combined with lower foreign tax rates . tax expenditures have played a limited role in this change . economists oftentimes use an effective tax rate to evaluate how the tax system affects incentives for capital investment . the effective marginal tax rate , which measures the impact of the tax system on investment decisions , can be defined as , where is the real before - tax return on the marginal ( or incremental ) investment and is the real return paid to investors . higher effective marginal tax rates indicate greater potential investment distortions . negative effective tax rates indicate that the tax code is actually subsidizing investment to the point where taxpayers are willing to accept a before - tax rate of return that is less than the after - tax rate of return for an investment . there are a number of factors that contribute to differences in effective marginal tax rates . these factors include the form of business organization , financing method ( eg , debt versus equity ) , whether a particular industry is more capital intensive than others , inflation , etc . tax expenditure provisions also contribute to variation in effective marginal tax rates . a 2005 congressional budget office ( cbo ) study calculating effective marginal tax rates for different asset types in the corporate sector found an overall effective marginal tax rate of 26.3% . gravelle ( 2011 ) also calculates effective tax rates by asset type , finding an average effective tax rate of 30% . both the 2005 cbo study and gravelle ( 2011 ) identified the computers and peripheral equipment , automobile equipment , and industrial and commercial building sectors as being highly taxed — facing effective marginal tax rates of 30% or above . assets with the lowest effective marginal tax rates — less than 20% in both studies — were communications equipment , ships and boats , railroad equipment , mining structures , and petroleum and natural gas structures . corporate tax revenues have been declining over the last six decades . the corporate tax reached its post - world war ii era peak in 1952 at 5.9% of gross domestic product ( gdp ) ( see figure 4 ) . in 2013 , the corporate tax generated revenue equal to approximately 1.6% of gdp . the corporate tax has also decreased in significance relative to other revenue sources . at its post - wwii peak in 1952 , the corporate tax generated 32.1% of all federal tax revenue . in that same year the individual tax accounted for 42.2% of federal revenue , and the payroll tax accounted for 9.7% of revenue .