in local union no . 697 ( ue & c catalytic , inc. ) , the nlrb found a violation of section 8 ( b ) ( 1 ) ( a ) when a local union engaged in a pattern of misconduct to get members of other unions employed at an amoco refinery , identified as "travelers," to abandon their jobs because they were not members of the local union and because a large number of local members were out of work . on the contrary , an employer's premises are the natural forum for him just as the union hall is the inviolable forum for the union to assemble and address employees . we do not believe that unions will be unduly hindered in their right to carry on organizational activities by our refusal to open up to them the employer's premises for group meetings , particularly since this is an area from which they have traditionally been excluded , and there remains open to them all the customary means for communicating with employees . last - minute speeches made by employers , however , have been distinguished from other pre - election speeches . in peerless plywood co . , decided the same day as livingston shirt , the nlrb declared that employers and unions are prohibited from making election speeches on company time to massed assemblies of employees within 24 hours before an election . the nlrb maintained that such speeches interfere with a free election by creating a "mass psychology which overrides arguments made through other campaign media and giv[ing] an unfair advantage to the party , whether employer or union , who in this manner obtains the last most telling word. in 1956 , the court considered whether an employer could prohibit the distribution of union literature on its company - owned parking lots by nonemployee union organizers . in nlrb v. babcock & wilson co . , the employer contended that it had a consistent policy against all pamphleteering and that it was not attempting to impede its employees' collective bargaining rights when it restricted the distribution of union literature on company property . the court maintained an employer cannot be compelled to allow the distribution of union literature on its premises if a union can reach employees through other channels of communication . if , however , the employer's location and the employees' residences place the employees beyond the reach of reasonable union efforts to communicate with them , the employer must allow the union to approach its employees on its property . as in babcock , the court in lechmere found that the union did have reasonable access to the retail employees and that this accessibility was suggested by the union's success in contacting a substantial percentage of them directly via mailings , phone calls , and home visits . in babcoc k , the court ultimately found that the employer's restrictions were permissible because its plants were close to the communities where a large percentage of employees lived , and various methods of communication were available to the union .