each is examined below . the case for greater federal aid for manufacturing rests in part on a view held by a number of economists that the united states would be better off relying less on consumption and imports financed by foreign borrowing to grow its economy and relying more on domestic production of goods and exports . manufactured products ( mainly chemicals , transportation equipment , computers and other electronic products , and machinery ) accounted for 49% of all u.s. exports and 68% of all u.s imports in the first four months of 2015 . proponents of more federal support for manufacturing maintain that these figures demonstrate that manufacturing has to play a leading role in any credible plan for reducing the u.s. trade deficit . in their view , the federal government should launch renewed efforts to dismantle the remaining barriers in key countries to the export of u.s. manufactured products and persuade major exporting nations like china to adopt more flexible exchange rate regimes . they also call for the adoption of federal initiatives to bolster the competitiveness of u.s. manufacturers through subsidized investments in workforce development , new production facilities , and r&d . proponents also point to the wages and benefits provided by manufacturing firms as another reason why targeted government support for manufacturing industries is warranted . this is because the compensation paid workers in manufacturing is larger , on average , than the labor compensation provided in other non - agricultural industries ( see figure 1 ) , though the gap has been shrinking over time . estimates of the size of the pay gap vary . for instance , between 2005 and 2010 , according to data from the bureau of labor statistics , average weekly earnings in manufacturing were 21% greater than average weekly earnings in all private non - agricultural industries . by contrast , according to a recent study by mark price of the keystone research center , manufacturing workers earned 8.4% more each week than non - manufacturing workers from 2008 to 2010 . there is evidence that this gap is even larger for manufacturing firms that have relatively high ratios of exports to total production . not all non - manufacturing industries pay less than the average wage in manufacturing . but the ones that do pay more , according to price's research findings , such as mining , utilities , telecommunications , finance , insurance , professional and technical services , hospitals , and public administration , accounted for only 21% of total non - manufacturing workers . price also found that low - wage workers benefitted the most from manufacturing jobs and high - wage workers benefitted the least , suggesting that manufacturing has the potential to lower wage gaps among workers . moreover , proponents note that manufacturing jobs are more likely to provide fringe benefits than non - manufacturing jobs , and that a higher share of manufacturing workers ( 48% ) have no formal education beyond a high - school diploma than non - manufacturing workers ( 37% ) do . consequently , say proponents , added federal support for manufacturing could open up more middle - income job opportunities and lower income inequality within the domestic workforce .