appendix a . textile manufacturers appendix c. top 10 states in textile employment appendix d. selected apparel and textile dutie . textile industry overview appendix b . this can be attributed both to automation and to the closure of less efficient mills . while imports of textiles and apparel undoubtedly have contributed to lower industry employment , over the past decade more than 200,000 textile manufacturing jobs have been lost due to automation , according to private estimates . at the end of 2013 , the domestic textile industry employed about 230,700 workers , accounting for fewer than 2% of the nearly 12 million domestic factory jobs ( see appendix a ) . average annual pay was $39,000 in 2013 , far below the average of $61,096 for all manufacturing . figure 2 shows employment has declined by two - thirds since 1990 . cut and s ew : only the cutting and sewing of the finished article must occur in fta member countries , providing maximum flexibility for sourcing . the united states , most often , has applied the "yarn forward" standard for textiles and apparel , with the notable exceptions of agreements with jordan and israel . most u.s. ftas also include exceptions allowing limited quantities of fibers , yarns , and fabrics to be sourced from outside the fta partner countries under certain conditions . appendix d lists textile and apparel tariff rates of various countries . in general , u.s. tariffs increase with each stage of manufacturing , such that duty rates are usually higher on apparel than on its yarn or fabric inputs . the united states' tpp negotiating partners also tend to maintain steep tariffs . vietnam's apparel tariffs range from 5% to 20% . u.s. negotiators have proposed that the tpp agreement incorporate a unified yarn - forward roo , with perhaps some exemptions for inputs considered to be in short supply , or "not commercially available," in the region to assure that duty - free preferences only benefit countries that are part of the agreement . press reports indicate that several tpp negotiating countries , including vietnam , oppose u.s. demands for a "yarn forward" rule . over time , employment has fallen most rapidly during economic downturns , but has failed to return to prerecession levels during the ensuing recoveries . the bureau of labor statistics predicts overall textile manufacturing employment will shrink to around 180,000 by 2022 . domestic textile production is primarily located in the southeastern states and in california , although every state has some textile manufacturing . in 2013 , more than one - third of all textile jobs were located in georgia and north carolina . appendix c compares textile employment in the top 10 states , which accounted for more than two - thirds of all textile jobs , in 2003 and 2013 . in related apparel manufacturing , employment has shrunk every year for more than two decades , resulting in 800,000 fewer u.s. apparel manufacturing jobs in 2013 than in 1990 as clothing manufacturers have transferred much of their production abroad .