federal employment . as discussed in the section above , veterans with service - connected disabilities are eligible for the highest preference in competitively hired federal positions . disabled veterans are also eligible for special hiring authorities , including noncompetitive appointments for qualified veterans with a disability rating of 30% or more from the va. work opportunity tax credit ( currently lapsed ; see wotc section for full details ) . some wotcs were available for businesses that hired veterans who were eligible for disability compensation from the va . the largest available tax credits were for hiring a veteran who was eligible for disability compensation and who was unemployed for at least six of the 12 months prior to hire . additional programs provide competitive grants for entities that provide services to veterans . since the programs are competitive grants , they may be available only in certain areas , may have limited capacity , or may serve only a targeted veteran population . hvrp is a competitive grant program administered by dol . the hvrp program has two goals: ( 1 ) assisting veterans in achieving meaningful employment , and ( 2 ) assisting in the development of a service delivery system to address the problems facing homeless veterans . hvrp grantee organizations provide services that include outreach , assistance in drafting a resume and preparing for interviews , job search assistance , subsidized trial employment , job training , and follow - up assistance after placement . recipients of hvrp grants also provide supportive services not directly related to employment such as transportation , provision of assistance in finding housing , and referral for mental health treatment or substance abuse counseling . fy2015 appropriations for hvrp were $38.1 million . the trio veterans upward bound ( vub ) program provides services to assist veterans in preparing for programs of postsecondary education . vub projects provide academic instruction , tutoring , assistance in completing secondary school , assistance with college admissions and applications , and assistance applying for financial assistance . it is administered by the department of education ( ed ) . to be eligible for participation , veterans must be in need of academic support to pursue education beyond secondary school successfully . at least two - thirds of program participants must be low - income , potential first - generation college students . the remaining one - third of participants must be either low - income , potential first - generation college students , or otherwise be at risk of academic failure . the program defines a veteran who is at risk for academic failure as an individual who has been out of high school or dropped out of a program of postsecondary education for five or more years , has scored on standardized tests below the level that demonstrates a likelihood of success in a program of postsecondary education , or meets the definition of an individual with a disability . section 548 of p.l . 112-81 , the fy2012 national defense authorization act , ( as amended by section 543 of p.l .