taxes will typically not be seen as equal to a criminal penalty . thus , for example , in bankers trust co. v. blodgett , the court refused to apply the ex post facto clause to a state law imposing a 2% tax on the value of taxable property in an estate for the five years preceding death if no tax had been assessed or paid during the year preceding death because "[t]he penalty of the statute was not in punishment of a crime…. when determining whether a tax provision is a criminal penalty for purposes of the ex post facto clause , a court's analysis could be informed by how taxes are treated in other contexts , such as the fifth amendment's prohibition on double jeopardy . in these contexts , the court has recognized that a tax provision may at some point lose its character as a tax and become instead "a mere penalty with the characteristics of regulation and punishment. it prohibits congress from enacting retroactive penal legislation . from its earliest days , the court has interpreted the clause to apply only to criminal punishment . thus , the analysis begins with determining , as a matter of statutory construction , whether the legislation at issue is civil or criminal . taxation is typically not a criminal punishment , and therefore the ex post facto clause is generally understood not to apply to tax legislation . having said that , there may be cases where a tax provision appears to be a criminal punishment . in such cases , the court requires the "clearest proof" to reclassify a civil remedy as a criminal penalty due to the deference owed the legislature's stated intent . an example of this occurring is burgess v. salmon , where the supreme court recharacterized a tax as a criminal penalty , and held its retroactive application violated the prohibition on ex post facto laws . the legislation at issue had increased the federal tobacco stamp tax , while also imposing criminal penalties on the transfer of tobacco without the proper stamp . at the time of the bill's passage , the taxpayer had already paid the stamp tax , and the court held that imposing the higher tax was impermissible . because legislatures have "especially broad latitude" in creating tax classifications , the bar is generally low for finding adequate justification for making classifications in a retroactive tax bill . tax classifications are usually given deference because they are "a device for fitting tax programs to local needs and usages in order to achieve an equitable distribution of the tax burden" and it is inappropriate for a court , which is not in a position to be familiar with these things , to second guess the legislature . on the other hand , it seems possible that such deference by a court may not always be appropriate if a bill or its legislative history were to evidence a punitive intent towards a taxpayer or group of taxpayers . in such cases , any expressed motivations targeting specific taxpayers may lead a court to question the legitimacy of the government's interest . however , it would seem to be a rare occurrence where such evidence would exist .