ams administers both programs . both cost - share programs operate under a cooperative agreement between usda and state agencies , and help defray the cost of organic certification by authorizing usda to allocate funds from the noccsp and ama to eligible state agencies ( typically state departments of agriculture but in some cases departments of natural resources ) . the program is administered through fns . the agency expects to allocate to states a total of about $165 million for school year 2013 / 2014 . in most states , ffvp is primarily administered through states education agencies , except for texas and new jersey , where ffvp is administered by their agriculture agencies . funding is mandatory through ccc . section 10201 received authorization for $12 million ( fy2009 ) ; $45 million ( fy2010 ) ; and $50 million ( fy2011-fy2012 and each fiscal year thereafter ) . ncpn was provided with $5 million annually ( fy2009-fy2012 ) . the 2014 farm bill consolidated both programs , naming it the "national clean plant network. it also consolidated and increased available mandatory funding levels: $62.5 million annually ( fy2014-fy2017 ) , and $75 million for fy2018 , including $5 million in appropriated funds for fy2013 . the 2008 farm bill also authorized the establishment of a pest and disease revolving loan fund to provide loans to local governments to finance purchases of equipment to monitor , remove , dispose of , and replace pest - and disease - infested trees in quarantine areas . the forest service is drafting rules and identifying appropriate mechanisms to implement the fund . aphis spends roughly $140 million to $150 , million annually ( about 15% - 20% of its total annual appropriation ) to address specialty crop pests . as part of this work , aphis cooperates with states to develop , implement , and funds action plans for surveying , reporting , and controlling emerging pest threats . this funding provides aphis with the infrastructure to carry out urgent plant pest and disease programs , some of which currently are or have been partially funded through emergency ccc transfers . for specialty crops , aphis works to address concerns within the following areas: citrus health response program , asian longhorned beetle , emerald ash borer , glassy - winged sharpshooter , pale cyst nematode , and light brown apple moth , among other pests . additionally , aphis gets appropriated funds for its pest detection program . the program helps ensure that any new introductions of harmful plant pests and diseases are detected as soon as possible , before they cause significant damage . under the program , aphis works with its state cooperators and also the scientific community , universities , the public , non - profit entities , and industry to carry out surveys for high - risk pests , diseases , and weeds in the field . funding is provided through the cooperative agricultural pest survey ( caps ) program . information collected through caps is compiled into detailed maps and other formats , and filed in the electronic national agricultural pest information system ( napis ) database .