there were no uncontested constituency races . the most significant events occurring late in the campaign were the release of videos by gd purporting to show shocking prison abuse by guards , and allegations by unm that gd was consorting with organized crime . the airing of the videos on september 18 led to large protests throughout georgia . on september 20 , saakashvili emphasized that the videos showed "disgusting" human rights abuses that were "failures of the system," but he urged that voters "should not throw the baby out with the bathwater," by punishing unm at the polls . in his address to the u.n. general assembly on september 25 , he emphasized that "we did what democracies must do," by replacing the minister of prisons with a human rights official , ousting the minister of the interior , and arresting other prison officials . the release of the videos late in the campaign undermined saakashvili's image as a anti - corruption fighter and champion of democracy in the eyes of many voters , according to many observers . opinion polls taken by the u.s. national democratic institute in june and august 2012 — before the release of the videos — seemed to indicate that more georgians preferred unm to gd and that support for gd may have weakened ( perhaps a caveat to these findings , a large percentage of individuals declined to indicate who they would vote for ) . after the videos were released , the views of the electorate may have shifted . perhaps indicative of this shift late in the campaign , over 100,000 individuals reportedly turned out at a final campaign rally held by ivanishvili in tbilisi on september 29 , among the largest turnout at a rally in recent years . the cec reported that almost 2.16 million of 3.6 million registered voters turned out for the election ( about 59.8% ) on october 1 . only unm and gd won enough party list votes to pass the 5% hurdle and win seats in the legislature ( see table 1 ) . citing irregularities in the voting in several precincts , the cec ordered repeat elections to be held on october 14 in three constituency races , which resulted in reversals in two with wins by gd candidates and the re - confirmation of a tentative win by a gd candidate in the third . looking at the results for both the party list and constituency races , unm lost 54 of the 119 seats it held after the 2008 election . the polarization between the two major political forces — gd and unm — appeared to attract the attention of the bulk of the electorate , so that all the other parties were sidelined , including the christian democratic union and the labor party , which had won legislative seats in 2008 but failed to win any during this election . on october 2 , after 29% of the votes had been counted and gd appeared to have a wide lead over unm , president saakashvili made a concession speech , repeating past statements that he thought gd's views were "extremely mistaken," but that he respected the decision of the people .