no specific dollar figure is given . the bill would also require the naming of an executive director by the board . the section would authorize the foundation to accept restitution and community service payments and other amounts resulting from legal , administrative , or regulatory actions , provided that the amounts further the conservation of fish , wildlife , and plants . consideration before the fall recess has been scheduled . title i of s. 3525 focuses on physical access to federal lands for hunting , fishing , and recreational shooting , as well as other topics . it addresses land acquisition to facilitate access for those activities ; authorization of permits to allow import of certain sport - hunted polar bear trophies ; expanded permission for carrying bows and crossbows in national park units ; expanded funding for state land purchase or operation of public target ranges ; and exclusion of lead ammunition and sinkers from regulation under the toxic substances control act . section 121 of s. 3525 would exempt lead shot , ammunition , and fishing sinkers from provisions of the toxic substances control act ( tsca ) . despite being named as modifying the "definition of toxic substance to exclude sport fishing equipment [under] subtitle c - fishing," the section applies to ammunition as well as to fishing gear . it would prohibit regulation under tsca of "shot , bullets and other projectiles , propellants , and primers" and "any sport fishing equipment. this section is identical to title iv of h.r . 4089 , except that the senate bill adds that the section does not limit the need to comply with other federal , state , or local laws . this provision appears to seek legislative certainty for a denied citizen petition to force the environmental protection agency ( epa ) to regulate lead in ammunition and in fishing sinkers . on august 27 , 2010 , epa denied one portion of the petition relating to the production of lead for use in ammunition , stating that the agency did not have legal authority to regulate ammunition under tsca . epa continued to evaluate the petition with respect to fishing tackle and accepted public comments until september 15 , 2010 . epa denied that portion of the petition on november 4 , 2010 . on april 30 , 2012 , a lawsuit challenging the denial was dismissed . on june 7 , 2012 , a suit was filed challenging epa's 2012 denial of a new petition to regulate lead shot under tsca . s. 3525 would prevent federal regulation through tsca , but not through other statutory authorities: lead shot has been banned in the united states for the hunting of migratory waterfowl since 1991 under authority of the migratory bird treaty act and the endangered species act . consequently , it is unclear whether the provision will have an affect . fishing programs and assistance are covered in title i , subtitle c , and in title ii , subtitle a of s. 3525 . sections specifically addressing fish would prohibit the sale of billfish , require a report on artificial reefs , and , through a variety of approaches , provide aid for modifying fish habitat .