see appendix a . in response to some mass shootings in recent years , congress passed a provision in the ndaa for fy2015 that expanded the purple heart's eligibility requirements . on june 1 , 2009 , a man who was allegedly angry over the killing of muslims in iraq and afghanistan opened fire on two u.s. army soldiers near a recruiting station in little rock , ar , killing one and wounding the other . on november 5 , 2009 , an army major opened fire at ft . hood , tx , killing 13 and wounding 29 , many of them servicemembers . both men were charged with murder and other crimes . federal and local law enforcement authorities initially considered these acts to be crimes , and the defense department reports the fort hood shooting as "workplace violence," not acts perpetrated by an enemy or hostile force , which made them ineligible for the purple heart . however , some believed these acts should be viewed as acts of war or domestic terrorism because they involved muslim perpetrators angered over u.s. actions in iraq and afghanistan . section 571 of the ndaa for fy2015 ( p.l . 113-291 ) expanded the eligibility for the purple heart by redefining what should be considered an attack by a "foreign terrorist organization" for purposes of determining eligibility for the purple heart . the law states that an event should be considered an attack by a foreign terrorist organization if the perpetrator of the attack "was in communication with the foreign terrorist organization before the attack" and "the attack was inspired or motivated by the foreign terrorist organization. still , some are opposed to awarding the purple heart for terrorist acts that were initially deemed "workplace violence" by the department of defense ( dod ) or a criminal act , and not earned on a battlefield . april 25 , 1962: executive order 11016 — president kennedy extends eligibility to civilians serving with military forces . february 23 , 1984: executive order 12464 — president reagan awards purple hearts to those killed and wounded in terrorist attacks after march 28 , 1973 , or on peacekeeping missions outside the united states . this act arguably sets a precedent for the future and could make purple heart eligibility more subjective , allowing public sentiment to determine what events are worthy of a purple heart . on april 10 , 2015 , then - army secretary john mchugh and army lieutenant general sean macfarland , 3 rd corps and fort hood commanding general , presented purple hearts to the families of the 10 servicemembers killed and to the 26 servicemembers wounded during the attack . defense of freedom medals were also awarded to dod civilians killed and wounded during the attack . in a memorandum , secretary mchugh directed the army to "expedite certain other benefits for which soldiers receiving the purple heart are traditionally eligible. in addition to the victims of the fort hood shooting , the two victims of the june 2009 , shooting at a recruiting station in little rock , arkansas , received purple hearts on july 1 , 2015 .