appendix a . educational assistance under the original gi bill of rights the original gi bill , the servicemen's readjustment act of 1944 ( p.l . 78-346 ) , was intended to help veterans returning from world war ii ( wwii ) . the original gi bill provided unprecedented benefits: funds to the va to build and administer additional hospital facilities ; extension of vocational rehabilitation and employment services ; educational assistance to non - disabled veterans ; loans for the purchase or construction of homes , farms , and business property at advantageous terms to veterans ; employment services to returning veterans ; and unemployment benefits to veterans . the purpose of the educational assistance program was to avoid high levels of unemployment as had occurred following world war i , to help servicemembers readjust to civilian life , and to afford returning veterans an opportunity to receive the education and training missed while providing compulsory service in the military . from december 1 , 1941 , through december 31 , 1946 , 16.1 million personnel served in the u.s. armed forces in wwii . the u.s. population in 1946 is estimated at 141,388,566 . eligible individuals educational assistance benefits were available to all veterans who served on active duty in the military or naval service after september 16 , 1940 , and before the termination of wwii hostilities ( december 31 , 1946 ) . eligible veterans must have been discharged other than dishonorably and have served a minimum of 90 days or have been discharged or released for a service - incurred injury or disability . the 90-day service period excluded time spent completing the army specialized training program or navy college training program and excluded time spent as a cadet or midshipman at one of the service academies . benefit availability and duration of use eligible veterans were required to begin an education program within two years of discharge or release or within two years of the end of wwii , whichever was later . the start date was later extended by p.l . 79-268 , enacted in 1945 , to four years after discharge or release or december 31 , 1950 , whichever was later . veterans were entitled to at least one year of education ( or the equivalent for continuous part - time study ) or the length of the chosen education program if that program was shorter than 12 months . upon satisfactory completion of the first year ( or the period of a shorter education program ) , veterans whose education had been interrupted upon entering military service were entitled to educational benefits for at least as long as they served after september 16 , 1940 , and before the end of wwii , but not more than four years . the restriction , which provided no more than one year of educational benefits to certain veterans , was later removed to provide the same benefits to all veterans . by law , no educational benefits under the original gi bill could be paid seven years after the end of wwii , or july 25 , 1956 .