( see below. ) lumber is the collective term for products sawn from logs . this contrasts with the panel products — plywood , particleboard , etc. analyses of the differences are difficult and generally problematic . injury to the u.s. lumber industry remains a complex issue . the canadian share of the u.s. softwood lumber market grew substantially over the past 60 years , from less than 7% in 1952 to more than 35% in 1996 . during that period , u.s. lumber production for domestic consumption grew slowly ( from nearly 30 billion board feet [bbf] in the early 1950s to 35 bbf in 1999 ) , while imports of canadian lumber rose substantially ( from less than 3 bbf in the early 1950s to more than 18 bbf in 1999 ) . under the 1996 agreement , imports remained at a relatively stable rate , fluctuating around 33% - 34% . under the 2006 sla , canadian imports declined to around 28% . this decline is likely attributable — at least in part — to the sla and a drastically decreased demand for softwood lumber due to the crisis in the u.s. housing market . other factors might also be important in the dispute over lumber imports from canada . some believe the persistence of the dispute is due , at least in part , to the conflict between a u.s. trade policy focused on the removal of trade barriers and the process for obtaining industry protection under u.s. trade law . others contend that the dispute is fueled by interest - group politics , and that the u.s. lumber industry is better organized and more influential than u.s. lumber consumers , who mostly feel the cost impacts of the trade protection measures . in addition , environmental laws and policies may differ , and the impact of those laws and policies for lumber production costs complicates any cross - border analyses . finally , the dispute may be alleviated in part due to increasing cross - border firm integration . in other words , lumber producers may increasingly become globalized , with holdings in both the united states and canada , and as such may begin to question these border protection measures . the definition of "softwood lumber" subject to the sla had been an issue leading up to the signing of the 2006 agreement . softwood is a classification of tree species and contrasts with the other major classification , hardwood . both , however , are misnomers . some hardwoods , "such as aspen and poplar , are softer ( less dense ) than many softwoods," such as yellow pines . softwood species are all in the order coniferales — the conifers . conifers generally have needle - like leaves and cones for reproduction . these plants are often called evergreens , because most retain their needles in winter . the hardwood timber species are in the phylum anthophyta — the angiosperms , or flowering plants . these plants are often called deciduous , because most species in temperate climates lose their leaves in the winter ; however , some temperate - climate species ( eg , holly ) and most tropical and subtropical species are evergreen , retaining their leaves throughout the year .