to 550 lbs . and allows states to issue overweight permits to trucks carrying relief supplies if a major disaster is declared . the surety bond filing requirement for truck brokers and ocean freight forwarders was raised from $10,000 to $75,000 with the intention of fighting fraud in the industry . truck brokers and freight forwarders marry shippers ( cargo owners ) with carriers on an individual shipment basis . small brokers contend this change is unnecessary and is being used by larger firms as a means of putting them out of business . since brokers do not own any transportation assets , entry and exit in the industry is relatively easy . the bond is employed as a means of ensuring brokers have sufficient financial stake in the business and / or as a means of paying creditors when firms do go out of business . section 1536 of map - 21 states as a non - binding sense of congress that the administration should request and congress should fully expend each year all of the revenues collected in the harbor maintenance trust fund for the operation and maintenance of the nation's federally maintained ports . the provision also expresses the importance of protecting other critical army corps programs , including inland navigation , flood and coastal storm protection , and ecosystem restoration , from funding reductions . the provision also directs the administration to provide an annual estimate of national harbor maintenance needs , including an estimate of the percentage of waterways that will be available for use based on the annual budget request as well as how much funding would be needed to achieve 95% availability of the nation's ports and waterways within three years . section 100124 reduces the percentage of u.s. food aid that must be shipped on u.s. - flag ships ( which must be owned and crewed by u.s. citizens ) from 75% to 50% and repeals the requirement that 25% of bagged or processed food aid be shipped through great lakes ports . the purpose of this so - called "cargo preference" law is to promote u.s. - flag shipping because the ships may be used to deploy military hardware and supplies during war or national emergency . operating expenses under the u.s. flag are significantly higher than those under many foreign flags , which is why congress supports u.s. - flag vessels through cargo preference , with the additional shipping cost paid by dot's maritime administration . section 100124 repeals a provision of the food security act of 1985 ( p.l . 99-198 , subtitle c ) , which increased the cargo preference requirement from 50% to 75% of food aid tonnage . one of the key eligibility criteria is creditworthiness . to be eligible , a project's senior debt obligations and the borrower's ability to repay the federal credit instrument must receive an investment - grade rating from at least one nationally recognized credit rating agency . the tifia assistance must also be determined to have several beneficial effects: fostering a public - private partnership , if appropriate ; enabling the project to proceed more quickly ; and reducing the contribution of federal grant funding .