nonetheless , ait remains controversial . among respondents expressing concerns regarding the use of full - body scanners in a 2010 travel leaders study , roughly 48% raised privacy issues , 27% worried about potential known or unknown health risks , and about 20% expressed concerns over delays in getting through security . concerns have also been raised over screening individuals with special needs , the effectiveness of the technology , screener staffing requirements , and tsa's deployment strategy . the acquisition cost per unit is about $175,000 . in addition , tsa incurs costs associated with installing and maintaining ait systems , training personnel , and operating the deployed units . tsa hired and trained an additional 8,000 screeners through fy2011 to meet the anticipated workload increases associated with operational deployment of the first 1,000 ait units . these additional operational costs can add substantially to the overall cost of deploying and operating ait . inferring from tsa statements , the annualized cost for purchasing , installing , staffing , operating , supporting , upgrading , and maintaining checkpoint ait systems currently sums to about $455 million and will increase to about $1.17 billion once the planned 1,800 units are fully deployed . this equates to roughly $655,000 annually per deployed ait unit . tsa argues that , at about 1,000 deployed ait units , the operating cost translates to roughly $1 per traveling passenger . however , this figure does not reflect the cost per scan because only a small percentage of passengers undergo a whole body scan . as tsa does not divulge the percentage of passengers screened using ait , the cost per scan cannot be accurately estimated . tsa selects passengers for ait screening using both random and targeted selection techniques . tsa considers the specific selection methods to be sensitive security information , and this information is not made public . initially , tsa procurements of x - ray backscatter units were greater , but more recently tsa has acquired larger numbers of millimeter wave systems . as of february 2012 , roughly 44% of total ait deployments were x - ray backscatter units , but that percentage had dropped to about 35% by august 2012 . public perceptions of possible health risks associated with x - ray backscatter systems , coupled with technological advances in second - generation millimeter wave systems that will replace human observers with automated threat detection capabilities , may have influenced tsa toward favoring millimeter wave systems over x - ray backscatter systems . tsa cites several independent polls indicating widespread public support and understanding of the need for and use of ait . the polling data indicate that about 75% to 80% of americans support the use of ait at airport checkpoints . although tsa has put in place policies and procedures to address concerns regarding ait scanning , these measures are not tied to specific statutory mandates and could be modified in the future without legislative action . a number of related bills have been introduced in the 112 th congress . however , none of these bills has moved out of committee . the aircraft passenger whole - body imaging limitations act of 2011 ( h.r .