section 3004 of p.l . 113-6 is intended to address the possibility that the new budget authority provided in the act exceeds the fy2013 discretionary spending limits in section 251 ( c ) ( 2 ) of the bbedca , due to estimating differences between cbo and omb . the funding amounts provided by p.l . 113-6 for covered projects and activities supersede the funding levels provided by part - year cr . all expenditures made under the part - year cr are charged to the full fiscal year of funds that are provided by p.l . continuing resolutions often include provisions that designate exceptions to the formula and purpose for which any referenced funding is extended . such provisions are often referred to as "anomalies. many of the anomalies in the part - year cr affected the funding levels that would otherwise be provided by the formula for covered activities . the reports were to cover the period from the beginning of the fiscal year through march 27 , 2013 . not later than 30 days after the date on which any sequestration is ordered by the president pursuant to section 251a of the bbedca , those same departments and agencies were to submit an updated operating plan to reflect any adjustments to funding as a result of the sequestration , as well as any extension of the cr's expiration date that may have occurred in the interim . in addition , beginning on november 1 , 2012 , the omb director was required to submit a monthly report to the house and senate appropriations committees on all obligations incurred by each department and agency in the period covered by the continuing resolution . the level of detail in the report is at the account level . the reports were also to compare the obligations incurred during this period to the obligations incurred during the same period in fy2012 . the full - year continuing resolution maintains the two additional reporting requirements from p.l . 112-175 , with some technical changes . the spending , expenditure , or operating plan for specified agencies must take account of any sequestration pursuant to section 251a of the bbedca , and must be submitted by april 26 , 2013 . the monthly report from the omb director is due beginning on may 15 , 2013 , through november 1 , 2013 . consequently , the across - the - board rescissions in section 3004 were increased by omb to 0.032% for security budget authority , and 0.2% for nonsecurity budget authority . the first continuing resolution included two new reporting requirements for certain departments and agencies as well as for the office of management and budget ( omb ) . these reports are in addition to any reports required under the terms and conditions in the fy2012 appropriations acts . on or before october 28 , 2012 , certain departments and agencies were to submit to the house and senate appropriations committees a "spending , expenditure , or operating plan. the required content in a given context appeared to be determined by the department or agency's relationship with the relevant appropriations subcommittee .