because more of the tax cuts in h.r . there are also issues of timing . if spending increases are authorized but cannot take place quickly , their effect would be delayed . this concern was a significant one in considering spending increases in 2009 , particularly with respect to infrastructure , where a planning period might have been needed . of course , that timing issue would be different because the policy in this case involves not a spending increase , which could take some time but avoiding a spending cut . presumably , cuts could be made more quickly than increases . ( note that in measuring the fiscal cliff , cbo projects spending changes under the bca , not changes in budget authority. ) the general patterns of differentials can be seen in cbo's analysis of the effects of the 2009 stimulus ( tax cuts and spending increases to expand the economy ) as shown in table 4 . considering the midpoint of multipliers in the last column , changes in federal spending have a higher multiplier than a low - to - middle - income tax change . tax changes for higher - income individuals and businesses have the smallest multipliers . transfers to individuals ( such as unemployment benefits ) have a somewhat smaller multiplier effect than spending changes but considerably higher effects than tax cuts . similar patterns are found in some of the alternatives reported in earlier testimony shown in table 5 . the smaller effect of infrastructure may reflect expectations that the spending will occur slowly ( whereas in table 4 that spending is already in place ) . both of these tables show multipliers from stimulus ( which produces output increases ) but the concept is the same as a contraction , just reversed . cbo's report on the fiscal cliff also contained additional estimates that allow separate multipliers for different components of the fiscal cliff . cbo indicates that the fiscal cliff with a deficit decrease at 5.1% of gdp comparing calendar 2012 and 2013 will result in a decrease in output of 3.9% . there are forces in the economy that limit the effects . for example , with a relatively small contraction for an economy at full employment , the multiplier could be close to zero because the contraction may lower interest rates or prices or both without any real output effects . even with an underemployed economy , there are aspects that dampen the effects on the economy . for example , part of each round of decreased income reduces savings rather than spending , or some part of the contraction in demand decreases imports rather than domestic production , or some of the contraction drives down interest rates and increases private investment . ( during this recession and recovery , there has been little evidence of fiscal policies altering interest rates. ) the cbo projections initially indicated an aggregate multiplier for the fiscal cliff of 0.76 ( a 3.9% contraction in output divided by a 5.1% decrease in the deficit relative to output ) . zandi's multiplier is about the same at 0.78 ( 3.6% divided 4.6% ) , whereas the other two forecasters indicate multipliers of one . the next section provides details of recent legislation .