appendix a . strategic context from u.s. perspective this appendix presents a brief discussion of some elements of the strategic context from a u.s. perspective in which the issues discussed in this report may be considered . there is also a broader context of u.s. - china relations and u.s. foreign policy toward the indo - pacific that is covered in other crs reports . shift in international security environment world events have led some observers , starting in late 2013 , to conclude that the international security environment has undergone a shift from the familiar post - cold war era of the past 20 to 25 years , also sometimes known as the unipolar moment ( with the united states as the unipolar power ) , to a new and different situation that features , among other things , renewed great power competition with china and russia and challenges by these two countries and others to elements of the u.s. - led international order that has operated since world war ii . it undermines international law and upsets the balance of power in the region . countries have taken note that the tide in the south china sea is in china's favor , and they are making their strategic calculations accordingly . this hurts u.s. interests in the region . a july 12 , 2018 , press report stated the following: the philippines is celebrating today the second anniversary of its landmark arbitration award against china's territorial claims in the south china sea handed down by an arbitral tribunal in the hague… . until now , the philippines remains sharply divided on how to leverage its arbitration award . filipino president rodrigo duterte has repeatedly downplayed the relevance of the ruling by questioning its enforceability amid china's vociferous opposition . soon after taking office in mid - 2016 , duterte declared that he would "set aside" the arbitration award in order to pursue a "soft landing" in bilateral relations with china . in exchange , he has hoped for large - scale chinese investments as well as resource - sharing in the south china sea… . other major leaders in the philippines , however , have taken a tougher stance and continue to try to leverage the award to resist china's expanding footprint in the area . the stratbase - albert del rosario institute , an influential think tank co - founded by former philippine secretary of foreign affairs albert del rosario , hosted today a high - level forum on the topic at the prestigious manila polo club . del rosario oversaw the arbitration proceedings against china under duterte's predecessor , benigno aquino . he opened the event attended by dignitaries from major western and asian countries with a strident speech which accused china of trying to "dominate the south china sea through force and coercion. he defended the arbitration award as an "overwhelming victory" to resist "china's unlawful expansion agenda. the ex - top diplomat also accused the duterte administration of acquiescence to china by acting as an "abettor" and "willing victim" by soft - pedaling the philippines' claims in the south china sea and refusing to raise the arbitration award in multilateral fora .