this section reviews some of these factors . if the increase in the number of declarations is a concern for the federal costs that accompany them ( or for other reasons which have been discussed in this report ) , congress may choose to address the issue . addressing the issue may be conceptualized as two approaches: ( 1 ) limiting the number of declarations and ( 2 ) limiting the amount of spending that can occur after a declaration has been made . the following section could be used to frame a potential debate on limiting the number of declarations being issued , limiting the assistance provided after a declaration has been declared , or both . given the variables described in this report that can lead to an increase in the number of declarations , including trends in severe weather patterns , population growth , and development , the upward trend of declarations will likely continue if declarations policies remain unchanged . some may contend that the policy mechanisms used to address the number of declarations should be shaped in response to the causes of the increase . others may argue that if the causes are due to an increase in severe weather incidents , population growth , or development , then the declaration process should remain unchanged . for example , are incidents increasing or is the federal government being more generous in its interpretation of disaster or emergency criteria ? another point of discussion is the relative capacity of state governments to respond to disaster events . the federal government's openness in describing factors considered for declarations may have led some state officials to believe they have met the factors under consideration and are entitled to support . this report provides a historical overview of the three categories of declarations , including the average number of declarations declared and turned down , and the distribution of declarations by incident type and state . this report discusses a wide range of factors that might be contributing to the increase in declarations and provides policy options that might reduce the number of declarations and some of their associated costs . prior to 1950 , state and local governments in need of federal assistance after a disaster had to wait until congress met , debated , and then acted upon their request for disaster assistance . the federal disaster relief act of 1950 ( p.l . while it is generally agreed that the government should help disaster victims in time of need , it is debatable whether the fiscal responsibility resides primarily with the federal or the state government . finding the balance has thus far has been elusive , and altering the declaration process could have important implications for both federal and state officials , as well as disaster victims . many of the policy options described in this report would shift a greater share of disaster - related costs to states and localities . it remains to be seen if reducing declarations and / or limiting the amount of disaster assistance provided to requesting states would severely disrupt the state's ability to recover from an incident or if states would be able to adjust to the changes by reallocating available state resources .