economy. he also rejected arguments by some commentators that congress apply the ebay case to the itc because "[g]iven that the only remedy available to the itc is exclusion orders , mandating application of ebay would substantially weaken the power of the itc to deal with unfair trade practices. finally , he predicted that reducing or eliminating the availability of exclusion orders or injunctions for frand - encumbered sep holders would mean that "fewer innovators would participate in ssos with such ipr rules ( or make frand commitments if they do participate ) or engage in r&d for technologies that may be standardized . how could it do otherwise ? how could it be permitted to enjoin apple from using an invention that it contends apple must use if it wants to make a cell phone with umts telecommunications capability — without which it would not be a cell phone . judge posner cited federal circuit case law that permits an injunction "only when damages would not provide complete relief. in this case , he concluded that "[a] frand royalty would provide all the relief to which motorola would be entitled if it proved infringement of the '898 patent , and thus it is not entitled to an injunction. in a case involving microsoft's use of seps owned by motorola relating to the h.264 video compression standard , the ninth circuit court of appeals stated that "injunctive relief against infringement is arguably a remedy inconsistent with the [frand] licensing commitment. in addition , the ninth circuit held that when an sep holder makes a commitment to a standard setting organization ( sso ) to license such patent on frand terms , such a commitment creates a contract enforceable by the members of the sso and third parties implementing the standard . thus , such third party beneficiaries have the right to sue for breach of that commitment . the ninth circuit found that "[i]mplicit in such a.... promise [to license the sep on frand terms] is , at least arguably , a guarantee that the patent - holder will not take steps to keep would - be users from using the patented material , such as seeking an injunction , but will instead proffer licenses consistent with the commitment made. several cases before the itc involve whether a frand - encumbered sep holder is entitled to exclusionary relief . the itc is currently investigating a case involving motorola mobility's claims of patent infringement against microsoft's xbox 360 gaming console ; at issue is whether to grant an exclusion order in favor of motorola mobility , a holder of standard - essential patents relating to video transmission and compression and wireless connectivity , that has previously agreed to license its technologies on frand terms and yet has not reached an agreement with microsoft on reasonable license terms . in may 2012 , the alj assigned to the case recommended a ban on the importation of xbox consoles after he had made an earlier determination that the device infringed four patents owned by motorola .