the effective date for each of these p.l . 113-183 changes is generally september 29 , 2015 . among other things , the youth - specific requirements added by p.l . 113-183 focus on youth engagement and empowerment . they require that youth be informed of certain rights they have with regard to education , health , visitation , court participation , access to key documents if aging out , and the "right to stay safe and avoid exploitation. further , in addition to a prior focus on transition services planning for older youth in care , the new provisions added by p.l . 113-183 explicitly incorporate youth participation in both development and revision of all case and permanency planning done on their behalf , including by allowing the youth to select up to two individuals — who are not the youth's foster parent or caseworker — to be a part of the youth's case planning and permanency planning . ( the state may reject an individual so selected if it has good cause to believe the individual would not act in the child's best interest. ) the new requirements also focus on getting an earlier start on equipping youth to be successful once they leave foster care ( requirements apply at age 14 versus age 16 ) and enhancing their ability for success when they age out of care . currently states are required to provide a credit report , annually , to each youth in care who is age 16 or older . this requirement , which will apply to youth in care at age 14 or older as of september 29 , 2015 , is intended to help identify and correct any errors in the report that result from identity fraud . this review must determine the safety of the child ; the continued need or appropriateness of the foster care placement ; the extent of compliance with the case plan ( eg , have promised services been provided ? further , states are currently required to provide any youth aging out of care a free copy of his or her health and education record . as part of its effort to aid a youth's successful transition to adulthood , p.l . 113-183 also requires states to provide additional key documents . as of september 29 , 2015 , states must also ensure that no youth who is aging out leaves care without an official or certified copy of his or her u.s. birth certificate , an official social security card , and a state - issued driver's license or identification card that meets the standards of the real id act . when the permanency hearing determines that a child cannot be returned home , then the title iv - e agency must make reasonable efforts to find a new permanent home for the child in a timely manner . outside of reunification , the law suggests three additional permanent family settings: adoption , legal guardianship , or placement with a fit and willing relative .