seq. ) supported the development of the current system of land - grant colleges to teach the agricultural and mechanical arts to the "industrial classes. federal funding for vocational education was initiated with the passing of the smith - hughes act in 1917 . in 1917 , vocational education was termed "vital to national defense and prosperity. the manpower development and training act of 1962 ( mdta ; p.l . 87-415 ) was intended to prepare individuals for employment who could not reasonably be expected to secure full - time employment without training . mdta was expected to address high unemployment by retraining individuals with obsolete skills to suit rapidly advancing technology . the 1963 vocational education act ( p.l . 88-210 ) supported vocational education schools ; vocational work - study programs ; and research , training , and demonstration programs related to vocational education . according to the government accountability office ( gao ) , there were 34 federal programs in fy2009 that provided occupational or vocational training as a primary service . these included programs authorized by the carl d. perkins career and technical education improvement act of 2006 ( perkins iv ; p.l . ยง301 et . 109-270 ) and administered by the department of education ( ed ) ; the trade adjustment assistance ( taa ) program , administered by the department of labor ( dol ) ; workforce investment act programs for dislocated workers and youth activities , administered by dol ; indian employment assistance programs , administered by the department of the interior ( doi ) ; and refugee and entrant assistance programs , administered by the department of health and human services ( hhs ) . as the unemployment rate remains higher than at the onset of the latest recession in december 2007 , congress has highlighted the need to more effectively support workforce development in order to reduce unemployment and the associated economic and social issues . this report provides a primer on cte to support the workforce development discussion . the first section provides an overview of cte including the methods used by practitioners to organize cte according to the labor market's structure , the role of business and student organizations , and the intended outcomes of cte . the subsequent sections describe the nature of cte at the secondary , postsecondary , and adult education levels . the final section presents data on the financial benefits of some cte credentials for students . cte is offered by a variety of institutions: high schools , area cte centers , community colleges , vocational schools , and employers through apprenticeships and on - the - job training . generally , cte occupations require two years or less of postsecondary education or training . therefore , at the two - year and less - than - two - year postsecondary education levels , cte encompasses most fields other than the liberal arts . cte integrates various aspects of knowledge from the liberal arts toward a practical or applied purpose . for example , cte provides preparation in homemaking and a variety of occupations , such as nursing , business administration , culinary arts , automotive maintenance , software programming , engineering technology , and cosmetology . the following subsections highlight key facets of cte .