there is also a trade - off between yield and liquidity . to have a higher return , an investor may have to sacrifice liquidity ( the ease with which an asset can be converted into cash ) . certificates of deposit , for example , may pay a higher interest rate than a typical savings account , but there are restrictions on when the money can be withdrawn . depositors' preferences for safety , liquidity , and yield will determine how they allocate their money across the various options they face . if tag expires , the options available to depositors can be simplified to two general choices: ( 1 ) depositors could leave some or all of their money in the traditional , insured banking sector or ( 2 ) they could move some or all of their money out of the traditional banking sector . some have raised concerns about what effect an extension of tag would have on the fdic's deposit insurance fund ( dif ) . under the program as established by the dodd - frank act , tag insurance functions as part of the fdic's traditional insurance . fdic institutions pay an insurance premium into the dif based on their risk — financial institutions that pose more risk to the dif are assessed higher deposit insurance premiums relative to those that pose lower risk . as explained by maureen murphy in crs legal sidebar wslg37 , extending the fdic's transaction account guarantee program given the uncertain economic outlook ? , although section 1105 of dodd - frank provides the fdic with authority to institute a widely available program of emergency assistance , it is limited to situations involving a liquidity crisis . invoking the authority to institute a broad program requires a detailed determination by the fdic and the board of governors of the federal reserve system ( fed board ) that a liquidity event exists and that failure to take action would have serious adverse effects on u.s. financial stability or economic conditions . additionally , the authority appears to be limited to guaranteeing debt obligations rather than expanding deposit insurance coverage . though the fdic established tag in 2008 , changes to the fdic's authority made by the dodd - frank act may prevent the fdic from having the option of extending tag . an extension of tag , therefore , may require congressional action . on november 26 , 2012 , senator harry reid introduced s. 3637 , a bill to temporarily extend the tag program for two years . nibtas constitute one of several cash management tools used by businesses , non - profits , governments , and other entities . they provide depositors with easy access to their money , allowing them to make transfers and to write checks to pay their vendors and employees . if tag expires , however , depositors may change their perception of the safety of nibtas , causing them to reevaluate how they allocate their money across the various options in the financial system . as is discussed in the following sections , the use of nibtas could return to pre - tag levels if tag expires .