bush ) waited 200 or more days to be confirmed . by contrast , more than half of president obama's uncontroversial confirmed judicial nominees ( for both circuit and district court judgeships ) waited 200 or more days to receive senate approval . a fourth section identifies various institutional and political factors that possibly influenced the increase across the five most recent presidencies in the length of time uncontroversial circuit and district court nominees waited from nomination to confirmation . a concluding section identifies several potential implications of longer waiting times from nomination to confirmation for uncontroversial judicial nominees . for purposes of this report , determining whether circuit or district court nominees were "uncontroversial" was based on the level of support they had from senators of both parties when their nominations were reported by the senate judiciary committee and when their nominations were approved by the full senate . specifically , the nominees were identified as uncontroversial if ( 1 ) their nominations were reported out of the judiciary committee favorably either by voice vote or by a unanimous roll call vote , and ( 2 ) their nominations were approved by the full senate by voice vote , or if a roll call vote was held , approved with 5 or fewer nay votes . all of a president's confirmed uncontroversial nominees are included in the analysis , regardless of whether such nominees were confirmed during his first or , when applicable , second term . the length of time from first nomination to confirmation is measured as the number of days elapsed from when a president first nominates an individual to a u.s. circuit or district court judgeship to when the senate approves his or her nomination . for some individual nominees , the number of days elapsed from his or her first nomination to confirmation spans two or more nominations to the same judgeship ( eg , an individual's nomination is reported out of the senate judiciary committee only to be returned to the president ; subsequently , the individual is renominated by the president to the same judgeship , his or her nomination is reported again by the senate judiciary committee , and then confirmed by the senate ) . figure 2 tracks , by presidency ( from reagan to obama ) , the mean and median number of days from first nomination to confirmation for all circuit and district court nominees approved by the senate , during the period january 20 , 1981 , to september 14 , 2012 , whose nominations were reported favorably out of the senate judiciary committee by voice vote or a unanimous roll call vote and who were confirmed by the senate by voice vote or , if a roll call vote was held , received 5 or fewer nay votes . as the mean and median trend lines in figure 2 suggest , the percentage of uncontroversial judicial nominees waiting at least 200 days from nomination to confirmation has increased in recent years . tables 1 and 2 , presented below , are more precise in revealing this trend .