this section of p.l . 105-33 took effect the first day of the contract year that began in 1999 . the act also mandated that individuals enrolled in fehb are not eligible to enroll in a medicare medical savings account ( msa ) plan until opm certifies to hhs that opm has adopted policies to ensure that enrollment in such plans will not result in increased expenditures for the federal government . strom thurmond national defense authorization act for fiscal year 1999 ( p.l . 105-261 ) , october 17 , 1998 p.l . since may 1 , 2012 , eligible indian tribes , tribal organizations , and urban indian organizations have been allowed to purchase fehb for their tribal employees . the aca required that the tribe or tribal organization pay the government's share of the premium , at a minimum , with the enrollee paying the remaining share . the act only allowed tribes and tribal organizations to purchase this coverage for employees ; coverage is not available to retirees . the act imposed some administrative requirements on employers that affect federal agencies . for taxable years beginning after december 31 , 2010 , it required employers to provide the aggregate cost of applicable employer - sponsored coverage on an employee's w - 2 . the requirement became mandatory in 2012 . beginning in 2014 , the act required insurers , self - insuring employers , government agencies , and employers , to file a return including the name of each individual for whom they provide minimum essential coverage , the number of months of coverage , and any other information required by the secretary of hhs . the effective date of this requirement was delayed until 2015 . the act generally specifies that the only health plans the federal government may make available to members of congress and certain congressional staff ( with respect to their service as members or staff ) are either created under the aca or offered through an exchange . beginning january 1 , 2014 , members and designated congressional staff were no longer able to purchase fehb plans as active employees ; however , if they enroll in a health plan offered through a small business health options program ( shop ) exchange , they remain eligible for an employer contribution toward coverage . members and designated congressional staff who are eligible for retirement are allowed to enroll in an fehb plan upon retirement . for more details on the implementation of this provision , see crs report r43194 , health benefits for members of congress and designated congressional staff . the act includes a number of provisions to raise revenues , which may have an impact on fehb plans . beginning in 2014 , the aca imposed an annual fee on health insurance plans based on their market share , which could affect most fehb carriers . additionally , the act imposed a new patient - centered outcomes research institute ( pcori ) fee on insurers , which was imposed on fehb plans for the first time in 2012 ( and will end in 2019 ) . starting in 2018 , the act will impose a 40% excise tax on health insurers and health plan administrators for coverage that exceeds certain thresholds .