thus , that question remains unanswered . the taxpayers in clintwood elkhorn had filed administrative refund claims for the three tax years open under the irc's statute of limitations and filed suit in the court of federal claims seeking the amount of taxes paid for the three previous years that were open only under the tucker act's longer limitations period . the supreme court held that the plain language of the relevant irc provisions , sections 7422 and 6511 , clearly required taxpayers to file a timely refund claim with the irs before bringing suit . one question that arises in these situations is what remedy exists for taxpayers who paid an unconstitutional charge imposed by the government . taxpayers who overpay a federal tax are typically required to seek a refund from the irs using the refund process found in the internal revenue code ( irc ) . thus , a key question is whether the export clause provides a right to monetary damages when the government violates it . if the answer is yes , the next question is whether such a claim can be made independent of an irc ( or other administrative ) refund claim . in 2000 , the court of federal claims held that the export clause provided a separate cause of action so that taxpayers could bring a suit for damages independent of an irc refund claim . the court based this conclusion on its findings that the export clause was a money - mandating provision , as required for tucker act jurisdiction , and that the cause of action founded in a violation of the export clause was self - executing . however , in a 2008 decision , united states v. clintwood elkhorn mining co. , the supreme court held that taxpayers seeking refunds for the unconstitutionally imposed coal excise tax must comply with the irc refund process . notably , the court did not address whether the export clause provides a cause of action that could be brought under the tucker act , finding that the irc refund provisions would apply regardless . the court stated that it had basically decided the issue in a 1941 case where it had reasoned that the tucker act's statute of limitations was simply "an outside limit" which congress could shorten in situations requiring "special considerations," such as tax refunds since suits against the government to recover taxes would hinder administration of the tax laws . as the court had explained in that case , the irc's refund provisions would have "'no meaning whatever'" if taxpayers who did not comply with those provisions could still bring refund suits under the tucker act . the question here is whether there is another option: can taxpayers bring suit in the court of federal claims under the tucker act seeking damages from the government in the amount of unconstitutional taxes paid ? the court explained that while the government may not impose unconstitutional taxes , it may create an administrative process to refund them because of its "exceedingly strong interest in financial stability," regardless of whether the tax violated the export clause or some other provision of the constitution .