both were repealed in 1872 . the war revenue act of 1898 created a so - called "legacy tax," which was levied on the estate and was the "precursor to the present federal estate tax. nevertheless , the federal government structured the initial federal estate tax such that any state tax would be credited dollar - for - dollar up to a specified tax rate on the estate . this provision created the equivalent of a revenue sharing arrangement between the federal government and the states as most states structured their taxes to match exactly the federal credit . the state taxes "sponged up" any available credit . this degree of voluntary vertical coordination was unique to the estate tax . this credit structure ( pre - 2001 law ) had the advantage over the deduction structure ( 2012 law ) , from an economic and tax policy perspective , of virtually eliminating the incentive for states to "compete" among themselves to offer the lowest estate tax rates . if a state decided to levy an estate tax below the rates outlined for the federal credit , the decedent would simply pay more federal estate taxes . thus , in addition to vertical coordination , horizontal coordination , as described earlier , would be strongly supported by this approach . as outlined above , the overall simplicity of the estate tax is diminished if states and the federal government do not coordinate . for example , taxpayers , or their estates , would need to establish the location and taxability of assets , and both the federal and state governments would need to verify these claims . with a patchwork of state estate taxes and rules governing asset location , this process would be complicated . over time , taxpayers would likely develop tax minimization strategies , further increasing compliance costs and complicating administrative oversight of the estate tax . the equity ( or "fairness" ) of a tax can be measured both vertically and horizontally . vertical equity is evaluated by comparing the tax burden across individuals with different abilities to pay . horizontal equity is evaluated by comparing the tax burden of individuals in otherwise similar economic circumstances . for an estate tax , a vertically equitable progressive estate tax would collect a larger share of the underlying estate as the value of the estate increases . a horizontally equitable estate tax would treat like - situated individuals ( or decedents ) in a like manner . the estate tax is considered highly progressive with the "top ten percent of income earners paying virtually all of the tax ; over half is paid by the richest 1 in 1,000. . state estate taxes are also progressive , though the burden is not as concentrated in the top wealth brackets . most state estate taxes had lower exemption amounts , which means more taxable estates . state estate tax rates are lower than federal rates , thus there are more taxable estates at the state level , but the average state tax paid is less than the federal estate tax paid .