appendix a . additional tables appendix b. methodological notes tanf national data files this report includes an analysis of work participation from the tanf national data files for fy2011 . the national data files are based on data states are required to collect monthly and report to hhs on a quarterly basis based on section 411 of the social security act . these data provide information at the family and individual recipient levels , and include various demographic and economic data . section 411 also requires that states report information required to compute tanf work participation rates , and hhs has specified that states report information on the average weekly hours of engagement in each of the 12 countable tanf work activities ( see table 6 ) . states may report engagement in other activities not countable toward the official tanf work participation standards , but they are not required to do so . the tanf national data files represent a sample of all tanf families and recipients receiving assistance . thus , the estimates here are subject to sampling error . additionally , there also may be nonsampling error associated with files if states miscoded some characteristics . there might also be some state - to - state variation in reporting practices that could affect data quality and the comparison of information from the files across states . the tanf national data files differ slightly from the data used by hhs to compute the official tanf work participation rates . states may revise their data reports after submission to hhs . the publically available tanf national data files and the data used to compute official participation rates may reflect differing revised versions of the data . data analysis in conducting the data analysis for this report , certain decisions were made to try to reduce the possibility of including erroneously reported data . for example , the analysis excluded participation in an activity when 90 hours or more of participation per week were reported . additionally , some recipients had implausible birth dates reported for them . no age was computed for these persons . the assumption that women should remain in the home with their children began to diminish . the 1950s ushered in an increased focus on the self - sufficiency and rehabilitation of public aid recipients , and amendments to the adc law began to reflect this reorientation . these amendments required states to disregard from a family's countable income some earnings when determining its "need" and benefits . they also created the first work program under afdc — the work incentive program ( win ) . win was compulsory for fathers , and states could determine whether it would be compulsory or voluntary for mothers . in practice , two - thirds of participants in the win program between 1968 and 1971 were mothers . in 1971 , the federal rules changed to require all parents to enroll in win , with the exception of mothers with children under the age of six . afdc work requirements continued to evolve in the 1980s . the omnibus budget reconciliation act of 1981 ( p.l .