fannie mae bought most of the mortgages from mortgage bankers . fannie mae completed this transition in 1970 . a glossary of terms is included at the end of this report . prior to the development of the secondary mortgage market , mortgage markets were local , and there were significant differences across the nation in mortgage rates and relatively large fluctuations in lending activity . primary lenders had to balance their lending practices with their deposits received , which led to severe credit shortages during economic downturns , when savings accounts were depleted by withdrawals . this shortage was exacerbated due to the concentration of major money centers in areas like chicago and new york , far from many who needed home loans . there was no way to move funds from these areas where mortgage money was available to other areas , such as california , where it was in relatively short supply . in effect , this amounted to a geographic barrier that prevented the law of supply and demand from operating on a national level in the home loan market . the secondary mortgage market combined these many regional mortgage markets into a single national market that draws financing from around the world . to encourage improvement in housing standards and conditions and to provide a system of mutual mortgage insurance , congress passed , and president franklin d. roosevelt signed into law , the national housing act in 1934 . title iii of the national housing act established national mortgage associations , giving rise to the creation of fannie mae . in its original form , fannie mae was a federal government agency that was chartered to support government - backed mortgages and carry out some government subsidy functions . in 1954 , congress re - chartered fannie mae as a mixed government and private - sector entity , with a clearly delineated separation between its market - oriented ( i.e. , secondary mortgage trading ) and governmental ( i.e. , special assistance and managing and liquidating government - held mortgages ) functions . in 1968 , congress split the firm into two distinct organizations , with the secondary market arm retaining the fannie mae name and the government functions arm taking the name ginnie mae , short for the government national mortgage association . the partitioning legislation re - chartered fannie mae as a gse to become completely privately owned with no federal funding . in 1970 , congress enacted the emergency home finance act , which authorized fannie mae to buy conventional mortgages . savings and loans , the other major source of mortgage money , were restricted to holding mortgages and were generally unable to work with fannie mae . to facilitate secondary market trading of conventional mortgages for savings and loan associations , the act created freddie mac as a wholly owned subsidiary of the federal home loan bank system ( fhlbs ) . in 1989 , congress re - chartered freddie mac so that its shares could trade on the new york stock exchange , in the same manner as fannie mae's . the 1989 act also did away with the separate missions of fannie mae and freddie mac , with the result that today the two enterprises have similar characteristics .