the program does not have income limitations for determining eligibility . however , income could be relevant in determining a family's contribution to housing costs . the below - market rents for lihtc units are set at 30% of either 50% or 60% of ami ( depending on which standard the property meets ) . the low - income families who receive assistance through the hud rental assistance programs discussed in this report may also qualify for other forms of public assistance . the coc program is the primary source of assistance for permanent and transitional housing . grant recipients that lease property where homeless clients reside have the option of imposing an "occupancy charge. if an occupancy charge is imposed , income is calculated in accordance with the regulations governing income and adjusted income ( 24 c.f.r . ยง5.609 and ยง5.611 ) , and the occupancy charge cannot exceed the greater of 30% of adjusted income , 10% of gross income , or welfare rent . in cases where homeless clients live in units receiving rental assistance , they must contribute toward rent . residents receiving rental assistance must be low - income , defined as income at or below 80% of area median income , but families or individuals living in community residences need not be low - income . in each case , the hopwa program requires families to pay rent , and the general regulations governing income and adjusted income apply ( 24 c.f.r . home program funds can be used for tenant - based rental assistance and to construct , acquire , or rehabilitate properties for rental housing . families living in home - funded rental housing or receiving rental assistance must be low - income ( at or below 80% of area median income ) ; however , with income targeting , 90% of families must be at or below 60% of area median income . under home regulations , annual income may be determined in one of three ways: ( 1 ) using the regulations at 24 c.f.r . section 5.609 , ( 2 ) as reported using the census long form , or ( 3 ) adjusted gross income as reported to the irs . adjusted income is determined according to the general hud regulations ( 24 c.f.r . rent for housing that was developed using home funds cannot exceed the lesser of section 8 fair market rents or 30% of the adjusted income of a family whose income is 65% of the area median income . the home statute and regulations do not set a maximum rent contribution for tenants receiving tenant - based rental assistance , but local jurisdictions must set a minimum rent contribution level . the u.s. department of agriculture's rural housing service funds the construction of affordable rental housing in rural areas through its section 515 program and ongoing rent subsidies tied to those properties through its section 521 program . similar to hud rent assistance programs , families are generally eligible to live in section 515 / 521 properties if they have low or very low incomes ( using hud's income limits ) , although , in some cases , moderate - income families may also be eligible .