so this is not a new position , this is a consistent one . [emphasis added] in our discussions , i emphasized with prime minister abe the importance of resolving this issue peacefully — not escalating the situation , keeping the rhetoric low , not taking provocative actions , and trying to determine how both japan and china can work cooperatively together... . events in 2012 dramatically intensified matters . in september of that year , japan's central government purchased three of the islands from their private owner in order to preempt a japanese nationalist who had raised nearly $20 million to purchase the islands . china and taiwan protested the move , and across china large - scale anti - japanese protests erupted , some of which resulted in violence . additionally , since the japanese government nationalized the three islands , china has markedly increased its deployments of maritime law enforcement and naval ships near the islands and increased military patrol flights in the east china sea , prompting reciprocal responses from the japanese coast guard and japanese air self defense force ( japan's air force ) . the frequent proximity of the two countries' ships and planes to one another has prompted worries from many about a collision or skirmish , which could draw in the united states due to its treaty commitment to help protect japan and the specific u.s. interpretation that its treaty commitment applies to the disputed territory . each time a crisis has erupted over the senkakus ( diaoyu / diaoyutai ) , questions have arisen concerning the u.s. relationship to the islands . this report focuses on that issue , which has four elements: 1 . u.s. administration of the islands from 1953 to 1971 , when the united states occupied okinawa ; 2. the application to the senkakus ( diaoyu / diaoyutai ) of the 1971 "treaty between japan and the united states of america concerning the ryukyu islands and the daito islands" — commonly known as the okinawa reversion treaty , which was approved by the senate in 1971 and entered into force the following year ( the daito islands lie to the east of okinawa ) ; 3. the u.s. view on the claims of the disputants ; and 4. the relationship of the 1960 u.s. - japan security treaty to the islands . for additional information and analysis on the geopolitical aspects of this and other maritime disputes , see crs report r42784 , china's actions in south and east china seas: implications for u.s. interests — background and issues for congress , by ronald o'rourke ; crs report r42930 , maritime territorial disputes in east asia: issues for congress , by ben dolven , mark e. manyin , and shirley a. kan ; and crs report rl33740 , the u.s. - japan alliance , by emma chanlett - avery and ian e. rinehart . the claims of china and taiwan to sovereignty over the senkakus ( diaoyu / diaoyutai ) have a similar basis . china asserts that its ming dynasty ( 1368-1644 ) considered the islands part of its maritime territory and included them on maps and documents of areas covered by ming dynasty coastal defenses .