what should be china's role in the world ? should it lie low and focus on domestic economic development , as former leader deng xiaoping counseled ? or , as a global economic heavyweight , should it take a more proactive and even assertive position on the world stage ? if the latter , should china assume the role of a responsible stakeholder or of a revisionist power that wants to set and operate by its own rules ? how should the chinese communist party address popular dismay with political corruption and new calls for political reform ? will incremental moves toward greater accountability suffice , or should the party heed calls for more substantive changes , such as easing controls on the media and requiring that all laws and party directives comply with china's constitution ? finally , congress and the united states also share an interest in understanding the mechanics of the political transitions . given the frequency of u.s. - china official interactions , for example , it may be helpful for congress to understand that top party officials are scheduled to step down from their party posts in november 2012 , but not from their state posts until march 2013 , meaning that they will continue to represent china on the international stage in the interim . it is possible that control of the chinese military may not change hands until 2014 . congress and the united states also have an interest in understanding the mechanics of the transition as a way of evaluating progress , or the lack thereof , toward participatory politics in china . the u.s. government frequently articulates an interest in china's citizens having "a lawful way to voice legitimate grievances and have a meaningful role in the political development of their own society. arrangements for the current political transition suggest that the role of ordinary chinese citizens in their country's political development remains minimal . for a detailed discussion of the chinese political system , please see crs report r41007 , understanding china's political system , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] . for background information about xi jinping , the man expected to be named general secretary of the communist party at the 18 th party congress in november , see crs report r42342 , china's vice president xi jinping visits the united states: what is at stake ? , by [author name scrubbed] . as noted above , the people's republic of china has managed only one previous transfer of power that was both orderly and institutionalized , in 2002-2004 , when jiang zemin yielded to hu jintao first the positions of communist party general secretary and state president , and then the position of central military commission chairman . the first challenge facing china's designated new leaders now is simply to undertake and consolidate a second such transition . although the party has worked hard to suggest that an orderly transition is inevitable , in three important respects , the challenge this time is greater than in 2002-2004: in the last transition , hu jintao had been personally selected to be china's next top leader by deng xiaoping , the dominant political figure of the post - mao zedong era .