appendix a . rebates by state appendix b . state mlrs state governments are the primary regulators of health insurance . many states have their own mlr requirements , which they use for a variety of purposes including evaluating corporate performance and insurance company requests for an increase in premium rates . the naic in 1980 developed mlr guidelines for state regulators to use in determining whether benefits paid under individual medical policies were reasonable in relation to premiums charged . a number of states also set separate mlr standards for other insurance products . when the aca was passed in 2010 , 34 states had established some type of mlr guidelines ; required the filing or reporting of mlr information ; set limits on administrative expenses for comprehensive major medical insurance ; or enacted a combination of such policies . of the total , six states required insurers that did not meet mlr standards to provide premium refunds or credits . ( see table b - 1 . ) states developed a range of mlr targets . for example , state mlr requirements for insurers selling products in the individual market ranged from 55% to 80% . mlrs in the group market ranged from 60% to 85% . the federal aca provisions are now the national , minimum requirement that insurers must meet in terms of calculating potential consumer rebates . states were allowed to apply for limited waivers of the federal mlr standards for their individual insurance markets , however , if they had evidence that the aca requirements could disrupt the state market for such policies . since the aca was enacted , several states have passed additional mlr laws including some that require insurers participating in medicaid to meet specific mlrs or to publish their premium and profit information . state policies can range widely depending on differences between rural and urban areas and markets that have a number of insurance options , as opposed to those where business is more concentrated in a few companies . one key difference between many state mlr calculations and the federal mlr standards enacted under aca is that the federal standards allow for adjustments based on quality improvements , taxes and fees , credibility adjustments , and other factors . according to a 2011 gao analysis , the combined effect of the federal allowances has been to raise federal mlrs above mlrs that are based only on medical claims compared to premium revenue . analyzing 2010 data , the gao said that average mlrs calculated under the aca formula were 7.5 percentage points higher than traditional mlrs in the individual market , 6.5 points higher in the small group market , and 4.8 points higher in the large group market . appendix c. mini - med plans final hhs rules allow separate adjustments in the mlr formula for a less commonly used type of health insurance: mini - medical ( mini - med ) policies . mini - medical or limited - benefit health plans subject to different mlr standards are defined by cms as policies with annual benefit limits of $250,000 or less .