the court's consideration of s.b . the nature of these measures has varied considerably . in some instances , jurisdictions have sought to enter cooperative agreements with federal immigration authorities , under which state or local officers are delegated authority to perform specific immigration enforcement functions . in other instances , state and local governments have acted independently to deter unauthorized immigration . some states and localities , for example , have sought to limit unlawfully present aliens' access to housing and municipal services . some have authorized or required the suspension or termination of the licenses of businesses that knowingly or intentionally hire unauthorized aliens , and have also required that employers within their jurisdiction use the federal government's e - verify database to check certain employees' work authorization . others have imposed criminal sanctions , separate and apart from any imposed under federal law , for activities believed to promote unauthorized immigration . still others have adopted laws or policies intended to facilitate the identification and apprehension of unlawfully present aliens by state and local law enforcement — even in the absence of a cooperative agreement with federal authorities — so that they may be transferred to the custody of federal immigration officers . an arizona measure enacted in 2010 , commonly referred to as s.b . 1070 , arguably represents the vanguard of recent attempts to test the legal limits of greater state involvement in immigration enforcement . potentially sweeping in effect , s.b . 1070 declared arizona's intent to establish a state - wide policy of "attrition through enforcement. among other things , s.b . 1070 required state and local law enforcement to facilitate the detection of unauthorized aliens in their daily enforcement activities . the arizona decision specially addresses only particular types of state and local action to deter unauthorized immigration . some measures that have recently been adopted by states — such as requirements that schools determine whether enrolling students are either unlawfully present themselves or the children of unauthorized aliens , or measures barring unlawfully present aliens from entering into certain transactions with government agencies — were not directly at issue in the arizona decision , and may not raise identical legal issues . for example , a key question that courts reviewing these measures have been asked to consider is whether they violate affected persons' constitutional guarantee of equal protection , an issue which the supreme court did not assess in its review of s.b . moreover , reviewing courts have had to consider whether these state measures are compatible with federal laws that were not at issue in the arizona case . accordingly , the arizona ruling may not provide definitive guidance to courts considering the permissibility of state immigration laws which differ significantly from s.b . on the other hand , it is possible that certain aspects of the arizona ruling may , at least indirectly , inform subsequent litigation concerning a broad range of immigration - related measures by the states .