these changes are described in the next section . generally , eo 13618 states that the federal government must have the ability to communicate at all times and under all circumstances . it assigns executive office responsibilities through presidential policy directive 1 ( ppd 1 ) . it establishes the ns / ep communications executive committee and the executive committee joint program office . eo 13618 assigns specific and general federal department and agency responsibilities . finally , it identifies previous executive orders that are amended and revoked . eo 13618 is a continuation of presidential authority assigned in the communications act of 1934 , and modifies or revokes other executive orders related to federal ns / ep communications . as identified earlier in this report , eo 13618 changes federal national security and emergency preparedness communications functions by dissolving the national communications system , establishing an executive committee to oversee federal national security and emergency preparedness communications functions , establishing a programs office within the department of homeland security to assist the executive committee , and assigning specific responsibilities to federal government entities . again , this executive order does not modify or end any ns / ep communications systems or programs , instead it assigns the management and administration of these systems and programs to specific federal departments , agencies , and entities . three sections of eo 13618 affect the federal government's ns / ep communications functions: section 3 "ns / ep communications executive committee," section 4 "executive committee joint program office," and section 5 "specific department and agency responsibilities. these three sections direct federal department and agency actions . it appears as if dhs is assigned increased ns / ep communications functions . specifically , eo 13618 affects dhs by dissolving ncs ; creating a new committee , the ns / ep communications executive committee and assigning dhs the responsibility of co - chairing that committee with dod ; establishing and supporting the executive committee joint program office ; and leading non - military federal department and agency ns / ep communications activities . generally , eo 13618 states that the federal government must have the ability to communicate at all times and under all circumstances . the 2010 national security strategy , the primary federal government guidance on national security , reiterates the notion that reliable and secure telecommunication is necessary to effectively manage emergencies , and that the united states must prevent disruptions to critical communications . following the enactment of the communications act of 1934 , numerous presidents have issued executive orders addressing ns / ep communications . for example , in 1962 president john f. kennedy issued eo 10995 that assigned federal telecommunications management functions ; in march 1978 , president jimmy carter issued eo 12046 that transferred certain federal telecommunication functions ; on september 13 , 1982 , president ronald reagan issued eo 12382 that established the national security telecommunications advisory committee ; and president william clinton issued eo 12919 on june 3 , 1994 , that addressed national security telecommunications related to national defense industry resources preparedness .