support for the global fund . hiv / aids advocates are concerned about the fundraising challenges facing the global fund and fear that advancements made through the global fund and other donors will be compromised should it scale back operations . the global fund accounts for roughly 18% of spending by donors on hiv / aids in low - and middle - income countries . while the global fund did not collect sufficient capital to launch a new round of grants in 2012 , support from the united states has not abated ; it has grown . since the united states offered the inaugural $200 million pledge for the global fund in 2001 , u.s. pledges and contributions have increased significantly . in fy2012 , congress appropriated $1.3 billion for the global fund and the administration requested $1.65 billion for the organization in fy2013 . although congress has continued to increase resources for the global fund , it has included language in annual appropriations restricting portions of the contributions , citing concerns about transparency and fiscal malfeasance . members of congress continue to debate the appropriate roles of the global fund and pepfar . this debate is expected to continue in the 113 th congress . alternative funding streams . several low - income countries are increasingly considering alternative approaches to financing their national aids plans . in january 2000 , zimbabwe launched an aids levy that collects a 3% tax on individual and corporate income . in 2011 , some $26 million was collected through the aids levy , and an additional $30 million is expected to be raised by the end of fy2012 . finances collected through the aids levy initiative and from key donors ( pepfar , global fund and the british aid organization department for international development [dfid] ) is expected to enable zimbabwe to achieve universal coverage ( defined as at least 80% of people in need of treatment ) by the end of 2012 . tanzania , kenya , and zambia are reportedly considering similar measures . rwanda and uganda have also imposed levies to fund national hiv / aids plans , but on mobile phone use . growing resistance to art medicine may increase the cost of treating hiv / aids as people graduate onto more expensive second - line treatments . in the 2012 unaids report , the organization conceded one of the greatest challenges facing the world is "the inevitably rising costs of drug resistance and the need to provide chronic care for people living with hiv over their lifetimes. despite these concerns , the world health organization ( who ) maintains drug resistance rates remain relatively low in low - and middle - income countries at roughly 6.8% . the cost of anti - retroviral treatments has fallen tremendously in developing countries over the past decade , from an average annual price of over $10,000 per person to $116 per person for who pre - qualified art . this decline is a key reason global access to hiv / aids treatments has expanded . indeed , per - patient spending on art within pepfar programs has declined , due in large part to increased use of generic treatments ( figure a - 1 ) .