such certification has not been issued . the massachusetts department of insurance has collected information on insured losses from the boston bombing and the losses from tria covered lines of insurance appear to be under the $5 million threshold established in the act . ( see precise criteria under the tria program on page 6 . ) the original tria legislation's stated goals were to ( 1 ) create a temporary federal program of shared public and private compensation for insured terrorism losses to allow the private market to stabilize ; ( 2 ) protect consumers by ensuring the availability and affordability of insurance for terrorism risks ; and ( 3 ) preserve state regulation of insurance . although congress has amended specific aspects of the original act , the general operation of the program largely follows the original statute . the changes to the program have largely reduced the government coverage for terrorism losses , except that the 2007 amendments expanded coverage to losses due to domestic terrorism , rather than limiting the program to foreign terrorism . a terrorist attack with some form of ncbr weapon would often be considered the most likely type of attack causing large scale losses . the current tria statute does not specifically include or exclude ncbr events ; thus , the tria program in general would cover insured losses from terrorist actions due to ncbr as it would for an attack by conventional means . the term insured losses , however , is a meaningful distinction . except for workers compensation insurance , most insurance policies that would fall under the tria umbrella include exclusions that would likely limit insurer coverage of an ncbr event , whether it was due to terrorism or to some sort of accident , although these exclusions have never been legally tested in the united states after a terrorist event . if these exclusions are invoked and do indeed limit the insurer losses due to ncbr terrorism , they would also limit the tria coverage of such losses . language that would have specifically extended tria coverage to ncbr events was offered in the past , but was not included in legislation as enacted . in 2007 , the government accountability office ( gao ) was directed to study the issue and a gao report was issued in 2008 . 4871 provides for higher federal cost sharing and a lower program trigger in the event of an ncbr attack , but does not specifically address ncbr exclusions . other tria extension bills in the 113 th congress have not specifically addressed ncbr events . table 1 presents a side - by - side comparison of the original tria law , along with the reauthorizing laws of 2005 and 2007 . table a - 1 contains illustrative examples of how the recoupment for the government portion of terrorism losses under tria might be calculated in the aggregate for various sizes of losses . the amount of the deductible in the chart is simply assumed to be 30% of the insured losses for illustrative purposes . without knowing the actual distribution of losses due to a terrorist attack , it is impossible to know what the actual deductible will be .