these are referred to as induced jobs . an input - output model is commonly used to provide a snapshot of these transactions ( sales ) between industries and ultimately , of the jobs dependent on these transactions . in this case , the model is used to trace the output by industry that results from the government ( eg , the department of defense , dod ) and consumers ( eg , employees of suppliers to shipbuilders and of the dod ) purchasing final products ( eg , aircraft carriers and groceries ) . the model expresses these transactions as the value of output supported by one dollar of spending ( demand ) in a given industry . productivity factors ( the ratio of employment to output ) are then applied to each industry to translate the output supported by one dollar of demand to the employment supported by one dollar of demand . in effect , most of the studies reviewed below applied these employment multipliers to their estimates of reduced agency spending under the bca to calculate the approximate number of jobs by industry and state that would no longer be supported by federal purchases ( i.e. , projected job losses ) . any projections involve considerable uncertainty and thus margins for error . in this case , the specifics of how the administration would implement sequestration were not known at the time the studies were conducted . in addition , the state - by - state job impacts of the analyses — which appeared to garner the most attention — were based on the perhaps unlikely assumption that the distribution of program spending by industry in the past would continue in the forecast period . the act reduces the budget deficit in two ways . first , it places statutory limits on the amount of most spending through the annual appropriations process from fy2012 to fy2021 , and it enforces the caps through sequestration in any year in which congress appropriates an amount greater than the discretionary spending limit for that year . second , it creates an automatic process to reduce spending by $1.2 trillion over the fy2013-fy2021 period through a combination of sequestration and lower statutory caps on discretionary spending if the joint select committee on deficit reduction , which was established by the bca , does not develop and submit to congress an alternative proposal that achieves at least equivalent budget savings . because the committee failed to agree upon a deficit reduction plan , the sequestration process is scheduled to go into effect on january 2 , 2013 . generally speaking , the bca would evenly split ( in dollar terms ) the $1.2 trillion in automatic reductions over the nine - year period between defense and nondefense spending categories . the office of management and budget ( omb ) is required to determine the annual amount of spending to be cut from defense and nondefense budgets after 18% attributable to debt service savings ( $216 billion ) is subtracted from the act's $1.2 trillion in deficit savings ( $984 billion ) , or almost $54.7 billion from the defense and $54.7 billion from the nondefense budget functions per fiscal year from 2013 through 2021 ( $984 billion divided by nine years ) .