§1461-1a ) sec . ban on domestic activities by the usia . what benefits are foreseen from these proposed changes ? what constraints might be lifted , or efficiencies realized ? what effect would lifting the domestic dissemination ban on certain state department and bbg communications have on interagency coordination of communications both to foreign and domestic audiences ? is there a need for additional legislation to better define what types of communications are designed to influence u.s. public opinion and are therefore prohibited , require effective identification of all communications as to their u.s. government source , and / or require publication or public availability of internal data to confirm statements in such communications materials ? appendix a. side - by - side amendment analysis appendix b. smith - mundt act sections 502 and 1005 sections 502 and 1005 ( 22 u.s.c . §§1462 and 1437 , respectively ) are set out in this appendix as they would appear if the proposed amendments are enacted . changes to the provisions below are shown using bold text denoting new language . policies governing information activities sec . in authorizing international information activities under this act , it is the sense of the congress ( 1 ) that the secretary and the broadcasting board of governors shall reduce such government information activities whenever corresponding private information dissemination is found to be adequate ; ( 2 ) that nothing in this act shall be construed to give the department or the broadcasting board of governors a monopoly in the production or sponsorship on the air of short - wave broadcasting programs , or a monopoly in any other medium of information . utilization of private agencies sec . in carrying out the provisions of this act it shall be the duty of the secretary and the broadcasting board of governors to utilize , to the maximum extent practicable , the services and facilities of private agencies , including existing american press , publishing , radio , motion picture , and other agencies , through contractual arrangements or otherwise . it is the intent of congress that the secretary and the broadcasting board of governors shall encourage participation in carrying out the purposes of this act by the maximum number of different private agencies in each field consistent with the present or potential market for their services in each country . appendix c. section 501 and the zorinsky amendment section 501 of the smith - mundt act ( 22 u.s.c . §1461 ) changes to the provision below are shown using strikethrough text denoting deletions , and bold text denoting new language . section 501 as enacted in 1948 sec . the secretary is authorized , when he finds it appropriate , to provide for the preparation , and dissemination abroad , of information about the united states , its people , and its policies , through press , publications , radio , motion pictures , and other information media , and through information centers and instructors abroad .