on december 30 , 2012 , president obama signed h.r . specifically , the fisa amendments act added a new procedure for targeting non - u.s. persons abroad without individualized court orders ; a new requirement to obtain an individualized court order when targeting u.s. persons abroad ; and new procedures that can be used to obtain court orders authorizing the targeting of u.s. persons abroad for electronic surveillance , the acquisition of stored communications , and other means of acquiring foreign intelligence information . fisa is just one of several federal laws that govern the use of electronic surveillance for legitimate investigative purposes . the principal others are the electronic communications privacy act ( ecpa ) , executive order 12333 , and the fourth amendment . each of these , and the manner in which they may overlap or interact with fisa , will be discussed briefly before turning to the provisions added by the fisa amendments act . in late 2005 , the new york times reported that the federal government had "monitored the international telephone calls and international e - mail messages of hundreds , perhaps thousands , of people in the united states without warrants. title vii is only tangentially related to the subjects of the previous years' debates in that it amends the same statute . therefore , the legislative activity in prior years should be conceptually separated from the current debate and legislation that would address the expiration of title vii of fisa at the end of this year . this report describes the changes that were made by the fisa amendments act within the context of the government's authority to conduct surveillance for foreign intelligence purposes . 5949 , the fisa amendments act reauthorization act of 2012 , which extends title vii of fisa until december 31 , 2017 . the foreign intelligence surveillance act ( fisa ) provides a statutory framework by which government agencies may , when gathering foreign intelligence information , obtain authorization to conduct wiretapping or physical searches , utilize pen registers and trap and trace devices , or access specified business records and other tangible things . authorization for such activities is typically obtained via a court order from the foreign intelligence surveillance court ( fisc ) , a specialized court created by fisa to act as a neutral judicial decision maker in the context of activities authorized by the statute . title vii , added by the fisa amendments act of 2008 , provides additional procedures for the acquisition of foreign intelligence information regarding persons who are believed to be outside of the united states . these provisions affect both u.s. persons as well as other non - u.s. persons . subsequently , president george w. bush acknowledged that , after the attacks of september 11 , 2001 , he had authorized the national security agency to conduct a terrorist surveillance program ( tsp ) to "intercept international communications into and out of the united states" by "persons linked to al qaeda or related terrorist organizations" based upon his asserted "constitutional authority to conduct warrantless wartime electronic surveillance of the enemy. now discontinued , the tsp appears to have been active from shortly after september 11 , 2001 , to january of 2007 .