( see table 1 . ) in a similar process to the landmark agreement that led to new fuel economy and greenhouse gas standards for my2012-my2016 , the administration has secured commitment letters from the state of california and from 13 automakers . many stakeholders were concerned about a potential "patchwork" of different federal and state standards if epa , nhtsa , and california were to establish different standards at the intersection of fuel economy and ghg emissions . ( see discussion below on " different statutes govern fuel efficiency ." two key parts of the agreement are that california will treat any vehicle meeting the new federal ghg standards as meeting california standards , and that the automakers agree to not challenge the new standards in court . the administration expects that consumers' fuel savings from the new standards will more than offset the additional cost of the new technology for these vehicles , which could be thousands of dollars per vehicle . epa and nhtsa expect that the new standards will save roughly 4 billion barrels of oil and 2 billion metric tons of greenhouse gases over the life of the vehicles covered under the new standards . on august 9 , 2011 , the agencies announced final rules . because of the inherent differences between commercial and passenger vehicles , the standards are based on multiple attributes , including the weight class , physical size , and the presence of a sleeping area in the driver's cab . critics have challenged the administration's assumptions , countering that the costs will be higher and could lead to a drop in new vehicle sales . in addition to requiring an increase in light - duty vehicle cafe standards , eisa also required nhtsa to study the potential for fuel efficiency gains , and , if feasible , implement fuel efficiency standards for medium - and heavy - duty trucks and engines . after the completion of studies by the national academy of sciences and nhtsa , epa and nhtsa proposed a joint rulemaking for my2014-my2018 . further , because the same heavy - duty engine may be used in various vehicles , and similar vehicles are often configured in different ways , the standards are based on fuel consumption and greenhouse gas emissions per tons of payload miles , as opposed to the miles - per - gallon standards for passenger vehicles . epa and nhtsa estimate that the rules will raise the average cost of new heavy - duty my2018 combination tractors ( i.e. , the tractor portion of a tractor - trailer ) by about $6,200 . for heavy - duty pickup trucks and vans , the agencies estimate the average increased my2018 cost at around $1,000 , and around $400 for vocational vehicles ( a wide range of vehicles including utility trucks , refuse trucks , and dump trucks ) . depending on the vehicle and the annual number of miles traveled , the agencies estimate that the increased costs would be made up within a few years in fuel savings resulting from the rules . the agencies estimate that the rules will save 530 million barrels of oil and 270 million metric tons of greenhouse gases over the life of the vehicles sold in my2014-my2018 .