the least ? why does the location dictate the level of protection ? and how does technology affect society's expectation of privacy ? when analyzing domestic drone use under the fourth amendment , a reviewing court may be informed by cases surrounding privacy in the home , privacy in public spaces , location tracking , manned aerial surveillance , those involving the national border , and warrantless searches under the special needs doctrine . as evidenced by the foregoing , the constitutionality of domestic drone surveillance may depend upon the context in which such surveillance takes place . whether a targeted individual is at home , in his backyard , in the public square , or near a national border will play a large role in determining whether he is entitled to privacy . equally important is the sophistication of the technology used by law enforcement and the duration of the surveillance . both of these factors will likely inform a reviewing court's reasoning as to whether the government's surveillance constitutes an unreasonable search in violation of the fourth amendment . although the supreme court is the final arbiter of the constitution , congress and the president can provide for greater regulation of drones than the fourth amendment requires . congress has taken such steps over the years to address government surveillance of communications in transit ( commonly known as wiretapping ) , communications in storage such as e - mails , bank records , and health records , among a host of other private information . several measures have been introduced in the 113 th congress that would restrict the domestic use of drones , and establish arguably greater constraints on their usage than the fourth amendment requires . several bills were prompted by a general concern for potential privacy intrusions by federal and state law enforcement and executive agencies . the introduction of drones into american airspace raises many legal and policy questions . for instance , how far can the government go in its attempts to maintain security and ensure that laws are enforced ? what level of privacy should americans expect in an age where technology facilitating the acquisition of personal information expands at a phenomenal pace ? currently , there is a vast body of fourth amendment law that governs the circumstances in which law enforcement must obtain a warrant before conducting surveillance . however , the sheer sophistication of drone technology and the sensors they can carry may remove drones from this traditional fourth amendment framework . beyond the courts and the constitution , what role should congress and the president play in regulating the introduction of drones inside the united states ? as the integration of drones for domestic surveillance operations quickly accelerates , these questions and others will be posed to the american people and their political leaders . so where do individuals enjoy the most fourth amendment protection ? so when does government monitoring constitute a fourth amendment "search" for which a warrant is generally required ? initially , courts' assessment focused on the specific area being investigated . consider the 1928 case olmstead v. united state s .