nor is it self - implementing . however , when tmdls are established , municipal and industrial wastewater treatment plants may be required to install new or improved pollution control technology . for waters impaired by point source discharges , tmdls are enforced through revisions to existing cwa permits , which include the pollutant limits and a schedule for compliance . for waters impaired by nonpoint source runoff , because there are no federal controls over these sources ( there is no cwa permit requirement as there is for point sources ) , the primary implementation tools are state - run nonpoint source management programs , coupled with state , local , and federal land management programs and authorities , and financial assistance and incentive programs . states can but are not required to regulate nonpoint sources to achieve goals set out in a tmdl . for example , farmers or ranchers may be asked by states to use alternative methods in their operations to prevent fertilizers and pesticides from reaching streams , and they may receive funds to help them install on - farm pollution management systems or practices . epa has specific responsibilities under section 303 ( d ) . first , epa is required to review and approve a state's list of impaired waters and tmdls . second , if a state fails to identify impaired waters and develop a tmdl where one is needed , the cwa requires epa to develop an impaired waters list for the state and make its own tmdl determination . epa is not authorized to implement a tmdl , but the agency provides technical assistance and funding , which help states develop and implement tmdls . epa acknowledges that a vigorous tmdl program is needed because significant water quality problems persist in the nation's waters , nearly 40 years after enactment of the cwa . an estimated 40% of the nation's waters assessed by states do not meet water quality standards . under the cwa , states are responsible for developing tmdls for waters that they identify as impaired and for implementing pollution control actions to reduce pollution to an amount that meets water quality standards . tmdls are one element of state water quality management programs . other activities include standard setting , monitoring , permitting , and enforcement , and all must be integrated with the tmdl program . most states have lacked the resources to do tmdl analyses , which involve complex assessment in order to ascribe and quantify environmental effects from particular discharge sources . baseline water quality monitoring data for the analyses ( to identify impaired waters and pollution sources ) have been limited . epa has both been reluctant to intervene in the states and also lacked resources to do so itself . thus , there was little initial implementation of the provision enacted in 1972 . only in 1992 did epa issue regulations requiring states , every two years , to list waters that do not attain water quality standards and establish tmdls to restore water quality . responding to the failure of states and epa to meet these requirements , however , environmental groups filed lawsuits in more than three dozen states to compel compliance with the law's requirements .