it now stands at $7.25 an hour . the flsa also mandates a pay rate of one - and - one - half times an employee's hourly wage for every hour the employee works beyond a standard work week . when enacted , the flsa required employers to pay overtime for hours worked in excess of 44 hours in a week . the 44-hour threshold was lowered to 40 hours in 1940 . the focus is on those exemptions that have been the subject of recent legislation , hearings , or oversight . major amendments to the flsa the flsa has been amended several times since 1938 . minors ages 14 and 15 can operate tractors or other machinery if they hold a certificate of training from a 4-h or vocational agriculture training program . the restrictions on employment in hazardous occupations in agriculture do not apply to youth employed on farms owned or operated by a parent . youth ages 12 and 13 can work in agriculture with the written consent of their parents on a farm where a parent ( or person standing in the place of a parent ) is also employed . youth who are covered by the flsa and are not exempt must be paid at least the applicable federal or state minimum wage . however , parties cannot agree to a settlement that would result in a wage less than the minimum wage or payment of less than time - and - a - half for overtime . additionally , in the 1947 amendments congress prohibited class action suits under the statute , unless the secretary of labor filed the suit as the representative of workers . it also limited the availability of compensation recovered in a class action suit only to those employees who affirmatively agreed to be a part of the suit . finally , the amendments set a two - year statute of limitation ( time limit ) in which a worker could file a claim . 1961 and 1966 amendments in 1961 , congress amended flsa exemptions such that employers of retail workers in enterprises with annual sales in excess of $1 million were required to pay minimum wage and overtime rates . in 1966 , congress expanded coverage of the flsa to include workers employed in any enterprise with annual sales of at least $250,000 and employees of all businesses engaged in construction , repair , laundering , and cleaning services . additionally , for the first time , flsa coverage was extended to employees of hospitals , elementary and secondary schools , and institutions of higher education . the 1966 amendments also added a "tip credit," which allowed employers to include a portion of an employee's tips as part of the minimum wage . the flsa extends minimum wage , overtime pay , and child labor protections to individuals "employed by an employer. congress has also "exempted" certain employers and employees from all or parts of the flsa . for example , exemptions were provided to executive , administrative , or professional ( eap ) employees ; individuals employed at retail stores that did not have interstate operations ; and agricultural employees .