this is $89,000,000 below the request . in the report accompanying h.r . associated with this , as described below , is additional funding under coast guard construction to ensure completion of the current project , improve site access , and support analysis for follow on work and any necessary planning adjustments for schedule , scope , and cost . 5855 , the committee noted the following: the committee recommends no new construction funding in the bill for new departmental headquarters consolidation expansion . funding is included , as requested , as part of the coast guard appropriation to cover the costs associated with completing the move of the coast guard headquarters to st. elizabeths . … the committee understands that the department … is actively exploring options to creatively modify or consolidate current leases , in the expectation that a permanent headquarters construction site will be significantly delayed or amended . the committee encourages the department to continue this effort and to inform the committee of its progress in consolidation no later than 90 days after the date of enactment of this act , including a revised schedule and cost estimates . further , as noted above , the committee includes $10,000,000 under the coast guard acquisition , construction , and improvements account to complete phase 1 of construction , ensure coast guard will be able to move in 2013 and that there will be no obstacles to access and transportation into the site , and to support orderly planning and analysis for the overall project . in the minority views accompanying the report , the ranking members of the subcommittee and full committee noted the following: the bill also fails to provide the $89 million for site access , including necessary road and interchange improvements , for dhs personnel to access the new dhs headquarters . the new dhs headquarters project has been shortchanged over the past few years , causing repeated schedule delays and increasing the costs from $3.4 billion to just over $4 billion if all three phases are constructed . in the interim , the coast guard may be the only tenant at this new facility for the next 3-5 years , as the bill funds only this relocation in 2013 . the bill does not include any funding for phase 2 , which was to begin construction for dhs central headquarters and fema . the senate appropriations committee recommended $89 million for the highway interchange , although it was funded as a part of the under secretary for management's office through a general provision rather than as a stand - alone appropriation in departmental operations as requested . the committee also fully funded the coast guard's operational transition costs for the move . no funding was provided for the project through the coast guard construction budget . an amendment was offered in full committee markup on may 22 , 2012 , to use the $89 million for the highway interchange as an offset for an unrelated amendment . the amendment failed on a 15-15 vote , and the funding remained in the reported version of the legislation .