only eligible individuals can establish and fund hsas . to be an eligible individual , one must be covered under a qualifying high - deductible health plan ( hdhp ) , cannot have any other insurance or coverage except what is permitted , and cannot be claimed as a dependent on a different taxpayer's return . in general , an individual's eligibility to contribute to an hsa is determined on a monthly basis . previously , receiving care from va limited veterans' ability to contribute to hsas . veterans who were otherwise eligible to contribute to an hsa ( i.e. , veterans who were eligible individuals ) could contribute in a month only if they had not received care from the va in the preceding three months . veterans who were otherwise eligible but had received care from the va in the preceding three months were not allowed to contribute to the hsa for the month . 114-41 , individuals are not prohibited from contributing to an hsa merely because they receive medical care from the va for a service - connected disability . these veterans are regarded by the va as "high priority" veterans , and they are enrolled in priority groups 1-6 . veterans enrolled in priority groups 1-6 include the following: veterans in need of care for a service - connected disability ; veterans who have a compensable service - connected condition ; veterans whose discharge or release from active military , naval , or air service was for a compensable disability that was incurred or aggravated in the line of duty ; veterans who are former prisoners of war ( pows ) ; veterans awarded the purple heart ; veterans who have been determined by the va to be catastrophically disabled ; veterans of world war i ; veterans who were exposed to hazardous agents ( such as agent orange in vietnam ) while on active duty ; and veterans who have an annual income and net worth below a va - established means test threshold . the va looks at applicants' gross household income ( earned and unearned ) and deductible medical expenses for the previous year to determine their specific priority categories and whether they have to pay copayments for nonservice - connected care . in addition , veterans are asked to provide the va with information on any health insurance coverage they have , including coverage through employment or through a spouse . in other words , individuals who are otherwise eligible to contribute to an hsa will not be prevented from doing so merely because they receive care from the va . this change went into effect january 1 , 2016 . the va has the authority to bill most health care insurers for nonservice - connected care provided to veterans enrolled in the va health care system . the consolidated omnibus budget reconciliation act of 1985 ( p.l . 99-272 ) , enacted into law in 1986 , gave the vha the authority to bill some veterans and most health care insurers for nonservice - connected care provided to veterans enrolled in the va health care system to help defray the cost of delivering medical services to veterans .