appendix b . certified native cdfi . , total costs ) . cdes are eligible for the nmtc . it is possible that potential investors may invest in an underdeveloped community as long as the potential return on that investment exceeds the potential risk . if investors are not attracted to a particular community , however , government incentives may be able to change investors' perceived return and risk calculations . if this initial group of businesses is successful , due in part to the government's incentives , then that success may send positive signals about potential return for other businesses that choose to locate in the community . in addition , if government incentives encourage employment in the communities , employees may feel they have more of a stake in the community and participate positively in activities outside of work . although government incentives initially benefit particular businesses or investments , they may also allow the broader community to capture these spillover benefits . empirical evaluations of geographically targeted economic development policies have been mixed . evaluations differ , in part , due to several factors , including the use of different evaluation criteria for economic development , different policies or sample areas used for analysis , or the use of different empirical strategies . many of these studies are based on variations of state and local enterprise zones and federal empowerment zones . enterprise zones typically provide certain tax incentives and regulatory relief for distressed communities , whereas federal empowerment zones provide certain tax exemptions and employer tax credits for hiring new employees . some studies have found that geographically targeted policies have a positive effect on several indicators of economic activity in the targeted area . these studies cite that such policies facilitate entrepreneurship and increase employment in the targeted area . john ham et al . find that an empowerment zone designation reduces local unemployment and poverty rates by 8.7% and 8.8% , respectively , whereas an enterprise zone designation reduces local unemployment and poverty rates by 2.6% and 20% , respectively . leslie papke's review of surveys from participants in multiple u.s. enterprise zones indicates that start - up firms average approximately 25% of new businesses within the targeted zones . barry rubin and margaret wilder's analysis of indiana's enterprise zone indicates that 76% of the 1,878 jobs created between the beginning of the program in 1983 and 1986 could not be attributed to regional or sectoral growth . assuming these residual jobs were created in large part due to policy , the researchers calculated that the creation of each of these 1,430 jobs cost taxpayers $1,372 per job , annually . by contrast , other evaluations indicate that these policies have little effect on economic activity within the targeted area or that they do not contribute to a net increase of economic activity throughout the larger economy . these studies find that geographically targeted policies encourage some types of economic activity at the detriment of others — thus rearranging the mix of economic activity within the target area .