appendix a . continuous sign - up initiatives continuous sign - up is designed to enroll the most environmentally sensitive land into crp through specific conservation practices or resource needs . continuous sign - up includes a number of initiatives that target acres with specific resource concerns or support additional conservation practices . these are described below . conservation reserve enhancement program ( crep ) initially implemented in 1997 , crep is a joint federal - state continuous sign - up program under crp . sign - ups are continuous , non - competitive , and typically provide additional financial incentives beyond annual rental payments and cost - share assistance . there are currently 45 crep agreements in 33 states . farmable wetland program ( fwp ) the farmable wetland program ( fwp ) enrolls farmable or prior converted wetlands into crp . in exchange for additional financial incentives , landowners agree to restore the hydrology of the wetland , establish vegetative cover , and prohibit development . for land to be considered eligible it must meet one of the following criteria: a wetland or converted wetland cropped at least 3 of the immediately preceding 10 crop years ; a constructed wetland that receives flow ( surface and subsurface ) from a row crop agriculture drainage system and is designed to provide nitrogen removal in addition to other wetland functions ; land in a commercial pond - raised aquaculture in any year between 2002 through 2007 ; or cropland that was cropped at least 3 of 10 crop years between 1990 and 2002 , and is subject to the natural overflow of a prairie wetland . the enrollment of buffer acreage is also permitted to enhance wildlife benefits . no more than 100,000 acres may be enrolled in fwp in any state and no more than 750,000 acres nationally . the enrollment of wetlands ( described under the first and second bullets above ) is limited to 40 contiguous acres . "flooded farmland," or that defined in the fourth bullet above , is limited to 20 contiguous acres , and has a 20-acre limit . crep targets geographic regions with agricultural - related environmental concerns , such as maryland's chesapeake bay and florida's everglades . some states ( eg , new york and ohio ) have multiple crep projects , each targeting a different area of the state . projects are designed to address specific environmental objectives through targeted crp enrollments . transition incentive program ( tip ) the 2014 farm bill reauthorized the transition incentive program ( tip ) option for expiring crp contracts . under tip land from expiring crp contracts may be transitioned back into sustainable grazing or crop production by a beginning , veteran , or socially disadvantaged farmer or rancher . the land must be from a retired or retiring owner or operator ( not a family member ) in exchange for up to two additional years of annual crp rental payments following the expiration of the crp contract . the program was authorized to spend up to $33 million between fy2014 and fy2018 . this is an increase over the previously authorized $25 million in the 2008 farm bill .