indonesia did not appeal that conclusion . in particular , the panel found that the ban's purpose , to reduce youth smoking , was a legitimate regulatory end ; that indonesia failed to demonstrate that the ban would make no "material contribution" to the goal of reducing youth smoking ; and that indonesia had failed to establish that there were less trade restrictive measures that the united states could take that would achieve a comparable reduction in youth smoking . accordingly , the panel concluded that indonesia had failed to establish that the ban on clove cigarettes was more trade restrictive than necessary . because indonesia did not appeal that part of the decision , the panel's conclusion stands . article 2.12 of the tbt agreement requires a "reasonable interval" between publication of a technical regulation and its effective date . indonesia complained that the tobacco control act provided an interval between publication and effective date of three months while the term "reasonable interval" meant not less than six months . indonesia based this claim on the fact that paragraph 5.2 of the doha ministerial decision on implementation - related issues and concerns ( doha ministerial decision ) interpreted "reasonable interval" within article 2.12 to mean not less than six months . paragraph 5.2 , indonesia argued , was a legally binding interpretation under article ix:2 of the wto agreement . without finding that paragraph 5.2 was a legally binding interpretation under article ix:2 , the panel determined that it must "guide" the panel's interpretation of "reasonable interval. in the alternative , the panel found that paragraph 5.2 could be considered a subsequent agreement of the parties within article 31 ( 3 ) of the vienna convention on the law of treaties ( vienna convention ) . ultimately , it found that the tobacco control act violated article 2.12 . the appellate body determined that paragraph 5.2 was not a legally binding interpretation under article ix:2 of the wto agreement , but it was a subsequent agreement under article 31 ( 3 ) of the vienna convention . therefore , the burden to present a prima facie case that the interval provided by the tobacco control act is less than six month fell on indonesia , as the complaining member , and the burden to rebut this prima facie showing by demonstrating that the interval is reasonable fell on the united states , as the responding member . because the appellate body concluded that indonesia presented a prima facie case which the united states failed to rebut , it held that the tobacco control act violated article 2.12 of the tbt agreement . in response to the appellate body's decision , the united states suggested that it will likely maintain the ban on clove cigarettes and stated that it will act in a way that respects its obligations under the wto agreement . however , it appears that the united states has not yet settled on a course of action . at the april 24 , 2012 , meeting of the dispute settlement body ( dsb ) , the united states made a statement about the appellate body's decision .