sections 2103 and 2104 . under such provisions , former federal officials who were involved in certain contracting and procurement duties for the government concerning contracts in excess of $10 million may generally not receive any compensation from the private contractor involved , as an employee , officer , consultant , or director of that contractor , for one year after performing those procurement duties for the government . the types of contracting duties and decisions for the government which would trigger coverage under these provisions include acting as the "procuring contracting officer , the source selection authority , a member of the source selection evaluation board , or the chief of a financial or technical evaluation team in a procurement" in excess of $10 million ; serving as the program manager , deputy program manager , or administrative contracting officer for covered contracts ; or being an officer who personally made decisions awarding a contract , subcontract , modification of a contract , or task order or delivery order in excess of $10 million , establishing overhead or other rates valued in excess of $10 million , or approving payments or settlement of claims for a contract in excess of the covered amount . officials of the department of defense who are involved personally and substantially in procurements of over $10 million , are leaving the department , and know that they will be receiving compensation from a defense contractor within the next two years must request , within 30 days before their departure , an ethics opinion about what they can and cannot do for the defense contractor under current ethics laws and rules . under legislation adopted in 2012 , all "senior" officers and employees in the federal government will now have to report to their ethics offices negotiations that they are having for subsequent private employment . the "stock act," enacted in april of 2012 , requires all of those federal officials who are required to file public financial disclosure reports ( that is , generally , those earning a rate of salary equal to or more than 120% of the base salary for a gs - 15 ) to notify their ethics office in writing within three business days of the commencement of such "negotiations," and then to recuse themselves from any governmental matter for which such negotiations may create a conflict of interest . the ethics reform act of 1989 added post - employment restrictions for members and certain senior congressional staffers , effective january 1 , 1991 , and these were amended by the lobbying and ethics reform legislation , titled the "honest leadership and open government act of 2007. . under the criminal provisions of this statute , individuals who were members of the house are prohibited from "lobbying" or making advocacy communications on behalf of any other person to current members of either house of congress , or to any legislative branch employee , for one year after the individual leaves congress . for a period of two years after leaving the senate , senators are prohibited from similar post - employment advocacy .