this can occur in a number of ways . for example , a student could be attending school full - time , while also working full - time in covered employment , and then lose his or her job . in addition , a worker could have a job in covered employment , and also start school , and subsequently lose his or her job . in both cases , the individual may apply for uc benefits , but the eligibility for those benefits may differ according to the governing state . many states disqualify workers from uc benefits for school attendance , although some states make exceptions for certain students , typically those receiving approved training or training under trade adjustment assistance for workers ( taa ) program , which provides federal assistance to workers adversely affected by foreign trade . this report examines the treatment of students as a special group within the uc system , and how states define student eligibility for their respective state uc programs . uc is a joint federal - state program that provides unemployment benefits to eligible workers . the u.s. department of labor ( dol ) administers the federal portion of the uc system , which operates in each state , the district of columbia , puerto rico , and the virgin islands . the uc program is financed by federal taxes under the federal unemployment tax act ( futa ) and by state payroll taxes under the state unemployment tax acts ( suta ) . in addition to establishing how the uc program is financed , these laws also establish certain criteria for uc eligibility . federal law excludes few positions or types of workers from coverage ( with certain exceptions such as the self - employed or others as noted below ) . because federal law provides broad guidelines for uc coverage , eligibility , and determination , specifics of each uc program are left to the determination of each state . although general similarities exist between states , each state establishing its own criteria results in essentially 53 different uc programs . state laws and program regulations determine uc benefit eligibility , payments , and duration . generally , uc benefits are available to eligible workers who have lost their jobs through no fault of their own and are willing , able , and available to work . in addition , uc eligibility is typically based on attaining qualified wages and employment covered in a 12-month period ( called a base period ) prior to unemployment . all states require a worker to earn a certain amount of wages or to work a certain period of time ( or both ) within the base period to be monetarily eligible to receive any uc benefits . most states disqualify students from uc benefits while they are attending school . states' policies tend to presume that students will be unavailable for full - time work because school hours often overlap with standard work hours . in addition , many students , if working part - time , would likely have insufficient prior earnings to qualify for uc benefits . however , if certain conditions are met , some states may allow students to remain eligible for uc benefits .