appendix a . title i: commodity programs appendix b . 2642 have been measured . according to the may 2013 baseline , expected outlays for all mandatory farm bill programs under current law are $973 billion during fy2014-fy2023 ( table 2 ) . of this amount , budget authority for farm safety net programs is $143 billion over the 10-year period , including $59 billion for commodity programs and $84 billion for crop insurance . disaster programs do not have baseline funding , since they expired ahead of other farm support programs . from a budget perspective , programs with a continuing baseline are assumed to go on under current law . these amounts can be used to reauthorize the same programs ; reallocated among these and other programs ; used as savings for deficit reduction ; or used as offsets to help pay for other provisions . for more information on the overall farm bill score and budget situation , see crs report r42484 , budget issues shaping a farm bill in 2013 . table 3 shows the cbo scores of both versions of the farm bill , with a detailed breakout for their respective farm safety net provisions . for just the farm safety net programs , the 10-year savings amount is $12.8 billion in s. 954 and $9.6 billion in h.r . approximately three - fourths of the 10-year , $46 billion - $47 billion in savings associated with the proposed elimination of current farm programs would be used to offset the cost of revising farm programs ( title i ) , enhancing crop insurance ( title xi ) , and retroactively reauthorizing four disaster programs ( title i ) . the 10-year savings from commodity programs in the house committee bill is $18.7 billion and savings in the senate bill is $17.4 billion . in contrast to scoring savings under title i , expenditures for crop insurance in both bills increase relative to baseline levels . the increase is about $4 billion lower in the senate bill , in part because the new revenue program contains an option for a farm - level guarantee that is expected to reduce demand for crop insurance and offset some costs associated with the crop insurance changes . a number of researchers have analyzed the proposed changes made to the farm safety net by the senate and house farm bills . the food and agricultural policy research institute ( fapri ) at the university of missouri concludes in an october 2013 sector - wide study that the economic consequences of the two bills would be similar in many respects , with reduced federal spending and relatively small effects on commodity markets . comparing the two bills , fapri's analysis indicates that the house bill , given its parameters and structure , would provide substantially more support than the senate bill to producers of rice , barley , and peanuts , while corn and soybean producers would benefit relatively more under the senate bill . actual program benefits will be sensitive to market conditions and producer participation , with government costs depending in part on eventual enrollment in the supplemental coverage option ( 65% subsidy rate ) and other factors .