circuit . the fwpca prohibits an employer from firing or otherwise discriminating against an employee , or causing such firing or discrimination , because the employee has filed , instituted , or caused to be filed or instituted any proceeding under the fwpca , or has testified or is about to testify in any proceeding resulting from the administration or enforcement of the fwpca . any employee who believes that he or she has been fired or discriminated against in violation of this provision may , within 30 days after such alleged violation occurs , apply to the secretary of labor for a review . upon receipt of such application , the secretary will institute an investigation as he or she deems appropriate . upon receiving the report of such investigation , the secretary will make findings of fact ; if she finds that such violation did occur , the secretary will issue a decision , incorporating an order and findings , requiring the party committing such violation to take such affirmative action to abate the violation , including the rehiring or reinstatement of the employee with compensation . if the secretary finds that there was no such violation , she will issue an order denying the application ; such order shall be subject to judicial review in the same manner as orders and decisions are subject to judicial review under 33 u.s.c . §§ 1251 et seq . whenever an order is issued , at the request of the applicant , a sum equal to the aggregate amount of all costs and expenses , including attorneys' fees , determined to have been reasonably incurred by the applicant , will be assessed against the person committing the violation . the lhwca prohibits an employer from discharging or otherwise discriminating against an employee who claims or attempts to claim compensation from the employer , or testifies or is about to testify against the employer in a proceeding under the statute . any employer who violates this provision will be liable for a penalty of not less than $1,000 nor more than $5,000 . if such penalties are not paid , they may be recovered in a civil action brought in the appropriate u.s. district court . any employee that is discriminated against under the statute's whistleblower provisions shall be restored to his or her employment and shall be compensated for any loss of wages arising from the discrimination , provided that if the employee ceases to be qualified to perform the duties of employment , he or she shall not be entitled to such restoration and compensation . the employer and not his insurance carrier shall be liable for such penalties and payments , and any provision in an insurance policy undertaking to relieve the employer from the liability for such penalties and payments shall be void . the msawpa prohibits employers from intimidating , threatening , restraining , coercing , blacklisting , discharging , or in any manner discriminating against any migrant or seasonal agricultural worker because such worker has , with just cause , filed a complaint or instituted , or caused to be instituted , any proceeding under the statute's anti - retaliation provisions .