appendix a . asset risk weighting capital adequacy regulation requires banks to hold enough reserves to maintain minimum capital - asset ratios , which are generally defined as bank capital ( eg , common shareholder equity ) in the numerator and bank assets in the denominator . basel i introduced a risk weighting system that weights ( multiplies ) the assets in the denominator of the capital - asset ratio by a factor that attempts to capture the relative credit or default risk of bank assets . the risk weighting system arguably correlates lower credit risk with liquidity , as it typically assigns lower weights to more liquid assets and higher weights to less liquid assets . for example , cash and u.s. treasury securities , which are liquid and considered to have zero default risk , receive a risk weight of 0% . these asset holdings would have no effect on a bank's portfolio capital - asset ratio . on the other hand , loans with higher risk weights reduce the overall portfolio capital - asset ratio by increasing the size of the denominator . a bank holding a loan that is assigned 100% risk weight would be required to hold 8% of the value of that asset as capital . should a bank decide to hold less cash and increase its holdings of higher yielding , less liquid loans , then its capital reserves must also increase for its capital - asset ratio to remain intact . conversely , when capital - asset ratios are low , academic research has found that some banks will substitute toward low risk - weighted asset categories to restore the ratio . the composition of a bank's asset portfolio , therefore , may be influenced by the fixed risk weights assigned to the various assets . the basel i weighting system arguably did not sufficiently differentiate among the degrees of risk . to illustrate , basel i places the same capital charge on all commercial loans regardless of the differences in credit ( default ) risk . in other words , a bank would be required to hold the same percentage of capital against two commercial loans regardless if one were of relatively higher credit quality . furthermore , the weighting system is unable to capture offsetting risk exposures . the capital surcharge is the same even though holding the loan with lower default risk may compensate for holding the higher risk loan . hence , banks arguably have an incentive to make higher risk loans with potentially higher yields as opposed to lower risk loans with lower yields . another concern regarding the basel i weighting system is that banks would be incentivized to hold government securities ( eg , u.s. treasuries ) rather than extend loans where credit shortages may exist , particularly during economic downturns . the government securities of nations that are members of the organization for economic co - operation and development ( oecd ) receive a risk weight of 0% . suppose capital - asset ratios fall below regulatory threshold levels during recessions after an increase in borrower loan defaults .