appendix a . debate over the market stabilization proposal what is dmsp's intended purpose ? the dmsp market stabilization proposal is being debated by dairy producer groups , which generally support it , and dairy processors and certain consumer groups who oppose it . the national milk producers federation ( nmpf ) , the largest u.s. dairy producer organization , is a principal proponent of the dairy market stabilization concept . nmpf describes the purpose and need for dmsp as follows: what is the purpose of the dmsp ? the dmsp does not fit the traditional definition of a supply management program . however , market stabilization is part of this proposal because there are times when imbalances occur in the marketplace that negatively impact dairy farmer margins . in 2009 , dairy farmers did not overproduce their way into extremely low margins , but demand , both domestically and internationally , collapsed with the global recession . the low milk prices combined with high feed costs resulted in the lowest margins most producers have ever experienced . situations like this ultimately correct themselves , but without timely and effective intervention , they can drag on too long and drag down too many farmers along the way . alternate viewpoints the international dairy foods association ( idfa ) , representing the nation's dairy manufacturing and marketing industries and their suppliers , is a principal opponent of the dairy market stabilization program . idfa argues: "a new government "dairy stabilization" program would routinely increase our domestic prices above international prices and make our dairy industry less competitive.... government supply management programs thwart export growth . that's why no other u.s. commodity has limits on production. during the house agriculture committee markup of h.r . 1947 in the 112 th congress , representatives goodlatte and scott first introduced their amendment ( no . 085 ) to remove the market stabilization program from the dairy subtitle d while retaining the dairy producer margin protection program . in a "dear colleague" letter dated july 10 , 2012 , they argued: a government supply management program arbitrarily penalizes consumers and dairy product manufacturers who respond to consumer demands , by uniformly requiring milk supply contraction and raising milk prices above not [sic] market clearing levels . the dairy market stabilization program , which our amendment eliminates , is the only u.s. commodity program that would allow this level of government market intervention in domestic commodity supply decisions . a major concern expressed by urban constituencies in regard to domestic milk supplies is that a "supply management" program would potentially both limit the volume of milk supply available to consumers and raise the price for the milk that is available . appendix b . historical dairy supply management programs the goal of dairy supply management programs is generally to enhance and stabilize farm - level milk prices by controlling the amount of milk marketed or to mitigate the increased production that would be stimulated by policy that supports diary product markets at a higher - than - market - equilibrium price .