forces. as noted above , a member of the benghazi - based ansar al sharia brigade being linked by some to the attack on u.s. offices reportedly said , "if one u.s. soldier arrives , not for the purpose of defending the embassy , but to repeat what happened in iraq or afghanistan be sure that all battalions in libya and all libyans will put aside all their differences and rally behind one goal of hitting america and americans.… libyans will wage jihad. members of congress may wish to consider how , and to what extent , the recent protests and attacks on u.s. and other diplomatic premises are addressed in united nations ( u.n. ) fora . for example , on september 14 , the u.n. security council issued a press statement that "condemned , in the strongest terms the series of violent attacks against embassies and consular premises of member states in multiple locations on 13 and 14 of september. additionally , the spokesperson for u.n. secretary - general ban ki - moon stated that the secretary - general was "deeply disturbed by the recent violence in libya and elsewhere in the middle east," and noted that "nothing justifies such killings and attacks. did particular governments temper their expressions of anger at the film with exhortations against violence ? did the publics and governments in a given country express sympathy with the attackers or outrage at their actions ? how cooperative has each government been in working with u.s. officials to protect u.s. persons and facilities and to investigate incidents ? congress may wish to hold detailed oversight hearings to explore these possible questions and others , as it did in the wake of previous diplomatic security incidents in the muslim world . some of the largest protests and the most violent attacks have taken place in countries in the middle east and north africa that have experienced political unrest and change since 2011 , most notably egypt , libya , tunisia , and yemen . the united states has generally embraced the emergent current of political change , but now faces choices about how to encourage host governments to meet their security responsibilities as they grapple with their own domestic political balancing acts and work to overcome the limitations of their security forces . in egypt and tunisia , for example , newly elected islamist political leaders share the disgust their fellow citizens have for the film , and they have struggled to simultaneously maintain credibility vis - à - vis the public , hard - line domestic rivals , and the united states and other international observers demanding action to limit the potential for violence . in both countries , moreover , these emergent political leaders are still testing the bounds of their relationships with the state security forces , which formed the backbone of previous authoritarian regimes' efforts to repress and contain islamist activism . libyan authorities remain dependent on state - affiliated militia groups to help provide security , including at diplomatic facilities . the recent attacks on u.s. diplomatic facilities and the ongoing protests and international political controversy present a number of challenging policy questions for congress .