the provisions of e.o . 12866 establish additional steps that executive agencies must follow before a rule can be finalized . clinton's e.o . ircs , however , are exempt from e.o . 12866 , but there has been consideration of extending these executive requirements to encompass the ircs . alternatively , congress could codify the provisions of e.o . 12866 , which has been previously considered . a statute mandating compliance with the oira review process could affect the recourse available to the president and the availability of judicial review . 12866 , it is helpful to review briefly some of the features that make the ircs generally insulated from presidential control . the apa provides for both formal and informal rulemaking procedures . the formal rulemaking procedures only need to be followed when an authorizing statute requires that a rulemaking proceed "on the record" after an opportunity for a hearing . these formal rulemaking procedures are rare and most agencies follow the informal , "notice and comment" rulemaking procedures outlined in the apa and discussed below . under informal rulemaking procedures , an agency must first publish a notice of proposed rulemaking ( nprm ) in the federal register . the nprm must include " ( 1 ) a statement of the time , place , and nature of public rule making proceedings ; ( 2 ) reference to the legal authority under which the rule is proposed ; and ( 3 ) either the terms or substance of the proposed rule or a description of the subjects and issues involved. after providing notice through the federal register , the agency must allow "interested persons an opportunity" to comment on the proposed rule . typically an agency will provide at least 30 days for public comment and this time period may be extended if the agency deems necessary . after the comment period has ended , the agency is required to review the public comments and may then issue a final rule . when publishing the final rule in the federal register , the agency must provide a "concise general statement" of the rule's "basis and purpose. the final rule may not go into effect until at least 30 days after it is published in the federal register , with certain exceptions . in addition to the apa , congress has enacted numerous statutes that impose obligations on agencies when they engage in rulemaking procedures . statutes such as the national environmental protection act ( nepa ) , the regulatory flexibility act ( rfa ) , the congressional review act ( cra ) , and the paperwork reduction act ( pra ) establish additional procedures and practices that the agencies must follow prior to establishing a finalized rule . furthermore , the president has issued executive orders and guidance documents establishing additional requirements and procedures that agencies must follow before a rule can be finalized . numerous presidential administrations have attempted to maintain control over the agencies by establishing a centralized review process for certain agency rules . notably , president reagan's issuance of executive order ( e.o. ) 12291 required agencies to have proposed and final rules reviewed by omb prior to publication . upon election , president clinton revised and replaced reagan's order with e.o .