this process is known as federal grant pass - through . those lands were to be sold for the support of public education . congress subsequently granted millions of acres for wagon road and canal construction , 64 million acres for improvements to river navigation , and several thousand acres for the establishment and support of land grant colleges . the first federal cash grant program was adopted in 1808 , to provide funds to states to support the national guard . since that time , there has been dramatic growth in federal cash assistance programs , now commonly referred to as "federal grant programs" or "federal domestic assistance programs. these programs transfer money , property , services , or other items of value for which the principal purpose is to accomplish a goal authorized by congress . a broader definition of federal domestic assistance would include loans . there are currently 2,179 congressionally authorized federal domestic assistance programs . the catalog of federal domestic assistance ( cfda ) indicates that of these , 1,714 are federal grant programs , which can be further broken out as formula ( 225 ) and project ( 1489 ) grant programs administered by 26 federal agencies . eight federal agencies administer 67% ( 1,143 ) of these programs , distributed as follows . as the number of congressionally authorized grant programs has increased over time , congressional interest in these programs , in terms of their efficiency and effectiveness , both individually and collectively , has also increased . the increasing cost of federal grants - in - aid assistance has also attracted congressional interest . figure 2 illustrates that federal outlays for grants to state and local governments have grown from $13.2 billion ( in constant fy2005 dollars ) in 1940 to $514.6 billion in 2011 . the growing number , perceived fragmentation , and complexity of these programs create challenges for federal agencies interested in standardizing various financial and administrative aspects of grant program management . as a result , there is wide variation across and within federal agencies in the administration of federal grant programs . this variation in federal grant administration makes it difficult for congress to compare program performance , both within and across federal agencies , and to exercise its oversight of federal agencies . federal agencies administering grant programs face challenges in providing timely , accurate , and detailed information on federal grant awards . this can be attributed , in part , to the way grant funds are distributed from the federal to the local level . this may also be attributed to the limitations of the databases used to track the distribution of funds . these limitations include questions regarding the validity of the data , and the limited ability to track the distribution of grant funds to the subgrant recipient level . without complete and valid information about the distribution of federal grant funds , congress may have a diminished capacity to engage in effective oversight of federal grants .