appendix a . potential applications of a carbon tax table a - 1 below identifies sources of ghg emissions that account for 0.5% or more of total u.s. ghg emissions . the sources are listed in descending order by their percentage contribution . carbon dioxide emissions from fossil fuel combustion , which accounts for almost 79% of total u.s. ghg emissions , are broken down by fossil fuel type: petroleum , coal , and natural gas . the right side of the table identifies potential points in the economy at which a carbon tax could be applied . the table lists the number of entities that would be involved with different tax applications . for some emission sources the number of "entities" may be relatively large . however , in some of these cases , the number of companies that operate these entities is considerably smaller . for example , natural gas wells involve a large universe of entities ( over 500,000 ) , but the 500 largest natural gas producers accounted for approximately 94% of total u.s. production in 2007 . the right - hand column of the table provides an estimate of the percentage of total u.s. ghg emissions that would be subject to a carbon price with a given tax application . for example , a carbon tax applied at natural gas wells ( based on a well's gross production ) could attach a price to all co 2 emissions that would result from domestic natural gas combustion . in addition , this application could attach a price to non - combustion related emissions , such as ch 4 emissions that occur during production and transportation . the potential for additional coverage explains why the percentage in the right - hand column may be larger than the percentage in the left - side column ( "percentage of total u.s. ghg emissions" ) . appendix b . illustration of natural gas sector appendix c. carbon pricing proposals in the 111 th  and 112 th congresses members introduced two carbon tax bills in the 112 th congress: h.r . 3242 ( stark ) , introduced october 24 , 2011: would have established a carbon tax on domestic and imported fossil fuels , as well as the carbon content of biomass , municipal solid waste , and any organic material used as fuel . the bill states that it would reduce the federal budget deficit by $480 billion over 10 years , with remaining revenues paid as dividends to individuals . 6338 ( mcdermott ) , introduced august 2 , 2012: would have required carbon emitters to purchase non - transferrable emissions permits from the u.s. treasury . the treasury would have used emissions targets to determine the price of these permits . revenues would have been used both for deficit reduction and to provide dividends to individuals . in the 111 th congress , policymakers introduced at least nine stand - alone , market - based proposals that sought to reduce ghg emissions . these bills included carbon tax , cap - and - trade , and hybrid approaches .