the second is the future status of functional constituencies . the pan - democrats generally prefer a lower threshold to allow more candidates ; the pro - beijing group are thought to prefer a higher threshold to avoid the nomination of candidates considered unacceptable to the chinese government . the existence of the functional constituencies is a controversial component of hong kong's governance structure . to some politicians and analysts , the functional constituencies are inherently non - democratic entities , and therefore must be eliminated in order to fulfill the "ultimate aim" stated in article 68 of the basic law . to others , the functional constituencies can be consistent with the "ultimate aim" if every eligible voter can cast a ballot for one of the functional constituency members . another controversial aspect of the functional constituencies is the existence of company and organizational votes . to some observers , universal suffrage implies that only people can vote , not companies or organizations . to others , because the basic law does not specifically state that only people can vote , company and organizational votes are not inconsistent with the ultimate aim of universal suffrage . the status of functional constituencies in any reform proposal is important also because at least 12 functional constituency members will have to vote in favor of the election reforms . some analysts question the likelihood of 12 functional constituency members voting to eliminate their own legco seats . the possibility of future election reforms in hong kong provides the opportunity to assess the chinese government's commitment to its promise to allow the democratization of hong kong , as well as the potential for democratic reforms in china . as noted above , the chinese government has a role in the approval of hong kong's election reforms at two points in the six - step process . in addition , some observers have suggested that the chinese government may use hong kong as a testing ground for possible democratic reforms in the mainland and to demonstrate the feasibility of the "one country , two systems" policy to taiwan . the chinese government plays a direct role in the approval process for hong kong's election reforms at two points in the process . first , the npcsc decides , in response to a report from the chief executive , if the "actual situation" in hong kong supports amending the election process . this role is based on the npcsc's decision of 2007 interpreting article 45 of the basic law . second , after the election reforms have been approved by two - thirds of the legco members and the chief executive , the npcsc has to approve any changes in the process of selecting the chief executive and record any changes in the process of electing the legco members . two pivotal issues will determine if such a compromise can be reached . the first issue is the nomination process for candidates for chief executive . at present , a candidate for chief executive must receive the support of at least 150 of the 1,200 members of the election committee to be considered a valid candidate . election committee members can only support the nomination of one candidate .