cost is another issue of interest to congress . defense officials have noted the marine corps is "not currently organized , trained and equipped to face a peer adversary in the year 2025" and enemies with advanced air and shore defense will make amphibious operations even riskier . to counter this , the navy is developing the expeditionary advance base operations ( eabo ) operational concept to address these concerns . eabo is described as follows: expeditionary advance base operations is a naval operational concept that anticipates the requirements of the next paradigm of us joint expeditionary operations . the concept is adversary based , cost informed and advantage focused . eabo calls for an alternative , difficult to target forward basing infrastructure that will enable us naval and joint forces to create a more resilient forward based posture to persist , partner and operate within range of adversary long range precision fires . the alternative forward posture enabled by expeditionary advance bases ( eabs ) is designed to mitigate the growing threat posed by the abundant quantity , expanded range and enhanced precision of potential adversary weaponry — particularly ballistic and cruise missiles designed to attack critical joint fixed forward infrastructure and large platforms . another possible congressional concern is to what extent a robust amphibious assault capability is a necessary component of u.s. national security . eabs provide a dispersed and largely mobile forward basing infrastructure that enables a persistent alternative force capability set that is similarly designed to be difficult to target and inherently resilient . the resilient , reduced signature infrastructure of eabs , combined with naval forces designed and structured to persist and operate within the arc of adversary anti - access / aerial denial ( a2ad ) capabilities enables naval commanders to conduct expeditionary advance base operations to support joint force maritime component commander ( jfmcc ) , and fleet commanders in the fight for sea control , by exploiting the opportunities afforded by key maritime terrain , particularly in close and confined seas . eabo advances , sustains and maintains the naval and joint sensor , shooter and sustainment capabilities of dispersed forces to leverage the decisive massed capabilities of the larger joint force with enhanced situational awareness , augmented fires and logistical support . the eabo concept enables us naval forces to exercise 21 st century naval operational art , meet new enemy a2ad threats with new capabilities and operate and thrive in and around close and confined seas . in terms of marine corps amphibious assault operations , the adoption of eabo could reportedly result in "an entirely different approach to amphibious assaults as well as new weapon systems. noting that "missiles can now hit ships and landing craft while they are hundreds of miles from shore , making it far too dangerous for marines to storm a beach with current capabilities," marine officials are reportedly exploring ways to create temporary "bubbles" where marines can get ashore . in response to these challenges , current and planned weapons systems might need to be modified to accommodate eabo operational concepts .