technical assistance p.l . 110-351 also requires hhs to provide "information , advice , educational materials , and technical assistance" to tribes , generally , regarding the services or other activities funded under the child welfare programs authorized in title iv - b and title iv - e of the social security act . this technical assistance is to be available to tribes seeking to operate title iv - e or title iv - b programs and to tribes and states seeking to enter into title iv - e tribal - state agreements or otherwise to satisfy the requirements for state and tribal collaboration or cooperation included in title iv - e or title iv - b of the social security act . in september 2009 , hhs awarded funding to the tribal law and policy institute ( based in west hollywood , california ) for a national resource center for tribes . the award is expected to last for up to five years . the placement does not have to occur at the same time . further , the sibling of the eligible child does not need to meet certain other eligibility requirements ( eg , previously eligible for a title iv - e foster care maintenance payment while living with the relative guardian ) . hhs has advised states that they may establish additional conditions on receipt of title iv - e kinship guardianship assistance that make eligibility for this assistance more limited in their state than what federal law would permit . however , hhs must approve those conditions as part of the state's title iv - e plan amendment related to kinship guardianship . some examples of conditions state might impose , as provided by hhs in july 2009 guidance , include requiring that a child must have lived in foster care with the prospective relative guardian for more than the 6-month time period required in federal law ; requiring a child to be a certain age before he / she is eligible ( eg , 12 or older ) ; requiring the relative guardian to inform the agency if the child's biological parents plan to stay with the guardian on a long term basis and / or requiring cooperation with child support enforcement . states that seek reimbursement for kinship guardianship assistance payments must enter into a written and binding kinship guardianship agreement with the prospective relative guardian of an eligible child .