s. 1360 would require the u.s . omb circulars operationalize implementation for agencies . the social security act , however , prohibits ssa from sharing state data with federal agencies that do not pay benefits . agencies may discover similar statutory obstacles as they try to formalize data sharing agreements , as required by s. 1360 . one option for identifying these statutory obstacles and making them known to congress would be to require the secretary of the treasury to include them in its report on data analytics . s. 1360 requires the secretary to submit a report within 180 days of enactment that includes a description of "multiple agencies and programs for which comparison of data could show payment duplication. as part of that review , the secretary could be required to work with agencies to determine whether any statutory barriers to sharing that data exist . another option would be to require the omb director to include statutory barriers in its annual report on the implementation of s. 1360 . s. 1360 includes language that would permit ssa to share state death data with federal agencies that do not issue benefit payments — agencies that are currently prohibited from accessing state death data by the social security act . the first such annual report would be required not more than one year after the enactment of s. 1360 . burtoni also discussed the degree to which agencies utilize the dmf . as noted , ssa receives death data from state governments . ssa , therefore , must determine whether an agency is eligible for access to the full dmf on a case - by - case basis . as of may 8 , 2013 , ssa had granted full access to only six federal agencies , all of which make benefit payments: centers for medicare and medicaid services ( cms ) department of defense ( dod ) department of veterans affairs ( va ) internal revenue service ( irs ) office of personnel management ( opm ) railroad retirement board ( rrb ) agencies are generally required to reimburse ssa for the "reasonable cost of sharing the [dmf] data. despite this , burtoni noted that ssa is not reimbursed by all agencies for access to the full dmf . the va is statutorily exempt from paying ssa , so it does not reimburse ssa at all . neither does opm , which has an arrangement with ssa under which the agencies exchange information at no cost to either party . cms and dod do reimburse ssa , but at different amounts . other federal agencies — including some that pay benefits — purchase only the partial dmf . these agencies include the departments of labor , agriculture , and justice . the partial dmf excludes data provided by states — estimated at about 11 million death reports . the agencies that pay benefits may be eligible for access to the full dmf , but they have not requested access . burtoni did not explain why some benefit - paying agencies had not requested access to the full dmf . in response to issues raised at the may 8 , 2013 , hearing , chairman carper introduced s. 1360 , the improper payments agency cooperation enhancement act of 2013 .