most of these changes affected the annual premiums . following several increases , fha decreased the annual mortgage insurance premiums that it charges in january 2015 . the current annual premiums are at their lowest levels since the beginning of october 2010 , though they are higher than the premiums that fha was charging previously . in recent years , as the capital ratio has increased over 2% , some industry groups and housing advocates have called for fha to further reduce the mortgage insurance premiums it charges for forward mortgages ( or to reduce the amount of time that it charges the premiums ) , arguing that the mmi fund is strong enough to take such steps to increase the affordability of fha - insured mortgages . the improvement in the mmi fund's capital ratio in fy2018 again led to calls from some advocates and industry groups to decrease the mortgage insurance premiums . however , fha has reportedly indicated that it is not likely to reduce the premiums in the near future . on january 9 , 2017 , in the last weeks of the obama administration , fha had announced that it would again decrease the annual mortgage insurance premiums charged to borrowers who took out new fha - insured mortgages that closed on or after january 27 , 2017 . however , on the first day of the trump administration , before the new premiums had gone into effect , fha announced that it was suspending the planned premium reduction . in its announcement , fha indicated a need to further study the impact that the fee decrease could have on the insurance fund and the long - term financial viability of fha . in its fy2017 annual report to congress on the financial status of the mmi fund , fha estimated that had the premium decrease gone into effect , the capital ratio for the mmi fund would have been 1.76% in fy2017 , below the statutorily mandated level of 2% . the lower capital ratio would have resulted from the combination of an estimated decrease of $3.2 billion in the net present value of expected future cash flows on insured mortgages ( stemming from lower premiums that would have been paid on fha - insured mortgages originated in fy2017 , including some borrowers refinancing their existing fha - insured mortgages into new mortgages with lower premiums ) and an estimated increase of $45 billion in fha's insurance - in - force ( stemming from more people obtaining fha - insured mortgages as a result of the premium decrease ) . these estimated differences in the net present value of future cash flows and insurance - in - force also would have reduced the economic net worth and the capital ratio for the forward mortgage portfolio alone . however , based on the figures provided in the annual report , the estimated capital ratio for forward mortgages alone would still have remained above 2% if the premium decrease had gone into effect , even though the capital ratio for the mmi fund as a whole ( including both forward mortgages and hecms ) would have fallen below that threshold .