502 ( f ) . this provision of federal law provides that "a member of the national guard may ... without his consent , but with the pay and allowances provided by law ... be ordered to perform training or other duty in addition to [inactive duty for training or annual training]. the advantage of using this authority is that the national guard personnel called will receive federal pay and benefits and are entitled to certain legal protections as though they were in federal service , but they remain under the control of their state or territorial governor and are therefore not subject to the restrictions of the posse comitatus act . such activation can only occur with the approval of the department of defense . finally , the national guard can be activated in a purely federal status . when federally activated , national guard personnel operate under the control of the president , receive federal pay and benefits , and are subject to the posse comitatus act . the u.s. department of agriculture ( usda ) has several agencies that provide emergency and disaster assistance , including the farm service agency , the natural resources conservation service , and rural development . the majority of usda assistance does not require a stafford declaration . each of these declarations are described in more detail in the following sections . under the stafford act , the costs of response and recovery efforts are usually split between the state and the federal government . the stafford act contains language detailing the amount the federal government must pay to the state for eligible repairs , restoration projects , and replacements of damaged facilities . the formula is called a "cost - share," and the stafford act provides that the federal share "shall be not less than 75 percent. the cost - share can be adjusted to reduce , but not increase , the state share . the reduced state share is known as a cost - share waiver . in most cases , waivers are adjusted according to fema regulatory authority and carried out by the executive branch through administrative actions based on per capita preliminary damage estimates . additionally , as part of a proactive federal response , dod could preposition assets in anticipation of a request . certain defense officials can provide dsca in a limited manner using "immediate response" authority . immediate response authority enables local military commanders and certain dod civilians to act immediately to "save lives , prevent human suffering , or mitigate great property damage within the united states" when they receive a request for assistance from a civil authority under conditions that are "imminently serious" and when time "does not permit approval from higher authority. assistance provided under this authority might include providing medical care , restoring critical public services , and distributing food and other supplies . however , commanders using this authority are obligated to seek approval or authorization through their chain of command as soon as possible . the department of defense may also provide support in response to a "request for assistance" from state , local , or tribal entities , or from another federal agency .