the program has not been funded since fy2010 . the perkins iv performance data submitted by states and local providers has been criticized for its lack of validity , reliability , and consistency . because of the lack of validity , reliability , and consistency , programs are sometimes deemed to be of unproven quality , questions arise about the extent to which cte completers are prepared for college or careers , and it is difficult to assess cte student and program outcomes from a national perspective . perkins iv does not establish standard definitions or methodologies for collecting and measuring the indicators of performance . states have developed differing methodologies for measuring each of the performance indicators ( see box below ) . a 2009 report by the government accountability office ( gao ; hereinafter referred to as the 2009 gao perkins iv report ) observed that the flexibility within the perkins iv performance measures , which allows states flexibility to structure and evaluate their cte programs to meet state / local needs , frustrates the evaluation of the effectiveness and outcomes of cte programs nationally . since perkins iv prohibits ed from issuing regulations except to administer and ensure compliance with the specific requirements of the act , ed is collaborating with states to improve the validity , reliability , consistency , and quality of perkins iv data . in march 2007 to combat the data discrepancies , ed recommended standard definitions and measurement approaches through nonregulatory guidance . there was little evidence of academic curriculum integration from secondary to postsecondary education . of the pos high school graduates , 17% enrolled in the same pos at the pos postsecondary institution . data on the postsecondary enrollment outcomes of the remainder of pos high school graduates was incomplete . in 2010 , the nrccte published preliminary results from a qualitative analysis of the status of pos implementation in six states that had shown overt interest in implementing pos successfully . a key implementation challenge indicated by surveyed stakeholders was the difficulty developing and sustaining relationships between academic and cte instructors at the secondary level in order to integrate curriculum and between secondary and postsecondary instructors to link instruction . the role of linkages between secondary and postsecondary education may again receive attention in a reauthorization . the workforce investment act of 1998 ( wia ; p.l . 105-220 ) , the main federal workforce development legislation , was enacted to bring about increased coordination among federal workforce development and related programs . since perkins iv is part of the nation's workforce development system , some stakeholders have advocated a stronger relationship between the two programs . perkins iv primarily promotes three types of linkages between the act and wia: unified planning , stakeholder consultation and coordination , and fund consolidation . rather than submitting a separate perkins iv state plan , the state plan may be submitted as part of a section 501 unified plan . section 501 of the wia allows states to develop a single plan for two or more of several eligible programs and activities .