these and other issues are discussed in more depth below . crs report rl33743 , trade promotion authority ( tpa ) and the role of congress in trade policy , by [author name scrubbed] . crs report rs21004 , trade promotion authority and fast - track negotiating authority for trade agreements: major votes , by [author name scrubbed] . it has also contributed to rising incomes . in the united states , jobs are supported by u.s. exports to foreign affiliates and u.s. production abroad , as well as foreign firms operating in the united states . these complex production networks further complicate the trade and employment policy debates , and raise other questions such as what constitutes an "american - made" product and how will innovation and production strategies continue to change the economic landscape . at the same time , while global economic integration has increased trade and economic growth , it has also exposed u.s. firms and workers to greater competition from lower - cost and more efficient producers in certain sectors and increasingly , from state - owned - enterprises ( soes ) . globalization and the larger volume of imports of goods and services , therefore , may force some u.s. firms to make costly adjustments to remain competitive . in some cases this may take the form of worker dislocation and shifts to production abroad , and may raise concerns in congress over distributional issues of global production and trade . in sum , u.s. costs and benefits linked to an increasingly interconnected global economy may run in many directions . the discussion is no longer simply about free trade versus protectionism . the debate involves domestic and foreign macroeconomic policies , the participation of foreign states in markets , the competitiveness of u.s. firms and workers , implications of value - chain and cross - country production , and the financial stability of the international economy . for the united states , an overarching goal is to maintain its high standard of living by remaining innovative , productive , and internationally competitive , while safeguarding those stakeholders who otherwise may be left behind in a fast - changing global economy , suggesting a strong supporting role for complementary domestic policies . these changes have also raised new trade policy issues , some of which are being discussed in current u.s. free trade agreement negotiations . congress is in a unique position to address these issues , particularly given its constitutional mandate for legislating and overseeing international trade and financial policy . in addition to broader congressional oversight of the economic and political context of the current u.s. participation in the global economy , this report highlights major international trade and finance issues that the 113th congress may address . the u.s. constitution assigns express authority over foreign trade to congress . article i , section 8 , gives congress the power to "regulate commerce with foreign nations" and to "lay and collect taxes , duties , imposts , and excises. for roughly the first 150 years of the united states , congress exercised its authority over foreign trade by setting tariff rates on all imported products .