oversee the activities of firstnet . lead the formation of domestic and international internet policies such as for data privacy and the free flow of information globally . monitor broadband grants awarded under the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 . many of the ntia's functions are performed in conjunction with other agencies . the ntia's role as liaison may lead to overlapping responsibilities , leading to duplication of effort across departments and agencies . at the same time , rapid advances in communications technology have changed the mission of the ntia in areas such as spectrum policy . as an example , policy makers may wish to consider if some of the ntia's shared obligations might be effectively and efficiently transferred to its partners , allowing the ntia to focus on communications policies that are considered by many to be key to future economic growth and development . as it reviews communications and spectrum policy , the 113 th congress may also choose to consider if the current structure of the ntia might be better aligned to its new responsibilities . for purposes of oversight , congress may — for example — choose to examine the efficacy of the ntia's spectrum management activities , and to evaluate the agency's compliance with the spectrum act ( p.l . 112-96 , title vi ) . oversight might cover requirements of the act regarding the transfer of spectrum from federal to commercial use and the act's provisions for public safety . btop grant programs are in the final stages of completion . as required by the middle class tax relief and job creation act of 2012 ( p.l . 112-96 ) , the ntia is commencing a $135 million grant program to help states plan for participation in a new , nationwide public safety broadband network . to deploy the new network , the act established the first responder network authority , or firstnet , as an independent authority within the ntia and assigned to the agency various responsibilities to support firstnet . firstnet is funded through the public safety trust fund , established by congress to receive revenues from auctions of certain spectrum licenses . firstnet has access to an advance of nearly $2 billion from the u.s. treasury against expected proceeds of sales of spectrum licenses . another $5 billion in funding is expected from the public safety trust fund as auction revenues are deposited in the account . the president's budget request for the ntia for fy2014 was $52.1 million for salaries and expenses . the consolidated and further continuing appropriations act , 2013 , provided $45.1 million for salaries and expenses for fy2013 ; no funding was appropriated for separate programs . in fy2010 , the public telecommunications facilities program ( ptfp ) represented half of the ntia's budget appropriations . in fy2011 , the total enacted budget appropriations amount for the ntia increased by 4% to $41.6 million ; funding for the ptfp was transferred to administrative expenses and salaries .