appendix a . most are skeptical . so this seemingly leaves the united states and its allies , many might reluctantly agree , with few better choices than the current apparent path . on the other hand , there are perhaps early indicators that congress' attitudes regarding the reliability of the "assured destruction" deterrence policy of the cold war era may be changing under the circumstance of both nuclear and missile delivery system proliferation . among the pieces of evidence suggesting this change in attitude is declaration 2 in the resolution of ratification accompanying new start . but would iran change its pattern of behavior short of a change in regime ? at the same time , is it realistic to believe that ending iranian interest in acquiring ballistic missiles or pursuing a space launch capability is even possible ? some point out that other countries have given up their missile programs entirely , or forsworn ballistic missiles while developing an effective space launch program alone . this is because declaration 2 challenges even a mature missile power such as russia to adopt a more defensive strategic posture in order to provide a political and policy basis for devaluing offensive missile and nuclear weapon programs in a broader grouping of threatening and potentially threatening states . in this case , the focus on assessing the progress of ballistic missile and nuclear weapons programs of rogue states might become less intense in congress because responsive u.s. policies will become more broadly based . in short , specific actions by iran may become a less powerful driver of u.s. strategic deterrence policy than is the case today . such a change in attitude might imply that defensive options will no longer be seen as 'destabilizing' , as was the dominant view during the cold war . although the behavior of rogue states such as iran may be catalyzing this change in attitude , the language of declaration 2 also carries the strong implication that in the future congress will gauge the missile threat more broadly than just focusing on the activities and progress of ballistic missile and nuclear programs in such rogue states . for the time being , however , congress will likely continue to take a focused interest in iran's role in the region and in its missile programs . the "great prophet" exercises ( 2006-2012 ) since 2006 , iran has conducted various military exercises that included some number of ballistic missile tests . iran tests missiles at other times as well , but these particular missile tests are held in conjunction with other conventional land , sea , and air military exercises . these are called "great prophet" exercises by iran and sometimes "noble prophet" or "holy prophet" by others . from open sources it is neither possible to identify with precision the number and type of all missiles launched during these exercises , nor to identify all other test launches by iran at other times . nevertheless , these ballistic missile exercises provide considerable information to u.s. and other intelligence communities that assess iran's ballistic missile programs .