provisions in h.r . 152 as it passed the house included "mitigation" as part of the purpose of the funds , without separating that purpose from recovery . in another circumstance , provisions in senate - passed h.r . 1 specifically identified subset of funds from the total appropriation to an account that may be used exclusively for "mitigation. in addition , sections 1104 and 1105 of senate - passed h.r . 1 , which were general provisions applying to all funds in the legislation , would have encouraged funds provided in the bill to be used in a manner that mitigates future risks . requested funding levels are provided by appropriations account in table a - 1 , below . it provides a summary and brief analysis of the administration's budget request . a series of columns notes the agency , bureau , and account for which appropriations were requested . the table then notes how much the administration sought as funds needed for recovery and repair of damage , as opposed to mitigation of future disaster impacts , and a total of the two categories . the table then notes what percentage that request is of the overall total sought . finally the table includes a quick assessment of whether the appropriation is intended to pay for damaged federal government property or provide other disaster assistance . these final categories on potential recipients are not mutually exclusive at the account level . while congress did not address these specific factors in p.l . 113-2 , the language of the request was reflected in the text of section 1104 of senate - passed h.r . for example , section 1104 ( a ) of senate - passed h.r . 1 would have directed federal agencies , in partnership with state , tribal , and local governments to " inform plans for response , recovery , and rebuilding to reduce vulnerabilities from and build long - term resiliency to future extreme weather events , sea level rise , and coastal flooding" ( italics added ) . further , the provision stated that with respect to "repairing , rebuilding , or restoring infrastructure and restoring land , project sponsors shall consider , where appropriate , the increased risks and vulnerabilities associated with future extreme weather events , sea level rise and coastal flooding" ( italics added ) . section 1104 ( b ) would also have made available funds under the legislation for the coordinated development of "regional projections and assessments of future risks" to help improve the plans required under 1104 ( a ) . in general , the impact of this full provision would have depended on how the relevant federal agencies interpreted and implemented the directive to inform their plans , and how recipient project sponsors interpreted and implemented the directive to consider these increased risks .