, fuel ) cost of production . wholesale prices are cleared at the intersection of supply bid and load demand . as such , the amount of economic activity ( load demand ) and the price of fuel can significantly influence wholesale market clearing prices . in many rto - managed markets , natural gas generation typically sets the market clearing price during peak demand times when wholesale prices are highest and when generator margin opportunities are the greatest . low natural gas prices result in lower natural gas generation costs , which reduce the wholesale clearing price and therefore the revenue and margins available to all generators . these three rtos were selected for the analysis in an effort to limit the scope of this report . furthermore , these rtos are commonly cited as markets that are being affected by wind power generation . as a result , there is no discussion of wind power market impacts within cost - of - service , vertically integrated electricity markets that are common in the west and southeast regions of the united states , nor is there any discussion of how wind power is managed by federally owned transmission system operators such as the bonneville power administration . wind electricity generation in the united states has experienced rapid growth over the last two decades . in 1992 , cumulative installed u.s. wind capacity was approximately 1,500 megawatts ( mw ) . in august of 2012 , the u.s. wind industry reached a new milestone of 50,000 mw of installed wind power capacity . in 2011 , 3% of electricity generated in the united states was derived from wind power , compared to less than 1% in 1992 . growth in the u.s. wind power sector has been influenced by complementary policies and incentives at both the state and federal level . states essentially create demand for wind power projects by implementing renewable portfolio standard ( rps ) policies that require a certain amount of renewable power to be generated by a certain date . and ( 3 ) does wind power impact electric system reliability ? as of september 2012 , 29 states and the district of columbia had established binding rps policies . each state rps policy is unique with respect to its design , goals , and means of compliance . federal incentives that support wind electricity generation are generally provided in the form of tax credits and depreciation benefits for qualified wind power projects . federal tax incentives for wind power provide an economic incentive for wind projects and they may reduce the financial impact to rate payers in states that require a certain amount of renewable electricity generation . this report focuses on data and information available for competitive electricity markets that are managed by a regional transmission operator ( rto ) or independent system operator ( iso ) . the federal production tax credit is currently 2.2 cents ( $0.022 ) for each kilowatt - hour of electricity produced from a qualified wind project . under current law , tax credit incentives for new wind power projects are scheduled to end on january 1 , 2013 . u.s. wind power growth has resulted in several challenges that are being addressed in various power markets throughout the country .