security . over the past 15 years , a significant percentage of foreign aid has been allocated to countries where security concerns have presented major obstacles to implementing , monitoring and evaluating foreign aid . a 2012 evaluation of a usaid agricultural development program in rural pakistan , for example , states "the operating environment for development projects has been especially testing in recent years in the presence of an insurgency and frequent targeted killings and kidnappings. development staff in afghanistan and iraq in particular have not always been able to safely visit project sites to verify that a structure has been built or supplies delivered , much less be out on the streets conducting the types of surveys that certain evaluations would normally call for . a 2011 usaid inspector general report noted that more than half of performance audits in iraq at that time indicated security concerns , and a 2016 sigar report noted that the drawdown of u.s. and coalition military personnel in afghanistan , and the deteriorating security situation , made it difficult or impossible for civilian agency personnel to oversee projects first - hand . even in less hostile environments , security concerns can undermine evaluation quality . for example , a 2011 evaluation of office of transition initiatives governance activities in colombia noted that "security considerations limited to some degree the evaluation team's freedom to interview community members in project sites at will . this fact made it difficult to be certain that field research did not suffer from a form of sampling bias. while security challenges may weigh against the use of aid in certain regions , the most insecure places are sometimes where the u.s. foreign policy interests are greatest , and policymakers must consider whether the risk of being unable to evaluate even the performance of an aid intervention is worth taking for other reasons . agency and personal incentives . given discretion in the use and conduct of evaluations , observers have noted the inclination of foreign assistance officials to avoid formal evaluation for fear of drawing attention to the shortcomings of the programs on which they work . while agency staff are clearly interested in learning about program results , many are reportedly defensive about evaluation , concerned that evaluations identifying poor program results may have personal career implications , such as loss of control over a project , damage to professional reputation , budget cuts , or other potential career repercussions . as explained by one usaid direct - hire in response to a 2001 survey , "if you don't ask [about results] , you don't fail , and your budget isn't cut. that same study revealed that staff felt more pressure to produce success stories than to produce balanced and rigorous evaluations , and that "professional staff do not see any agency - wide incentive to advance learning through evaluations. few observers consider risk taking and accepting failure as a necessary component of learning to be hallmarks of usaid or state department culture , but a shift in this attitude may be in progress . according to usaid administrator gayle smith , there has been "a cultural shift from checking the box that everything is fine to here's what we're learning and here's what happened.