compliance with the rfs is measured using rins . when qualifying biofuels are produced , each gallon is assigned a rin . 110-140 ) significantly expanded this mandate . the rfs mandate has been a major impetus to the development of u.s. biofuels industries , especially the ethanol and biodiesel industries . in 2005 , the united states produced 3.9 billion gallons of ethanol and 0.1 billion gallons of biodiesel . by 2013 , production had increased to roughly 14 billion gallons of ethanol and over 1 billion gallons of biodiesel . covered parties meet their obligations under the rfs by surrendering renewable fuel credits to epa equal to the number of gallons in their annual obligation . these credits , known as renewable identification numbers ( rins ) , are generated when a batch of biofuel is produced , and separated from the fuel by obligated parties ( generally gasoline and diesel fuel refiners or blenders ) . once separated , these rins may be traded like other commodities . recent civil and criminal action against parties accused of registering and selling fraudulent rins has raised questions about the integrity of the rin market and epa's oversight of the market . further , some stakeholders have argued that recent rin market volatility indicates that obligated parties are facing challenges in complying with the mandates . this report outlines the rfs and the current rin system , discusses the current market for various rins , and outlines policy considerations to address rin fraud going forward . for 2013 , the rfs required the blending of 16.55 billion gallons of renewable fuel in transportation fuels , including at least 1.28 billion gallons of biomass - based diesel substitutes ( bbd ) . the rfs increases to 36 billion gallons by 2022 with an increasing share coming from "advanced biofuels" — biofuels produced from feedstocks other than corn starch — including cellulosic biofuel and bbd fuels . as was the case in previous years , in 2013 the vast majority of the mandate was met with u.s. corn ethanol ( and a smaller amount of biodiesel , as well as sugarcane ethanol from brazil ) . by 2015 corn ethanol's share of the rfs is effectively capped at 15 billion gallons per year . the eisa amendments to the rfs specifically mandate the use of cellulosic biofuel ( 16 billion gallons by 2022 ) and biomass - based diesel fuel ( at least 1.0 billion gallons annually by 2012 ) . however , advanced biofuels , especially cellulosic fuels , have been slow to develop and fuel production lags the eisa's mandate schedule . within the overall rfs mandate , there are sub - mandates for specific types of fuel . for example , for 2013 eisa required the use of 16.55 billion gallons of biofuels , of which 2.75 billion must be "advanced biofuels. within the advanced biofuel carve - out for 2013 , at least 1.28 billion gallons were to be biomass - based diesel ( bbd ) fuels 6 million gallons were required for cellulosic biofuels .