amtrak owned no infrastructure at the time of its creation . it was structured as a contracting agency , and amtrak trains were operated by private railroads over tracks they owned . the company operates approximately 44 routes over 21,000 miles of track . most of that track is owned by freight rail companies ; amtrak owns about 625 route miles . the primary section it owns — the northeast corridor ( nec ) — includes some of the most heavily used segments of track in the nation . the nec is used not only by amtrak's intercity trains , but also by regional commuter lines and some freight trains . by far , the greatest volume of nec traffic consists of commuter trains , not amtrak trains . amtrak also operates corridor routes ( covering distances under 400 miles ) and long - distance routes ( over 400 miles in length ) . some of amtrak's corridor routes are financially supported by states they serve . amtrak also operates commuter service under contract with state and local commuter authorities in various parts of the country . several years later , as congress was dealing with the bankruptcy of the penn central railroad , congress decided that amtrak would receive much of the trackage owned by the penn central in the 450-mile corridor running from washington , dc , north through philadelphia and new york city to boston , along with shorter lines serving harrisburg , pa , and springfield , ma . the northeast corridor traverses one of the most densely populated and economically important corridors in the world and carries over 259 million passengers annually ( the vast majority aboard trains run by regional commuter operators ) . the nec also carries freight trains run by private railroads . ( amtrak also inherited 96 miles of track in michigan , and controls short lengths of track in other locations. ) portions of the nec are well over a century old , and the alignment was laid out at a time when the top speed of trains was much less than is possible today . this has caused problems for amtrak's efforts to improve service on the nec . amtrak has identified three general issues: a large backlog of capital projects needed to bring the nec to a state of good repair ; limits on the number of trains that can operate on the nec , especially due to bottlenecks at tunnels ; and increasing demands for service on the nec , including service by commuter operators . on march 4 , 2015 , the house passed h.r . 749 , the passenger rail reform and investment act of 2015 . this bill would authorize $7 billion in funding for passenger rail programs , including $5.8 billion for amtrak and $1.2 billion for grants to states for passenger rail activities ( including states along the nec ) over four years , and would make a number of changes to federal intercity passenger rail policies . proposed changes include the following: restructuring dot's amtrak accounts into an nec account and a national network account ( §101 ) . this will end the cross - subsidization of operating losses on amtrak's long - distance routes with the operating profits from the nec .