5557 would restrict voter id requirements . it would amend hava and nvra to prohibit requiring a voter id that has an associated cost . some require photo id , others nonphoto id , and yet others nondocument identification . some states with id requirements accept a broad range of documents , while others permit only a narrow range . some states permit voters without id to confirm their identity through another means , while others do not . as shown in figure 1 and the two tables in the appendix , 32 states require a voter to show id before voting at a polling place . the other 18 states and the district of columbia do not require a voter to provide any id to vote — they have a range of nondocument requirements instead . the tables briefly summarize the major requirements for each state , describing the types of ids accepted , whether the requirements apply to absentee and mail - in voting as well as in - person balloting , exceptions to the id requirements for specified classes of voters , the recourse available to voters who do not present an accepted id , year of enactment of the requirement ( for photo id states ) and additional information such as whether an expired id will be accepted and whether the state makes an id available without charge to qualified voters . specific types of accepted ids ( eg , passport ) are listed in the tables if they are specified in state law or guidance . a glossary of summary terms and abbreviations in the table ( in addition to postal abbreviations , used for all states except idaho ) is below: in both tables , states with names in italics ( eg , alabama ) are categorized in this report as having a strictly enforced voter id requirement . the states with names not in italics ( eg , florida ) are categorized as not having a strictly enforced requirement . figure 1 depicts state id requirements as organized into five categories , based on whether the state requires a document id , whether an id must have the voter's photograph , and whether the id requirement is strictly enforced . table a - 1 describes the specific requirements for photo id states , and table a - 2 for states requiring an id that need not be photographic . the differences among requirements in the states are sufficiently nuanced that observers may reasonably differ in characterizing a state's requirements as strictly enforced or not . for purposes of this report , whether an id requirement is considered strictly enforced is based on interpretation of the requirement as described in state law or available guidance . in a state with a strictly enforced requirement , a voter who does not present the required id at the polling place — with certain exceptions that vary among the states — either cannot cast a ballot at all or must cast a provisional ballot and take action after leaving the polling place to verify his or her identity in order for the ballot to be counted .