agi is often referred to as "the line. then , the tax filer subtracts personal exemptions , or fixed dollar amounts per spouse and dependent child ( step 3 ) . the tax filer then subtracts the greater of either the sum of all of their below - the - line , or itemized deductions , or the standard deduction , which is a fixed amount based on filing status , in order to arrive at taxable income ( step 4 ) . the marginal tax rates are applied to taxable income ( step 5 ) to arrive at a preliminary tax liability . finally , tax credits are subtracted from preliminary tax liability ( step 6 ) to arrive at final tax liability . the provisions in figure 1 surrounded by dotted lines are covered in this report . simply stated , deductions reduce taxable income . each deduction reduces tax liability by the amount of deduction times the tax filer's marginal tax rate . in contrast , a tax credit reduces tax liability on a dollar - for - dollar basis because it would be applied after the marginal tax rate schedule . an individual in a 35% tax bracket would receive a reduction in taxes of $35 for each $100 deduction while an individual in a 25% tax bracket would receive a reduction in taxes of $25 for each $100 deduction . hence , the same deduction can be worth different amounts to different tax filers depending on their marginal tax bracket . the tax savings from deductions are generally equal to the tax filer's marginal tax rate times the amount of the deduction . so higher - income tax filers typically benefit more than lower - income tax filers from deductions . deductions serve four main purposes in the tax code . first , they can account for large , unusual , and necessary personal expenditures , such as the deduction for extraordinary medical expenses . second , they are used to encourage certain types of activities , such as homeownership and charitable contributions . third , they account for and ease the burden of paying for nonfederal forms of taxes , such as state and local taxes . fourth , deductions adjust for the expenses of earning income , such as deductions for work - related employee expenses . the following sections define each form of deduction and explain in greater detail how deductions are used in the calculation of an individual's tax liability . to arrive at final tax liability , all taxpayers may be able to claim above - the - line deductions whether they claim itemized deductions or the standard deduction . each of these deductions has a specific line on the form 1040 ( eg , line 23 for teacher classroom expenses ) . figure 2 shows how tax deductions appear on the irs form 1040 . these deductions are commonly referred to as above - the - line deductions , because they reduce a tax filer's agi ( the line ) . above - the - line deductions are sometimes also called adjustments to income , because they generally represent costs incurred to earn income .