no action was taken on the bill . ( for additional information on the wood heater proposal , see crs report r43489 , epa's proposed wood stove / wood heater regulations: frequently asked questions . ) the obama administration's epa has also reviewed several national ambient air quality standards ( naaqs ) , as it is required to do by section 109 of the clean air act . naaqs do not directly regulate emissions from sources of pollution ; rather , they represent epa's formal judgment regarding how clean the air must be to protect public health and welfare . the standards set in motion monitoring and planning requirements , which in turn can lead to designation of "nonattainment areas" and the imposition of emission controls . since 2009 , epa has proposed and promulgated numerous regulations implementing the clean air act ( and other pollution control statutes that it administers ) . critics of the administration , both within congress and outside of it , have accused the agency of reaching beyond the authority given it by congress and ignoring or underestimating the costs and economic impacts of these rules . at least seven bills that would have overturned specific regulations or limited the agency's authority ( h.r . 3409 ) passed the house in the 112 th congress . in addition to the regulation of greenhouse gas emissions , power plants , and naaqs , discussed above , two of the epa regulations that attracted the most attention were the maximum achievable control technology standards for cement kilns and boilers ( referred to as the "portland cement mact," and the "boiler mact," respectively ) . in both cases , epa agreed to reconsider rules that it had promulgated . on december 20 , 2012 , epa administrator jackson signed revised rules for both , giving the affected industries additional time to comply , and making the final standards less stringent than those originally promulgated . while epa has been widely criticized by industry groups and many in congress for overreaching , the agency maintains that in promulgating these and other rules , it is complying with statutory mandates placed on the agency by congress . the agency states that its critics' focus on the cost of controls obscures the benefits of new regulations , which , it estimates , far exceed the costs ; and it maintains that pollution control is an important source of economic activity , exports , and american jobs . environmental groups generally disagree that the agency has overreached in setting clean air act standards . these groups often maintain that the agency's standards are not stringent enough , do not meet statutory requirements , or disregard the findings of the agency's science advisors . the result is that epa clean air act standards generally are challenged in court both by industry and by environmental groups , with various states supporting each side . the resulting court decisions often set epa's agenda as much as congress or the administration . confirmation of a new epa administrator as well as oversight hearings gave the 113 th congress early venues to revisit these issues .