detection tickets are similar to detection paper . the ticket is waved in the air or used with a hand pump to determine if chemical agents are present . detection tubes use a similar technology , but rely on a hand pump to draw air samples through the tube , which discolors in the presence of an agent . a disadvantage to these techniques is that other substances can also dissolve these pigments , causing false positives . the pigments involved can be specific to a type of agent , so an array of papers , tickets , or tubes may be required to identify the exact agent encountered . handheld detectors , such as the chemical agent monitor ( cam ) , are able to detect some chemical agents , namely mustard agents and nerve agents . automatic sampling devices , such as the automatic chemical agent detector / alarm ( acada ) , are also employed to provide automated , constant atmospheric sampling . these devices sometimes use a technique called ion mobility spectroscopy to detect the presence of chemical agents . much of the above equipment is commercially available , and hazardous material response teams could use it to assess a chemical release . typically , hazardous material response teams possess detection paper , tickets , or tubes , but these teams may not have standardized equipment across jurisdictions . to aid first responders in choosing the best or most appropriate system for their use , the department of homeland security has provided guidelines to assess various types of detectors . another way of detecting a chemical terrorism event would be through the public health system . the sudden arrival of chemical casualties in local hospitals will quickly alert health care professionals . since september 11 , 2001 , increases in public health networking have improved information sharing between localities . this may increase the likelihood of identifying , for example , a covert release of blister agents through identification of symptoms . public health monitoring also may aid in forensic investigations following a covert event , especially if symptoms are delayed . such public health monitoring may also provide opportunities to identify terrorists who may have self - inflicted chemical weapon injuries . additionally , the laboratory response network has been established , which links together diagnostic laboratories for the identification of chemical agents , as well as disease outbreaks . in february 2012 , the director of the defense intelligence agency identified that "terrorist organizations are working to acquire and employ chemical , biological , and radiological materials. many experts believe that it would be difficult for terrorist groups to use chemical agents as weapons of mass destruction . in 1993 , the office of technology assessment estimated that vx , the most lethal of nerve agents , spread uniformly and efficiently would require tons of material to kill 50% of the people in a 100 km 2 area . on the other hand , chemical agents might be effectively used as weapons of terror in situations where limited or enclosed space might decrease the required amounts of chemical .