to date , the united states has not formally approved these reforms . congress plays a pivotal role in determining the u.s. position on the current imf reform agenda . following the absence of any imf authorizations or appropriations in the fy2015 omnibus legislation , imf managing director christine lagarde requested that fund staff prepare alternative reform options that could be enacted without u.s. authorizations or appropriations . in response to concerns among imf member nations that the institution was underfunded given the potential global needs for crisis funding and that the developing and emerging economies were underrepresented , member nations agreed in december 2010 to an ambitious package of reforms . if completed , these reforms would double the imf's quota resources and allow emerging and developing countries to own a larger share of the institution and take on more responsibility for the fund's governance . in order for key parts of the reform package to take effect , imf rules dictate that the reforms must be formally accepted by three - fifths of imf members ( 113 members out of 188 members ) representing 85% of the total voting power . under this formula , although unanimous support is not required , approval by the united states , the imf's largest stakeholder , is essential . in its budget requests for fy2014 , fy2015 , and fy2016 , the obama administration has included authorization and appropriation requests for the united states to endorse and ratify the 2010 reform package . during the spring of 2014 , during debate on a ukraine - assistance package , imf funding legislation was included in the senate version of the bill but was stripped out prior to passage . congress has at least four options regarding the reform package . the authorizing committees for the imf are the senate committee on foreign relations and the house committee on financial services . to date , no action has been taken by congress on the necessary legislation . in october 2014 , imf member countries agreed that if the 2010 reform package was not completed by the end of the 2014 , other options for advancing quota and governance reform should be considered . since the beginning of 2015 , two interim options that are reportedly being discussed are ( 1 ) "de - linking" the imf quota increase and governance reform proposals and ( 2 ) ad hoc quota increases , that would raise the quota and voting rights of a select group of under - represented countries . delinking imf quota and governance is highly unlikely . if the united states allows the imf quota increase to proceed without participating , the u.s. quota share would be expected to fall below 15% , and the united states would forfeit its veto power in supermajority decisions requiring 85% of the voting share . for this reason , it is extremely unlikely that any administration would consent to the board reform amendment without the quota increase . most experts believe that an ad hoc increase will be the likely interim measure pursued by imf membership . in particular , the belgium and netherlands seats merged .