112-95 ) , which was enacted in february 2012 . specifically , section 308 of the act requires faa to establish and implement a safety assessment system for all repair stations approved under 14 c.f.r . part 145 by february 14 , 2013 , with assessments based on the type , scope , and complexity of work performed ; faa to ensure that foreign repair stations are subject to appropriate inspections consistent with existing u.s. requirements ; that agreements with foreign aviation authorities or other foreign government agencies provide an opportunity for faa to conduct independent inspections of foreign repair stations when warranted by safety concerns ; faa to notify congressional oversight committees within 30 days of initiating formal negotiations with foreign governments on new maintenance safety or maintenance implementation agreements ; faa to issue an annual report describing improvements to identify and track where air carrier ( 14 c.f.r . part 121 ) maintenance is performed ; a staffing model regarding the number and geographic placement of faa inspectors ; inspector training ; and a quality assessment of faa and foreign authority inspections performed under existing agreements ; faa to request that all member countries of the international civil aviation organization establish drug and alcohol testing programs encompassing all safety - sensitive maintenance workers that perform work on commercial air carrier aircraft ; faa to publish a proposed rule by february 14 , 2013 , to require drug and alcohol testing programs at all part 145 repair stations that service part 121 aircraft , consistent with the laws of the country where the work is performed ; and faa to conduct annual inspections at all foreign repair stations consistent with obligations under international agreements . while u.s. airlines are increasingly sending aircraft overseas for major repairs and overhauls , highly skilled maintenance workers in the united states working on foreign aircraft have helped the united states retain a positive trade balance of aircraft maintenance work in the globalized mro industry . increasing competition in this field coupled with growing opportunities for advanced technical training overseas may reduce this advantage in the future . this report analyzes trends in mro outsourcing and explains the major factors contributing to them . it then considers safety consequences , employment effects , and regulatory implications of increased foreign maintenance of u.s. passenger aircraft . there are multiple factors behind airlines' use of foreign maintenance providers . the most commonly mentioned is cost savings from sending mro work to lower - wage countries such as china and el salvador . while this is generally true , there are other factors influencing airlines' decision to perform mro in other countries , including changes in route structures and the increasing availability of mro services in emerging economies . foreign repair stations have been the subject of safety concerns at least since 1995 , when the crash of a u.s. passenger plane was attributed to faulty repair work undertaken abroad ( see text box ) .