the usf receives no federal monies . some consumers may notice a "universal service" line item on their telephone bills . this line item appears when a company chooses to recover its usf contributions directly from its customers by billing them this charge . the fcc permits , but does not require , this charge to be passed on directly to customers . a failure to recertify eligibility will result in removal from the program . consumers apply for lifeline through their local telephone company or designated state agency . the companies in my state ( http: / / www.lifelinesupport.org / ls / companies.aspx ) provided by usac can help locate a lifeline provider in your state . the national association of regulatory utility commissioners ( naruc ) provides a listing and links to state utility commissions ( http: / / www.naruc.org / commissions / commissionslist.cfm ) . telecommunications carriers that provide interstate service and certain other providers of telecommunications services are required to contribute to the federal usf based on a percentage of their end - user interstate and international telecommunications revenues . these companies include wireline telephone companies , wireless telephone companies , paging service providers , and certain voice over internet protocol ( voip ) providers . each company makes a business decision about whether and how to assess charges to recover its universal service obligations . the charge , however , cannot exceed the amount owed to the usf by the company . federal rules prohibit eligible low - income consumers from receiving more than one lifeline discount per household . an eligible consumer may receive a discount on either a wireline or wireless service , but not both . if a household is currently receiving more than one monthly lifeline service , it must select one provider to provide lifeline service and it must contact the other provider to de - enroll from their program . subscribers found to be violating this rule will be de - enrolled and may also be subject to criminal and / or civil penalties . depending on the package selected the subscriber is allocated a set number of usage minutes per month . once the allocation is used the subscriber may choose to pay for additional minutes of use . although not required , most providers that offer a prepaid wireless option provide a wireless phone to the subscriber for free . the cost of this phone is not covered under the lifeline program but is borne by the designated provider . although the prepaid wireless option is growing in popularity the lifeline program also covers a wireline option or a postpaid wireless option . as with the case of the prepaid wireless option the program solely covers the minutes of use , not the device . the lifeline program is available to eligible low - income consumers in every state , territory , and commonwealth , and on tribal lands .