the grocery industry disagrees with this definition . additionally , the interpretation of "variable menu items" has raised grocers' concern because certain prepared items , such as fruit or vegetable platters , vary in composition according to seasonality , altering the calorie and nutrient content . composition of other products may also vary according to brand and ingredient availability . the fda has estimated that grocery stores and supermarkets have approximately one - half of the number of restaurant - type food menu items that a restaurant has that would be covered by the proposed rule . that would be approximately 40 items requiring nutrition labeling in supermarkets and grocery stores , versus approximately 80 items requiring nutrition labeling in restaurants . the grocery industry argues that this estimate is inaccurate , and that many more items at grocery stores would be affected by the adoption of option 1 in the final rule , due to the inclusion of self - service food and food on display , which are prevalent in grocery stores and supermarkets . grocers argue that the fda's estimate would be accurate if the rule only applied to restaurant food ; however , if it applies to restaurant - type food , which would include many self - serve and deli items , then the affected number of items would be closer to 500 to 15,000 items , according to the food marketing institute ( fmi ) . the proposed rule includes clarification of several concepts that were noted but not defined in the aca , including the medium ( i.e. , menu , table tent , place mat ) , placement , and layout of the information provided to consumers . under the law , covered establishments must provide calorie information on menus and menu boards , and must provide other nutrition information upon request for standard menu items . according to the proposed rule , calorie information must be provided adjacent to the name of the menu item so that it is clearly associated with that item . establishments can choose to implement this requirement by including a column on the menu or menu board ( including drive - through menu boards ) with the heading "calories" or "cal" or they may list the number of calories and "calories" or "cal" next to each item . menu boards must also have a prominent , clear , and conspicuous statement on menus and menu boards regarding the availability of written nutrition information for menu items . the written nutrition information must include the same nutrition information that is currently required by law on food package labeling . the fda further proposes that the term "primary writing" be interpreted from a customer's vantage point . this would include drive - through menus , take - out and delivery menus , and information posted on the internet by the covered establishment that a customer would use as the primary writing for placing an order by telephone , fax , or online . at issue is the scope of covered establishments . some have argued that option 1 , as described in table 1 , is too broad and that grocery and convenience stores should not be covered by the rule .