what limitations should be included in statute ? what significance should be given to recommendations from congressional commissions , congressional committees , gao , and other stakeholders ? answers to these questions , drawn from the history of reorganization authority , could provide a basis for evaluating the potential approaches discussed below . government reorganization is often cast in terms of potential administrative benefits , such as improved program effectiveness , greater efficiency , reduced cost , and improved policy integration across related programs . whenever congress has delegated reorganization authority to the president in the past , it has clearly stated in the statutory provisions that the objective of reorganization is such administrative improvement . congress has often required that reorganization plans submitted by the president certify that such improvements are at least part of the objective of the proposed reorganization . in more recent versions of the law , the president is required to articulate the plan's means of achieving such improvements . in addition to these administrative goals , reorganization efforts often have spoken or unspoken political goals and outcomes . the political nature of reorganization arises from the fact that it redistributes power and resources , and interests inside and outside the federal bureaucracy stand to gain or lose in this process . depending on the scope and limitations of the authority available to the president , organizational units and functions might not only be moved , but could be abolished . employees in the reorganized agencies will often be the most directly impacted , but outside interests , such as those who are regulated by , or receive benefits from , such agencies are affected as well . congressional committees may also be impacted by a reorganization , directly through potential jurisdictional changes or indirectly through constituent groups . although a government reorganization may have beneficial outcomes over time , it is axiomatic that it is disruptive , at least in the short term , to the functioning of the organizational systems involved . it is likely to upset existing power dynamics , rearrange relationships , create uncertainty and anxiety , and generally interrupt the flow of work . proponents of a delegation to the president of broad reorganization authority might argue that the president can be more effective than congress in conceptualizing , as well as implementing , government - wide reorganization . some critics argue that congress is often unable to develop consensus and pass meaningful reorganization legislation . where such consensus is arrived at , critics might assert that political , rather than administrative reform concerns are primary in its crafting . opponents of reauthorizing the president's reorganization authority might argue that congress is better suited as a place for sorting out the competing demands and interests involved in broad reorganizations . they might argue that congress , by representing a greater cross section of interests , provides a better forum in which to shape the federal government . critics of presidential reorganization authority might also note that congress has successfully reorganized the federal government , in large and small ways , through the legislative process .