3710d , or implementing regulations . express statutory or regulatory restriction . initially , the office of government ethics notes that conflicting activities include those that are prohibited by statute or by agency supplemental regulations . each federal agency , upon approval from the office of government ethics , is authorized to issue ethics and conflict of interest regulations supplemental to oge's government - wide provisions , which may relate to and bear upon the particular function and mission of that agency . employees must thus examine their individual agency's own regulations on outside employment and conflicts of interest before engaging in outside compensated activity . in addition to specific restrictions on certain kinds of outside employment , it is common for agency supplemental regulations to require the employee to receive express prior approval to engage in outside employment activities . employment which creat es a disqualifying conflict of interest . secondly , the regulations provide that a "conflicting" outside employment would result if that activity necessitated the employee's disqualification and recusal from official matters so central to the individual's governmental duties that it would "materially impair" the employee's capacity to perform his or her official responsibilities . "recusal" or disqualification from participating in a governmental matter under consideration is one of the principal "conflict of interest" avoidance mechanisms in federal law and regulation . under current conflict of interest law and regulation , an employee in the executive branch is required to disqualify himself or herself from official governmental activities regarding any "particular matter" when such matter would have a "direct and predictable effect" upon a personal financial interest of the employee , or upon the financial interests of the employee's outside employer or business associates . outside activities which entangle federal employees in outside employment , business , or economic relationships requiring such regular recusals or disqualifications under federal law or regulation would thus be prohibited , on a case - by - case basis , under this standard . federal employees are cautioned as a general matter that outside employment and other outside activities must comply with the other ethics standards and provisions promulgated by the office of government ethics and by executive order , including "the principle that an employee shall endeavor to avoid actions creating the appearance of violating any of the ethical standards" promulgated by oge , and "the prohibition against use of official position for an employee's private gain or for the private gain" of one with whom he or she has a business or economic relationship . employees are expressly restricted by regulation from using official government resources , supplies , or their official government time , to work on outside , private activities . it should also be noted that general ethical standards for executive branch personnel provide that "an employee shall not ... solicit or accept any gift or other item of monetary value from any person or entity seeking official action from , doing business with , or conducting activities regulated by the employee's agency , or whose interests may be substantially affected by the performance or nonperformance of the employee's duties. this standard must be observed by federal employees in the conduct of any outside business and financial activities and relationships .