these bills saw no action . most importantly , the judgment fund cannot be used in place of a specific appropriation . the fund remains a source of continued controversy and discussion , especially in the current fiscal environment . during the budget uncertainties in the 1990s , federal agencies became increasingly concerned about the judgment fund's solvency , as statutory and constitutional constraints precluded the agencies from obligating funds where appropriated money is not available . it is only accessible when the united states has waived its sovereign immunity and certain statutory conditions are met . the fund has evolved in administration and function over the last half century and has been subject to limiting principles . this report reviews the history of the judgment fund , which has been administered through different agencies and with variable levels of congressional oversight since its inception . this report also outlines specific instances in which the fund may be accessed , and when costs other than the principal award may be paid . finally , this report provides examples of how and when the judgment fund may be accessed , as well as instances of when tribal judgment funds are implicated . federal courts have some discretion when deciding at the end of litigation whether to charge the losing party with costs for the prevailing party . however , the categories of costs that may be awarded are strictly circumscribed and the subject of considerable debate . ยง 1920 , the clerk of the court may award costs for court fees , transcripts , fees related to witnesses , materials for presentation in the case , compensation for court - appointed experts , and docket fees . to obtain costs for suc h items in payment fro m the judgment fund , the submitting agency must include a bi ll of costs or the c ourt's order awarding costs with the request for payment . courts have limited payment to the enumerated items in ยง1920 and the specific exemptions in applicable statutory authority when awarding costs . payments of interest and attorneys' fees have caused considerable debate with respect to this issue . as discussed above , the judgment fund enabling statute limits an agency's ability to access the fund . this section provides examples of statutes that prevent an agency from relying on the judgment fund as the source of payment , and briefly outlines the legislative intent of these statutes . the judgment fund has changed many times in its over - 50-year history , and recent legislative proposals in congress could again alter certain payments and processes . in the 113 th congress , the judgment fund transparency act of 2013 has been introduced to amend the judgment fund enabling statute . the act would require the secretary of the treasury to post on a publicly accessible website the claimant , agency , fact summary , and payment amount for each claim from the judgment fund , within 30 days after the payment was made , unless a law or court order otherwise prohibits the disclosure of such information .