language identical to h.r . 872 is included in the 2013 farm bill legislation ( h.r . 1947 ) approved by the house agriculture committee . similar proposals have been introduced in the 113 th congress ( h.r . some older pesticides are persistent organic pollutants ( pops ) that are global contaminants of concern to many nations . the united states has signed three international agreements to reduce the production and use of pops and to regulate their trade and disposal . president george w. bush submitted two of these agreements , which are formal treaties , to the senate for advice and consent , where they will remain pending senate action . if the senate consents , and if congress passes legislation needed to implement the treaties and the executive agreement in the united states , then the treaties could be ratified and the agreements would become binding u.s. law . president obama also supports ratification , but two u.s. statutes are inconsistent with the agreements: tsca and fifra . congress has considered but has not enacted proposals to amend the statutes . s. 696 in the 113 th congress would add a new section to tsca authorizing actions that would allow u.s. implementation of the three international agreements . another issue before congress relates to chemical contamination from lead - based paint , which is banned by the consumer product safety commission but remains in older homes , where it may be hazardous to young children . congress amended tsca to establish a grant program in 1992 to assist states in reducing lead - based paint hazards in private and federally assisted residences . the problem of lead - based paint hazards , although improved , has not been eliminated . thus , congress annually appropriates more than $100 million to the grant program , which is administered through the department of housing and urban development . congress annually adjusts the parameters of grant programs to reflect its priorities and is likely to do so again in the 113 th congress . a bill introduced in the 113 th congress , h.r . further information disclosure by epa under epcra might be on the horizon in response to a citizen petition . seventeen environmental advocacy groups petitioned epa to require additional public reporting of chemical releases by the oil and gas producers . currently , oil and gas production is not covered by the reporting requirements of epcra , but the growth of hydraulic fracturing as a means of oil and gas production and the use of certain chemicals in that process may make this petition and epa deliberations more salient . in the 113 th congress , h.r . 1921 , the frac act , and section 301 of s. 332 would require a person conducting hydraulic fracturing operations to disclose to the state ( or to the epa administrator if he or she has primary enforcement responsibility in such state ) the chemicals intended for use in underground injections before the commencement of such operations and the chemicals actually used after the end of such operations , and would require a state or the administrator to make such disclosure available to the public .