112-240 extension on the domestic food assistance programs . of the programs in title iv , snap ( as food stamps was renamed in the 2008 farm bill ) accounts for the largest amount of federal funding and also serves the largest number of households . in fact , the vast majority of the current farm bill's spending is for snap — nearly 78% based on current cbo baseline projections . snap is an open - ended appropriated entitlement and program benefits are 100% federally funded . subsequent sections will take a closer look at the bills' proposed changes to snap . the report also discusses the two bills' changes to the emergency food assistance program , commodity supplemental food program , commodity foods in schools , and additional farm bill nutrition assistance programs and policies . for general background on the usda - fns programs , consult crs report r42353 , domestic food assistance: summary of programs , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] ; as well as crs report r42505 , supplemental nutrition assistance program ( snap ) : a primer on eligibility and benefits , by [author name scrubbed] . while this report focuses on the five - year proposals in s. 3240 and h.r . 6083 from the 112 th congress , the text box below summarizes the impact of the p.l . further , snap participation ebbs and flows in relation to the nation's economy . indian tribal organizations may choose to operate the food distribution program on indian reservations ( fdpir ) , instead of having the state offer regular food stamp benefits ; the full cost of benefits and most administrative expenses are covered by the federal government . usda commodity foods are foods purchased by the usda for distribution to usda nutrition programs . they are not necessarily specific types of food ; the catalog of commodity foods is a wide variety of fruit , vegetable , livestock , dairy — fresh , frozen , and processed foods . the 2012 farm bill provisions in this section of the report are those which relate to programs that distribute usda commodity foods . the usda food and nutrition service programs that include usda commodity foods are the emergency food assistance program ( tefap ) , commodity supplemental food program ( csfp ) , national school lunch program ( nslp ) , summer food service program ( sfsp ) , and child and adult care food program ( cacfp ) . many of these programs distribute "entitlement commodities" ( an amount of usda foods to which grantees are entitled by law ) as well as "bonus commodities" ( usda food purchases based on requests from the agricultural producer community ) . both senate - passed and house - reported bills would have repealed the authority to operate a nutrition information and awareness pilot program . this discretionary authority had not been funded or utilized in recent years . this report's introduction includes a legislative history of the 112 th congress's farm bill actions as well as a budget - oriented overview . "programs in lieu of snap" refers to the related programs operated by entities that do not operate snap or which are offered as an alternative to snap .