the cdc administers the delta program . the family and youth services bureau ( fysb ) in hhs / acf administers funding for the hotline and the domestic violence shelters and support . authorization of funding under fvpsa has been extended multiple times , most recently through fy2015 by the capta reauthorization act of 2010 ( p.l . congress has appropriated funding in subsequent years . table 1 includes actual funding from fy1993 to fy2018 , which includes reductions in some years , and appropriated funding for fy2019 for the three major fvpsa activities . congress appropriated just over $180 million for fy2019 , the highest total to date . since 1994 , fvpsa has authorized the hhs secretary to award cooperative agreements to state domestic violence coalitions that coordinate local community projects to prevent domestic violence , including such violence involving youth . congress first awarded funding for prevention activities in fy1996 under a pilot program carried out by the centers for disease control and prevention . as originally implemented , the program provided funding and technical assistance to 14 state domestic violence coalitions to support local efforts to carry out prevention strategies and work at the state level to oversee these strategies . local prevention efforts were referred to as coordinated community responses ( ccrs ) . the ccrs were led by domestic violence organizations and other stakeholders across multiple sectors , including law enforcement , public health , and faith - based organizations . the pilot program was formalized in 2002 under a program now known as the domestic violence prevention enhancement and leadership through alliances ( delta ) program . the focus of delta is preventing domestic violence before it occurs , rather than responding once it happens or working to prevent its recurrence . the program has had four iterations: delta , which was funded from fy1996 through fy2012 and involved 14 states ; delta prep , which extended from fy2008 through fy2012 and involved 19 states that had not received the initial delta funds ; delta focus , which extended from fy2013 through fy2017 and involved 10 states , all of which had previously received funding under delta or delta prep ; and delta impact , which began with fy2018 and involves 10 states , all of which except one has previously received delta funding . for example , the michigan coalition against domestic and sexual violence supported two ccrs — the arab community center for economic and social services and the lakeshore alliance against domestic and sexual violence — that focused on faith - based initiatives . both ccrs held forums that provided resources and information about the roles of faith leaders in preventing the first - time occurrence of domestic violence . overall , the report found that states improved their capacity to respond to intimate partner violence through evidence - based planning and implementation strategies . as amended by the violence against women act ( vawa ) of 1994 , fvpsa directs the hhs secretary to award a grant to one or more private entities to operate a 24-hour , national , toll - free hotline for domestic violence .