attorneys . doj officials initially refused , arguing that allowing access would have a chilling effect on department officials and noting the department's historic reluctance to comply with such requests . instead , it offered to provide access to the head of ecs instead . inquiry. the committee chairman wrote the attorney general and objected that the department was denying the committee access even though no claim of executive privilege had been asserted . on june 3 , 2008 , chairman waxman wrote to attorney general michael mukasey , again requesting access to reports of interviews with the president and vice president . on june 11 , 2008 , the justice department again refused . the next day , the committee issued a subpoena to the attorney general , demanding the production of unredacted "transcripts , reports , notes , and other documents relating to interviews outside the presence of a grand jury" the president and vice president . on june 24 , 2008 , the justice department responded that it would not release reports of interviews with the president or vice president . these reports dealt with "internal white house deliberations and communications relating to foreign policy and national security ... the absolute core of executive privilege. in addition , the subpoena implicated "separation of powers concern[s] relating to the integrity and effectiveness of future law enforcement investigations. the justice department argued that revealing records of interviews officials voluntarily participated in to congress would deter future white house cooperation with criminal investigations , because subsequent administrations might "limit the scope" of their participation , or simply refuse to be interviewed so as to prevent possible future disclosure to congress . chairman waxman responded on july 8 , 2008 , agreeing to refrain from pursuing the interview with president bush , but reiterating his demand for access to vice president cheney's interview and unredacted versions of interviews with white house staff . he noted that at the close of mr. libby's trial , special prosecutor fitzgerald remarked that there was a "cloud over what the vice president did [in connection with the leak]. the interviews with the vice president were essential in order to investigate this cloud and perform oversight of the executive branch's handling of national security secrets . waxman also rejected the justice department's various arguments for withholding the interview reports . first , he argued that no "confidentiality interests" applied since the vice president knew the interview could be made public when it was conducted and executive privilege was unavailable for "communications voluntarily disclosed outside the white house. second , he noted that the reports in question did not concern vital national security or foreign policy issues , but were limited to the role the vice president and others played in leaking national security secrets . third , he argued the presidential communications privilege was limited to "communications ... with the president or certain advisers directly on his behalf about presidential decisionmaking," and was therefore inapplicable to conversations between the vice president and his staff . fourth , president bush and vice president cheney agreed to be interviewed even though similar interviews with the previous administration had been released . if the risk of this disclosure did not deter them , it would probably not deter future administrations .