five other u.s . ambassadors have died by violent acts in the line of duty , although none since 1979 . since 1977 , 66 american diplomatic personnel have been killed by terrorists . these events , along with recent attacks on u.s. embassies in egypt , sudan , tunisia , yemen , and turkey , have drawn renewed attention to the challenges facing u.s. diplomats abroad , as well as to the difficulty in balancing concerns for their security against the outreach required of their mission . under reciprocal treaty obligations , host nations are obligated to provide security for the diplomatic facilities of sending states . however , instances in which host nations have been unable or not fully committed to fulfilling this responsibility have sometimes left u.s. facilities vulnerable , especially in extraordinary circumstances . u.s. facilities therefore employ a layered approach to security including not only the measures taken by a host country , but also additional , u.s. - coordinated measures , to include armed diplomatic security agents , hardened facilities , u.s. - trained and / or contracted local security guards , and sometimes u.s. marine security guard detachments . the inability to provide perfect security , especially against the evident threat of mob violence , has led some observers to question the deployment of personnel in high - threat environments . the department of state's assistant secretary for diplomatic security , testifying in november 2009 , underlined that "the department currently operates diplomatic missions in locations where , in the past , we might have closed the post and evacuated all personnel when faced with similar threats. the rapid growth in the number of u.s. civilians deployed in the high - risk environments of iraq , afghanistan , and pakistan spurred significant investment in recent years in the department of state's capacity to provide security in dangerous areas through its bureau of diplomatic security ( ds ) . the challenges of providing security in these war - related areas may have also strained ds's capability to provide security for deployed diplomats in other hardship posts around the world . observers have suggested that funding for embassy security follows a "boom and bust" cycle , in which major attacks are followed by a sudden influx of resources that may be difficult to expend in a well - planned manner . an influx of security - related resources in the 1980s , in response to the 1983 / 1984 bombings in beirut , lebanon , was followed by a lull in the 1990s when diplomatic security funding was greatly reduced prior to the 1998 attacks in kenya and tanzania . the subsequent state department accountability review board suggested that the preceding years of reduced spending for embassy security was a contributing factor to the vulnerability of the targeted embassies . this report provides background information on the authorities , regulations , and procedures in place at the department of state regarding diplomatic security . it also describes several areas of potential congressional interest , including the accountability review board process , whose conclusions the secretary of state is required to report to congress , and discussion of embassy security funding trends . it also examines the september 11 , 2012 , attack in benghazi , libya .