app . 533 ) addressing mortgages and trust deeds . this section covers servicemembers who , prior to active military service , entered into a property transaction subject to a mortgage , a trust deed , or other security loan . as amended , if the servicemember is unable to make payments on the loan due to military service , the provision prevents the vendor from exercising any right or option under the contract to rescind or terminate , to resume possession of the property for nonpayment of any installment due , or to breach the terms , except by action in a court of competent jurisdiction , until one year after the term of active duty terminates . a sale , foreclosure , or seizure of property during a servicemember's period of military service , and for one year after , is prohibited unless under a court order issued prior to foreclosure on the property , or if made pursuant to an agreement under section 107 of the act . additionally , section 701 requires the comptroller general of the united states to submit a report to congress addressing the protections afforded under section 303 of the scra within 540 days after the date of enactment . section 703 of p.l . 112-154 requires the secretary of the va to , within 180 days of enactment , report to the house and senate committees on veterans affairs on a plan to: ( 1 ) evaluate the skills and capabilities of employees ( and managers ) at the veterans benefits administration ( vba ) who process disability compensation and pension benefit claims ; ( 2 ) provide training for those employees whose skills and capabilities are deemed unsatisfactory ; ( 3 ) re - evaluate employees who receive the training ; and ( 4 ) take appropriate personnel actions if employees' skills and capabilities are still deemed unsatisfactory after additional training and re - evaluation . section 502 of the veterans benefits , health care , and information technology act of 2006 granted the va special authority to conduct competitions in which only small businesses owned by service - disabled and other veterans may compete ( i.e. , set - asides ) , and to make noncompetitive ( or sole - source ) awards to such firms . eligibility for these contracting preferences is limited to firms and firm owners listed in a database maintained by the va , and firms or owners that misrepresent their status in order to qualify for preferences under the 2006 act are subject to debarment , or exclusion from government contracting for a specified period of time . specifically , section 502 provided that any firm determined to have "misrepresented [its] status" as a veteran - owned or service - disabled veteran - owned small business for purposes of the va's "veterans first" contracting program "shall be debarred from contracting with the department for a reasonable period of time , as determined by the secretary. such debarments — prescribed by law — are known as statutory debarments and , unlike administrative debarments under the federal acquisition regulation ( far ) , are imposed for purposes of punishment . section 706 of p.l .