u.s. - ghanaian relations are close . a small population of americans , many of african - american descent , has settled permanently in ghana , and many prominent ghanaians have received education in the united states . in its foreign aid congressional budget justification ( cbj ) for fy2013 , the obama administration stated that the united states supports the ghanaian government's "efforts to improve on and sustain middle - income status , and to solidify its position as a regional leader in an area better known for civil strife and economic stagnation. it also pledged to help ghana to achieve the poverty reduction and development - focused united nations millennium development goals by 2015 . the united states also sponsors a variety of exchange visits for ghanaian government officials , focused on increasing ghanaian familiarization with u.s. legislative and other governance practices , and a variety of educational programs for students and civil society organizations . services have expanded rapidly , and contributed 47% of gdp in 2011 . an economic constraints analysis for the proposed compact was completed in november 2011 . ghana was selected as one of four initial u.s. partnership for growth countries globally for several reasons . these include its positive mcc scores and compact completion record ; potential synergies between the expected second mcc compact and other u.s. assistance programs ; and increases in other types of u.s. - ghanaian engagement , including private sector business deals . ghana's economy has grown steadily in recent years ; gross domestic product ( gdp ) totaled $32 billion in 2010 , rose to $39 billion in 2011 , and is projected to rise further . goods export earnings have also grown ; estimated at $8 billion in 2010 , they grew to $13 billion in 2011 , with additional gradual growth projected in the next three years . spurred by new oil sector investment and production ( discussed further below ) , the economy grew at an estimated annual rate of 14.4% in 2011 , according to the economist intelligence unit ( eiu , a private economic analysis firm ) , which projected a decline to 7.3% in 2012 and 7.6% in 2013 . the international monetary fund also estimated that the economy grew by 14.4% in 2011 , but provided a slightly more optimistic estimate of 8.1% for 2012 and 7.8% in 2013 . this prospective decline is attributable , in part , to slowing new investment in the oil sector , lower - than - expected initial oil output , and a temporary dip in prices for cocoa . in general , rising commodity prices and production , notably for key exports like cocoa and gold , along with growth in tourism , have helped propel economic growth in recent years . despite diversification into oil , mining and , to a lesser extent , financial services and offshore information processing , and even though about 52% of ghanaians are urban , farming remains a cornerstone of the economy . agriculture employs over half of workers , and contributes about 27% of annual gdp , although its share has dropped since the mid - 2000s .