appendix a . definition of "byproduct material" 10 c.f.r . 37 regulates "byproduct material. this appendix presents the definition of the term as contained in 10 c.f.r . 30 , "rules of general applicability to domestic licensing of byproduct material," at 10 c.f.r . 30.4 , "definitions. byproduct material means — ( 1 ) any radioactive material ( except special nuclear material ) yielded in , or made radioactive by , exposure to the radiation incident to the process of producing or using special nuclear material ; ( 2 ) ( i ) any discrete source of radium - 226 that is produced , extracted , or converted after extraction , before , on , or after august 8 , 2005 , for use for a commercial , medical , or research activity ; or ( ii ) any material that — ( a ) has been made radioactive by use of a particle accelerator ; and ( b ) is produced , extracted , or converted after extraction , before , on , or after august 8 , 2005 , for use for a commercial , medical , or research activity ; and ( 3 ) any discrete source of naturally occurring radioactive material , other than source material , that — ( i ) the commission , in consultation with the administrator of the environmental protection agency , the secretary of energy , the secretary of homeland security , and the head of any other appropriate federal agency , determines would pose a threat similar to the threat posed by a discrete source of radium - 226 to the public health and safety or the common defense and security ; and ( ii ) before , on , or after august 8 , 2005 , is extracted or converted after extraction for use in a commercial , medical , or research activity . appendix b. radionuclides and quantities of concern regulated by nrc appendix c. nuclear regulatory commission security orders to licensees in the wake of the 9 / 11 attacks , nrc issued orders to its licensees to enhance the security of radioactive materials . this appendix summarizes these orders ; a full listing is available on the nrc website at http: / / www.nrc.gov / reading - rm / doc - collections / enforcement / security / index.html#6 . licensees of panoramic and underwater irradiators having more than 10,000 curies of material ( 68 fr 35458 , june 13 , 2003 ) . nrc , under its common defense and security authority , issued this order to nrc and agreement state licensees . manufacturers and distributors of radioactive material ( 69 fr 5375 , february 4 , 2004 ) . nrc , under its common defense and security authority , issued this order to nrc and agreement state licensees . licensees transporting radioactive materials in quantities of concern ( 69 fr 44407 , august 2 , 2005 ) , with category 1 as the threshold for a quantity of concern . nrc , under its common defense and security authority , issued this order to nrc and agreement state licensees . increased controls ( ic ) order for licensees authorized to possess 16 types of radioactive material above specified "quantities of concern.