at the same time , congress has protected other information from public release . if angels were to govern men , neither external nor internal controls on government would be necessary . attempts to make the executive branch more transparent require congress , the public , and the executive branch itself to ensure that appropriate information is released and that the information can be used and analyzed . users of such released information , therefore , must have the time and the tools to interpret and understand the data in order to hold government accountable . congress plays an active role in defining the balance between transparency and secrecy in american democratic society . while openness in government is considered essential to democratic operations and deliberations , secrecy can protect americans from security threats , privacy invasion , and economic harm . as agencies increasingly use new technologies to collect , maintain , and release federal records and data , congress may have an interest in ensuring that the public has the ability to find and use the data properly . additionally , congress may choose to determine whether agencies are inappropriately withholding documents or improperly releasing sensitive materials . accordingly , this report assesses scholarly and practical definitions of transparency and provides an analysis of the concept of transparency , with a focus on transparency in the executive branch of the federal government . it also examines how the release of large amounts of public data may make the operations of government more or , counter - intuitively , less transparent . releasing vast amounts of raw data , for example , could make it difficult for the public to find the information they seek or to understand how to analyze data they find . this report examines statutes , initiatives , and other items that seek to make information more available to the public as well as those that seek to protect certain information from release to the public . this report examines transparency and secrecy from the standpoint of how the public historically has and can currently access government information . it also explores the statutes and policies in place to ensure the protection of certain information from public release . the report then describes existing powers , authorities , and initiatives that promote transparency or protect federal records from public release . finally , this report analyzes whether existing transparency initiatives are effective in reaching their stated goals . as already noted , there is no single definition of what constitutes transparency or method for measuring it . for the purposes of this report , transparency comprises not only the disclosure of government information , but also the access , comprehension , and use of this information by the public . transparency , as such , requires a public that can acquire , understand , and use the information that it receives from the federal government . this concept of transparency , however , is not the only possible designation of the term . an accessible and transparent government is one goal of a functioning democracy , but access to government information may not always be warranted or safe .