patent rights do not enforce themselves . patent owners who wish to compel others to respect their rights must commence enforcement proceedings , which most commonly consist of litigation in the federal courts . as noted previously , at one point the court's decision suggests that "advanced diagnostic medicine techniques" might be patented . on the other hand , the court confirmed that "laws of nature" could not be patented and explained that broadly preemptive claims were likely unpatentable . diagnostic methods might well be classified under either of these headings . two years after deciding bilski v. kappos , the supreme court would address the patentability of diagnostic methods in mayo v. prometheus . prometheus laboratories , inc. is the sole licensee of two patents ( u.s. patent nos . 6,355,623 and 6,680,302 ) claiming methods for determining optimal dosages of thiopurine drugs used to treat autoimmune diseases . stated generally , the patents claim methods of ( a ) administering a thiopurine drug to a patient , and ( b ) determining the levels of the drug or the drug's metabolites in red blood cells in the patient . the measured metabolite levels are then compared to known metabolite levels . if the measured metabolite levels in the patient are outside the known range , then the physician should increase or decrease the level of drug to be administered so as to reduce toxicity and enhance treatment efficacy . claim 1 of the `623 patent , which reads as follows , was representative of the claims of the two patents at issue: a method of optimizing therapeutic efficacy for treatment of an immune - mediated gastrointestinal disorder , comprising: ( a ) administering a drug providing 6-thioguanine to a subject having said immune - mediated gastrointestinal disorder ; and ( b ) determining the level of 6-thioguanine in said subject having said immune - mediated gastrointestinal disorder , wherein the level of 6-thioguanine less than about 230 pmol per 8x10 8 red blood cells indicates a need to increase the amount of said drug subsequently administered to said subject and wherein the level of 6-thioguanine greater than about 400 pmol per 8x10 8 red blood cells indicates a need to decrease the amount of said drug subsequently administered to said subject . prometheus brought suit against mayo clinic rochester and mayo collaborative services ( collectively "mayo" ) for infringement of the `623 and `302 patents . the district court held that the two patents did not comprise patentable subject matter because they claimed a natural law — namely the correlation between thiopurine metabolite levels and the toxicity and efficacy of thiopurine drug dosages . following an appeal , the federal circuit reversed . applying the machine - or - transformation test , the court of appeals concluded that the patent claims called for the transformation of the human body or of blood taken from the body . following its decision in bilski v. kappos , the supreme court directed the federal circuit to rehear the appeal in mayo v. prometheus . the court of appeals again concluded that the claims of the `623 and `302 patents constituted patentable subject matter .