called a special rule . special rules are reported by the house rules committee . this committee is considered an arm of the majority party leadership , and majority party members outnumber minority party members , nine to four . common provisions found in a special rule include the identification of the text to be considered , a specified period for general debate , and limits on the amendments that can be offered on the floor . for instance , sometimes the committee reports a rule that places few restrictions at all on amending , which can result in dozens of amendments being offered on the floor during consideration . in other cases , the special rule will allow only specific predetermined amendments to be offered , or even preclude floor amendments altogether . note that house rules also place certain other limitations on the content of amendments , unless the special rule waives these restrictions . for instance , amendments must typically be germane to the text they propose to change . that is , an amendment cannot change the subject under consideration . after the rules committee reports a rule for consideration of a bill , the house first considers that special rule itself on the house floor , for approximately one hour . after debate , the house votes on adopting the special rule ; only after its adoption will the house then proceed to consider the bill itself , under the terms specified by the special rule . in this situation , the house will typically consider the bill in a procedural setting called the committee of the whole , which allows members an efficient way to consider and vote on amendments . after any amendments are offered and debated , members vote on approval ; each amendment requires a simple majority to be agreed to . after the amendment process is complete , the committee of the whole reports to the full house any recommended amendments , which are then usually approved by the house by voice vote . just prior to voting on final passage , members will typically briefly debate and then vote on a motion to recommit , which allows the minority party to effectively propose its own amendment . in the house , some votes are taken by voice , but many votes are taken by electronic device , a method that records the individual position of each member who voted . to consider a bill on the floor , the senate first must agree to bring it up — typically by agreeing to a unanimous consent request or by voting to adopt a motion to proceed to the bill , as discussed earlier . only once the senate has agreed to consider a bill may senators propose amendments to it . perhaps the modern senate's defining feature is the potential difficulty of reaching a final vote on a matter . most questions that the senate considers — from a motion to proceed to a bill , to each amendment , to the bill itself — are not subject to any debate limit . senate rules provide no way for a simple numerical majority to cut off or otherwise impose a debate limit and move to a final vote .