111-148 as amended ) . according to some experts , financial incentives in the aca may provide further incentives for consolidation and integration of services . for example , the health care law creates integrated delivery systems called accountable care organizations ( aco ) that contract with payers who agree to be responsible for the entire continuum of care provided to a group of patients . if the treatment costs less than set targets , and certain quality measures are met , the aco and the payer share in the savings . hundreds of physician practices , insurers , and hospitals have announced financial and clinical integration to quality as acos . the ongoing changes in practice organization — if they alter the way that physicians deliver care — could help determine whether the u.s. health care system expands access , improves quality of treatment , and addresses the growth of government and private health care spending , according to analysts . a congressional budget office analysis of past demonstration programs designed to reduce medicare spending by implementing quality care initiatives concluded that a number cut hospitalizations and improved measures of patient care , but most did not meet their spending goals . though physician payments account for about 20% of medical spending , studies suggest that physicians direct as much as 90% of total health care spending through referrals , tests , hospital admissions , and other actions . congress is playing dual roles regarding the consolidation . on the one hand , lawmakers designed the aca in part to reduce health delivery fragmentation and help control government and private spending . in addition , congress and federal regulators have been monitoring , and continue to monitor , the health care system for signs that mergers and acquisitions may be having negative effects on costs , competition , and consumer access such as distorting prices or creating conflicts of interest in provision of services . a 2012 analysis of a coordinated care pilot study at the university of washington at st. louis hospital found notable improvements in quality of care , as well as health savings . there may also be differences in the ability of smaller versus larger physician practices to experiment with new quality - based systems such as medical homes . practices bear many of the up - front costs of creating new coordinated care services , while many savings may be dispersed through the broader health care system . another potential factor that could affect efforts to improve coordination of care is increased segmentation of physicians as a result of ongoing market changes . a 2012 report on the future of medical practices noted: these changes in the practice environment have given rise to a large segment of the physician community that no longer hospitalizes patients , but rather manages them exclusively in ambulatory settings ( imaging , surgery , chemotherapy , etc. ) in an increasing number of places , there are now two non - overlapping physician communities: physicians who never visit the hospital and physicians who never leave it , as is the case in most of europe . for example , many lower - income consumers use emergency rooms as their entree to care .