appendix a . previous efforts at identifying a group of rising developing countries over the past two decades numerous efforts have sought to identify which developing countries will change the face of the global economy . in what was one of the earliest attempts at identifying a group of countries that would be increasingly important to u.s. interests , the clinton administration in the early 1990s undertook what was called a big emerging markets initiative ( bem ) . china , india , and brazil , three countries with huge populations and land mass , impressive economic progress , and large political ambitions , led the list of 10 countries chosen for the bem initiative . the "big ten" list also included mexico and argentina in latin america , south africa in africa , poland and turkey in europe , and south korea in asia . countries were selected not only on the basis of their probable commercial importance to the united states in the decades ahead , but also due to broad foreign policy concerns bearing on security , human rights , and environmental issues . the bem initiative acknowledged that u.s. policy towards these countries ought to have a stronger commercial dimension and advocated cultivating ties with these countries in broader and more systemic ways . the world bank's 1997 global economic prospects report was another early attempt to identify a group of rising developing countries . dubbed the "big 5," this report projected that brazil , russia , india , china , and indonesia would increase their influence on world patterns of resource allocation , production , and trade by 2020 . in a 2001 report that examined the relationship between the world's leading advanced countries and the world's leading emerging market economies , goldman sachs researchers argued that brazil , russia , india , and china — four populous and fast - growing countries that they dubbed the brics — would propel global growth in the decades ahead and that their weight in the world economy would grow markedly , overtaking the six largest western economies in 40 years . in 2005 , goldman sachs designated a next group of developing countries that arguably would have the capacity to play a much larger role in the global economy . this group was dubbed the "next eleven," or n - 11 for short , and included bangladesh , egypt , indonesia , iran , mexico , nigeria , pakistan , the philippines , south korea , turkey , and vietnam . the so - called civets group of countries — colombia , indonesia , vietnam , egypt , turkey , and south africa — was touted by the economist intelligence unit ( eiu ) in 2009 as the next generation of "tiger" economies ( even though they are named after a shy feline mammal ) . the appeal of these countries is that they all have large , young populations with an average age now of 27 and reasonably sophisticated financial systems , and export a variety of products . in january 2011 president obama announced a national export initiative ( nei ) aimed at doubling u.s. exports over five years .