there was no further action on this bill . congress did not reach final agreement on fy2014 appropriations before the start of the fiscal year on october 1 , but did agree to a short - term continuing appropriations measure ( p.l . 113-46 ) , which provided funding through january 15 , 2014 . final action on appropriations for epa and all other federal agencies and departments occurred as part of the consolidated appropriations act , 2014 ( h.r . other factors also have been at work . these include a general reluctance by some members of congress to address controversial environmental issues in view of the relatively slim majorities held by political parties in the house and the senate ; a lack of legislative initiatives by the administration on clean water issues ( neither the clinton nor the bush administration proposed cwa legislation , nor has the obama administration ) ; and the high economic cost of addressing water infrastructure issues . two cwa issues that have been the focus of much of legislators' interest in recent congresses received some attention again in the 112 th congress — water infrastructure financing , and regulatory protection of wetlands — but with different focus than in the recent past . after the 2010 election , congressional leadership and priorities shifted — particularly in the house , which used both oversight and legislation to focus criticism on epa regulatory activities . the 112 th congress enacted two bills that amend the cwa . one extended the moratorium for cwa permitting of certain vessels for an additional year , until december 18 , 2014 ( p.l . 112-213 ) , and the other extends authorization of funds for the lake pontchartrain basin program in section 121 of the act through fy2017 ( p.l . with the 113 th congress divided like the 112 th into a republican - controlled house and a democratic - controlled senate , and president obama having been re - elected , consideration of environmental issues generally , including water quality , reflected those of the previous two years . in addition to enacting appropriations bills ( see " continuing issue: appropriations " ) , the 113 th congress enacted several bills with cwa provisions . provisions of water resource legislation creating a pilot program for water infrastructure financing , plus some amendments to cwa title vi ( see " wifia pilot program and srf amendments in p.l . 113-121 " ) ; as part of the 2014 farm bill , legislation exempting silviculture activity from requiring a cwa permit ( see " cwa permits for logging road discharges " ) ; legislation providing an additional three - year moratorium for cwa permitting of certain vessels ( see crs report r42142 , epa's vessel general permits: background and issues ) ; and a bill eliminating a number of statutorily required reports to congress , including one cwa report ( p.l . clean water policy and program issues also have been addressed regularly by congress in the context of annual appropriations acts . epa's appropriations are included in the interior , environment , and related agencies appropriations acts . the administration presented the fy2014 budget request in april 2013 .