this report first provides a primer on federal flood policy . in implementing the federal response fema can assign missions to numerous other federal agencies . the u.s. army corps of engineers ( hereinafter referred to as the corps ) has been actively working on emergency engineering missions related to infrastructure using its power engineering and dewatering expertise . in addition to its fema assignments , the corps has its own emergency response authority and a program to assist with repairs of eligible hurricane protection and flood control projects . while availability of funding is unlikely to interfere with near - term emergency response activities in the case of federal response and recovery programs without significant existing balances , federal funding for these programs may become an issue . in addition to oversight and funding of emergency response activities , at issue for congress is deciding on whether and how to enact and implement feasible and affordable flood policies and programs to reduce flood risk . the challenge is how to structure federal actions and programs so they provide incentives to reduce flood risk without unduly infringing on private property rights or usurping local decision making . this is the case for the corps' flood and hurricane project repair program . as recovery proceeds , congress may be faced with questions about the efficacy of current federal approaches and participation in hurricane protection ( and the relationship of these issues to mandatory flood insurance ) and a reevaluation of how federal programs and policies influence coastal development . that is , while probability of another storm just like sandy is unlikely , the likelihood of coastal communities seeing storm surges and flooding hazards like those experiences with hurricane sandy is much higher . the remainder of the report describes the federal role in emergency flood response and post - disaster repair and rehabilitation of flood protection measures . this report will help answer the following questions: which federal programs can assist with floodfighting ? which federal programs can assist with repairing damaged dunes , levees , and flood control works ? what are the flood policy and funding issues that may arise during recovery from hurricane sandy ? developing and investing in flood - prone areas represents a tradeoff between the location's economic and other benefits and the exposure to a flood hazard . hurricane sandy in 2012 , midwest flooding in 2011 and 2008 , hurricane ike in 2008 , and hurricanes katrina and rita renewed interest in the suite of tools available to improve flood resiliency . tackling this challenge would require adjustments in the flood insurance program , disaster aid policies and practices , and programs for structural and nonstructural flood risk reduction measures and actions . as decision makers evaluate options for how to manage the atlantic coast's coastal flood hazard , it is important to distinguish between the frequency of a storm with particular characteristics and the frequency of a storm surge height or other coastal flood hazard for a specific location . this flooding disrupted transportation , business , and government operations and created public safety concerns that necessitated voluntary and emergency evacuations .