these options are examined below . to date , the corps' operation of lake lanier for m&i water supply has constituted the agency's most controversial provision of permanent m&i water supply . the acf litigation raised numerous concerns , including the possibility that previous reallocations at other corps facilities could be disputed , and uncertainty about how future reallocation at corps facilities will be evaluated and performed . thus far , most corps reallocations have taken place without the national attention or litigation of lake lanier , either using the corps' delegated authority or through specific congressional legislative direction . as shown in table 1 , existing reallocations under the wsa , with few exceptions , were within the numeric criteria that the corps established for implementing its discretionary authority . whether congress agrees with the corps' interpretation and use of its discretionary authority is a policy issue of increasing relevance as interest grows in m&i reallocation at federal facilities . other issues raised by current use of the discretionary authority and reservoir operations include whether multiple reallocations in a single basin are to be treated separately or on a watershed basis , how much discretion the agency should have in making reallocation agreements with stakeholders , including financial charging and crediting arrangements , and how the agency should handle ongoing unauthorized withdrawals . current policies on m&i reallocations at corps facilities reflect numerous decisions and tradeoffs that may be reexamined as more reallocations are requested . for example , if permanent reallocations to m&i are made , how is the transition to be carried out , given that stakeholders , such as recreation interests and hydropower customers , have developed around existing operations ? how should the federal government charge for the m&i storage space provided ? should the federal government credit for return flows ( i.e. , water not consumed by m&i uses that is returned to a corps reservoir ) ? m&i water supply at corps facilities also is part of several broader water policy questions for congress . for example , what is the appropriate federal role in municipal water supply ? should that role change if a community's existing water supply is reduced by potential climate change effects , such as extended drought ? do current water resources infrastructure operations , laws , divisions of responsibilities , and institutions reflect the national interest and present challenges ? addressing these questions is complicated by the wide range of opinions on the proper response and the difficulty of enacting any change to how federal facilities are operated , other than incremental change or project - specific measures , because of the many affected constituencies . enforcement action to stop the withdrawals at lake cumberland has not been taken . how many other unauthorized withdrawals and operational actions that support m&i uses occur at other corps facilities is largely unknown as many corps dams are decades old , often predating the wsa , and their operations have evolved incrementally over time . the question of when congressional authorization is required for modifications made under the wsa appears not to have been litigated prior to the dispute raised regarding lake lanier .