successive u.s . administrations have embraced the taif principles , while acting to limit opportunities for u.s. adversaries and anti - israeli forces . syria's security presence in lebanon was acknowledged at taif , but security negotiations called for in the agreement did not occur until syrian forces withdrew from lebanon following the assassination of former lebanese prime minister rafiq hariri in 2005 . hariri's assassination and the mass national demonstrations that followed marked a defining political moment and led to the emergence of the pro - asad "march 8" coalition and the anti - asad "march 14" coalition that now dominate the political scene ( figure 3 ) . the intervening years have been marked by conflict , political gridlock , and further assassinations of anti - syria figures . each coalition has held power , although attempts at unity government have proven fruitless , with both sides periodically resorting to resignations , mass protests , and boycotts to hamper their rivals . external players such as syria , iran , israel , turkey , saudi arabia , qatar , the united states , and others have all struggled for influence . the war in neighboring syria , the influx of syrian refugees , hezbollah's intervention on behalf of president asad , lebanese sunni support for syrian opposition forces and a wave of sectarian violence and terrorist attacks by sunni extremist groups have heightened tensions and complexities surrounding all of these issues . as of april 2014 , u.s. officials continue to call on lebanese leaders to avoid a political vacuum in the midst of volatile regional conditions . hezbollah emerged during the early 1980s , when lebanon's shia leaders split in their responses to the israeli invasion and occupation of southern lebanon in 1982 . leaders favoring a more militant response and supporting the long - term creation of an iranian - style islamic republic in lebanon broke away from the then - leading amal movement and formed the al amal al islamiya ( islamic amal ) organization . the amal movement continued as a political , social , and militia organization and disarmed following the civil war . by leveraging direct support from iran's revolutionary guards and recruiting from other revolutionary shiite groups , islamic amal became the vanguard of the religiously inspired groups that would later emerge under the rubric of hezbollah . considerable financial and training assistance from iran allowed islamic amal / hezbollah to expand from its base of operations in the bekaa valley of eastern lebanon to the southern suburbs of beirut and the occupied shiite hill towns of the south . attacks on israeli defense forces ( idf ) and u.s. military and diplomatic targets allowed islamic amal and other iran - supported shiite militants to portray themselves as the leaders of resistance to foreign military occupation , while their social and charitable activities in shiite communities solidified popular support . hezbollah remained loosely organized and largely clandestine until 1985 , when it released a manifesto outlining a militant , religiously conservative , and anti - imperialist platform .