this report will describe each of these regulatory exclusivities below . in combination , patents and regulatory exclusivities provide the fundamental framework of intellectual property incentives for pharmaceutical innovation in the united states . due to the trips agreement's obligation of technological neutrality with respect to the patent system , regulatory exclusivities provide congress with a more adaptable option for stimulating specific sorts of hoped - for private activity than do patents . the fda maintains the test data incorporated into an nda in confidence . in addition , because the required test data is usually quite costly to generate , sponsors of new pharmaceuticals ordinarily do not disclose them to the public . an anda may be filed if the active ingredient of the generic drug is the bioequivalent of the approved drug . an anda allows a generic drug manufacturer to rely upon the safety and efficacy data of the original manufacturer . the availability of the anda mechanism often allows a generic manufacturer to avoid the costs and delays associated with filing a full - fledged nda . andas also allow a generic manufacturer , in many cases , to place its fda - approved bioequivalent drug on the market as soon as any relevant patents expire . the hatch - waxman act placed certain limits upon the ability of generic competitors to reference the data generated by the manufacturers of brand - name drugs . these limitations — termed regulatory exclusivities — consist of a period of time during which a competitor's ability to obtain fda permission to sell a generic version of a previously approved brand - name drug is restricted . the federal food and drug laws establish several different sorts of regulatory exclusivities relating to new chemical entities , new clinical studies , orphan drugs , pediatric studies , generic drugs , and biologics . as such , regulatory exclusivities have been , and likely will continue to be , the most widely used option for encouraging the development of discrete classes of products regulated by the fda . the report closes with a summary of congressional issues and potential alternatives . the patent act of 1952 ( also known as the patent act ) requires innovators to prepare and submit applications to the uspto if they wish to obtain patent protection . uspto officials known as examiners then assess whether the application merits the award of a patent . in deciding whether to approve a patent application , a uspto examiner considers whether the submitted application fully discloses and distinctly claims the invention . the examiner will also determine whether the invention itself fulfills certain substantive standards set by the patent statute . to be patentable , an invention must consist of a process , machine , manufacture , or composition of matter that is useful , novel , and nonobvious . the requirement of usefulness , or utility , is satisfied if the invention is operable and provides a tangible benefit . to be judged novel , the invention must not be fully anticipated by a prior patent , publication , or other knowledge within the public domain . a nonobvious invention must not have been readily within the ordinary skills of a competent artisan at the time the invention was made .