the bill was never introduced . in the 113 th congress , the restoration of america's wire act ( s. 2159 and h.r . 4301 ) , introduced by senator lindsey graham and a companion bill by representative jason chaffetz , would amend the wire act to prohibit all forms of internet gambling in the united states , including in the three states where online gambling has already been licensed and regulated . this bill would not make online games themselves illegal , but rather would prohibit use of the communications network to play games like poker or bingo over the internet , restoring the original interpretation of the wire act . the bill contains exemptions for online interstate horse race wagers and state - licensed computer - generated retail lottery sales . representative peter king introduced the internet gambling regulation , enforcement , and consumer protection act of 2013 ( h.r . 2282 ) , which would create an office of internet gambling oversight ( oigo ) in the department of the treasury to oversee state and tribal agencies that license and regulate online gambling operators . most forms of gambling , except sports betting , would be permitted . the bill includes an "opt - out" provision for any state or tribe that does not wish to participate in the federal licensing system , and would grandfather in any states with laws that permit some kind of online gambling before the passage of the bill . representative jim mcdermott sponsored a companion bill , the internet gambling regulation and tax enforcement act of 2013 ( h.r . 3491 ) , that would impose a 12% tax on any licensed operator that offers internet wagering . of that , one - third would go to the federal government and two - thirds to states and tribes that participate in the national regime . a 50% tax would be imposed on all unlicensed operators . an online gambling measure under consideration in the 113 th congress is the internet poker freedom act ( h.r . 2666 ) , introduced by representative joe barton . adapted from similar bills in previous congresses , the measure would allow a state or tribal gambling oversight commission approved by a new office of internet poker oversight in the department of commerce to license online poker sites only . registered sites would be subject to regulation and inspection to , among other things , prevent minors from playing , stop money laundering , and identify problem gamblers . the bill would prohibit the use of credit cards . certain established gambling businesses would initially have preference for licenses . government - supported gambling has been part of america's development since the earliest days of colonization , starting with a 1612 london lottery to raise money for the virginia colony . while gambling restrictions were imposed in some of the colonies , the continental congress used lotteries to raise funds for forces during the revolutionary war . lotteries were used to finance public works projects and establish universities , including harvard , yale , columbia , dartmouth , and princeton . by 1832 , there were more than 400 lotteries in eight states .