the remote retailers have challenged the pact act under the due process clause . the due process issue is governed by the supreme court's opinion in quill . circuit will consider the preliminary injunction in gordon on appeal in the coming months . in musser's inc. v. united states , the federal district court for the eastern district of pennsylvania rejected the due process argument because , it concluded , the pact act is merely a federal statute that requires compliance with state and local laws and does not implicate due process . the pact act , the court determined , is no different in principle from other federal statutes that incorporate state law . moreover , the court determined , the plaintiff had minimum contacts with the jurisdictions into which it shipped tobacco products because it transacted business through its interactive website . the supreme court stated in quill : "while congress has plenary power to regulate commerce among the states and may thus authorize state actions that burden interstate commerce , it does not similarly have the power to authorize violations of the due process clause. it seems from this statement that congress may not be able to require remote retailers to pay taxes to jurisdictions with which they do not have minimum contacts . it appears , therefore , that the constitutionality of the pact act would depend on what constitutes minimum contacts for remote retailers . in quill , in the context of catalogue retailers , the supreme court noted that in connection with jurisdiction to adjudicate lawsuits against out - of - state defendants , it has said that the existence of minimum contacts depends on the degree to which the retailer has "purposefully avail[ed] itself of an economic market in forum state" or "purposefully directed" activities at the state's residents . moreover , in quill , the supreme court wrote that due process requires that the tax paid must be rationally related to "values connected with the taxing state. in another case , the supreme court wrote that this requirement means that the state must give something for which it can ask return . among the purposes of the pact act were to require remote sellers of cigarettes and smokeless tobacco to abide by the same laws that apply to law - abiding brick and mortar retailers ; to increase the collection of federal , state , and local excise taxes ; to discourage cigarette smuggling ; and to reduce youth access to inexpensive cigarettes and smokeless tobacco . to increase the taxes collected on remote sales of cigarettes and smokeless tobacco , the pact act does two things .