appendix a . national statuary hall collection statues since 2005 , when new mexico provided its second statue — po'pay — the national statuary hall collection has contained 100 statues . table a - 1 provides a list of statues currently in the collection , by state , with the name of the statue and the year it was placed in the collection . appendix b. statues replaced in the national statuary hall collection since 2000 , states have been allowed to replace statues donated to the collection . regulations for the replacement of statues were established by the consolidated appropriations act of 2001 . table b - 1 provides a list of states that have replaced statues , the year of the replacement , the original statue , and the replacement statue . the senate took no further action on the joint resolution . subsequently , in june 1864 , during house consideration of a civil appropriations bill , representative thaddeus stevens offered an amendment similar to the joint resolution previously passed by the house . the amendment was agreed to in the house , but was removed from the bill when it was considered in the senate . the proposed language , however , was restored in conference committee , which stated , sec . and be it further enacted , that a marble floor , similar to that of the congressional library or the senate vestibule , shall be constructed in the old hall of the house of representatives , using such marble as may be now on hand and not otherwise required , and that suitable structures and railings shall be therein erected for the reception and protection of statuary , and the same shall be under the supervision and direction of the commissioner of public buildings ; and so much of the moneys now or heretofore appropriated for the capitol extension as may be necessary , not exceeding the sum of fifteen thousand dollars , is hereby set apart and shall be disbursed for the porse [purposes] hereinbefore mentioned . and the president is hereby authorized to invite each and all the states to provide and furnish statues , in marble or bronze , not exceeding two in number for each state , of deceased persons who have been citizens thereof , and illustrious for their historic renown or from distinguished civic or military services , such as each state shall determine to be worthy of this national commemoration ; and when so furnished the same shall be placed in the old hall of the house of representatives , in the capitol of the united states , which is hereby set apart , or so much thereof as may be necessary , as a national statuary hall , for the purposes herein indicated . pursuant to the july 1864 civil appropriations bill , each state may donate up to two statues for inclusion in the national statuary hall collection .