sec . limitation on availability of funds for procurement of alternative fuel . ( a ) limitation - except as provided in subsection ( b ) , none of the funds authorized to be appropriated by this act or otherwise made available during fiscal year 2013 for the department of defense may be obligated or expended for the production or purchase of any alternative fuel if the cost of producing or purchasing the alternative fuel exceeds the cost of producing or purchasing a traditional fossil fuel that would be used for the same purpose as the alternative fuel . ( b ) exception - notwithstanding subsection ( a ) , the secretary of defense may purchase such limited quantities of alternative fuels as are necessary to complete fleet certification for 50 / 50 blends . are there alternative ways to achieve these benefits ? should these alternative fuel efforts be viewed in terms of their potential benefits to the services , or in terms of their potential benefits to the nation ? how much funding should be invested in the services' alternative fuels testing and certification efforts ? to what extent are the services coordinating their alternative fuels testing and certification efforts to prevent duplication of effort ? what analysis by the navy , doe and usda supports the navy's conclusion that this $510 million investment would positively impact the domestic advanced biofuel industry ? should biofuel investment be left to private industry ( eg , commercial aviation ) or other government agencies such as the department of energy or the department of agriculture ? why is the dod effort to jumpstart a domestic advanced biofuels industry being led by the navy ? how well is the office of the assistant secretary of defense for operational energy plans and programs ( asd ( oepp ) ) coordinating the alternative fuel goals of the military services ? how is asd ( oepp ) overseeing current investments by the military services in alternative fuels testing and certification ? is asd ( oepp ) 's oversight authority , including the required budget certification process , adequate ? has asd ( oepp ) 's coordination activities or alternative fuels guidance and policy affected the alternative fuel goals and initiatives of the military services ? if so , what have been these changes ? is there overlap or duplication between dod's alternative fuel initiatives and the alternative fuel initiatives being pursued by other federal agencies ? does the executive branch use a process to coordinate alternative fuel and other energy initiatives across all federal agencies ? if so , what are the steps of this process and what criteria are used to determine whether an initiative should be pursued by dod or some other federal agency ? appendix a. dod alternative fuel contracts to date appendix b . recent legislative action fy2012 department of defense appropriations act ( p.l . 112-74 ) the fy2012 department of defense appropriations act ( combined into the consolidated appropriations act of fy2012 [ h.r . 112-74 ] ) included $150 million in appropriated funds to support dpa title iii funding .