distribution . the distribution segment is the final step in delivering natural gas to customers . the natural gas enters the distribution segment from delivery points located on interstate and intrastate transmission pipelines and then flows to business and household customers . nationwide , natural gas distribution systems consist of thousands of miles of pipes , including mains and service lines to the customers . distribution systems also include compressor and metering stations , which allow companies to both move and monitor the natural gas in the system . the delivery point where the natural gas leaves the transmission segment and enters the distribution segment is often called the ''citygate.' typically , the citygate serves as the transfer point of ownership from producers to utilities . raw natural gas is a mixture of various hydrocarbons ( primarily methane ) and may contain trace amounts of other chemical substances that must be removed before distribution . air pollutants associated with the natural gas industry may be emitted through the release of natural gas vapors ( either purposefully or accidently ) , the combustion of natural gas ( either for use or for safety / disposal ) , the combustion of other fuel resources ( for process heat , power , and electricity ) , and the discharge of particulate matter during construction , transportation , and associated operations . sources of emissions include pad , road , and pipeline construction ; drilling , completion , and flowback activities that occur during the development of a well ; and gas processing and transmission equipment such as controllers , compressors , dehydrators , pipelines , and storage vessels . pollutants include , most prominently , methane and volatile organic compounds , of which the natural gas industry is one of the highest emitting industrial sectors in the united states . pollutants also include nitrogen oxides , sulfur dioxide , particulate matter , and various forms of hazardous air toxics , including n - hexane , the btex compounds ( i.e. , benzene , toluene , ethylbenzene , and xylene ) , and hydrogen sulfide . the clean air act ( caa ) seeks to protect human health and the environment from emissions that pollute ambient , or outdoor , air . it requires the u.s. environmental protection agency ( epa ) to establish minimum national standards for air emissions from various source categories ( sources in the "crude oil and natural gas production," and the "natural gas transmission and storage" sectors are included under these categories ) , and assigns primary responsibility to the states to assure compliance with the standards . epa has largely delegated day - to - day responsibility for caa implementation to all 50 states , including permitting , monitoring , inspections , and enforcement ; and in many cases , states have further delegated program implementation to local governments . sections of the caa which are most relevant to air quality issues in the natural gas industry are discussed below . some of the regulations implementing these sections have been revised by federal air standards promulgated by epa on august 16 , 2012 . the paragraphs below summarize relevant sections of the caa prior to these revisions .