these programs are described below . historically , the majority of emergency assistance for agriculture was funded through supplemental appropriations or as an add - on to regular annual appropriations . a supplemental appropriation provides additional budget authority during the current fiscal year either to finance activities not funded in the regular appropriation or to provide funds when the regular appropriation is deemed insufficient . since most agricultural land assistance programs do not receive the level of attention that triggers a standalone supplemental appropriation bill , annual appropriation bills are increasingly seen as a vehicle for funding these programs . the change in funding mechanism from standalone supplemental appropriations to annual appropriations has presented a challenge for agricultural land assistance programs . the timing of annual appropriations bills may not coincide with natural disasters and the subsequent requests for assistance . the variability of funding for agricultural land rehabilitation has led some to suggest that these programs have been left behind in favor of providing assistance for crop and livestock production loss rather than for land rehabilitation and natural resources degradation . some have suggested that the use of permanent mandatory funding could be expanded beyond production to include land rehabilitation assistance . others point out that permanent mandatory funding would be difficult to achieve in the current fiscal climate . the budget control act of 2011 ( bca , p.l . 112-25 ) limits emergency supplemental funding for disaster relief . under section 251 ( b ) ( 2 ) ( d ) of the bca , funding used for disaster relief must be used for activities carried out pursuant to the robert t. stafford disaster relief and emergency assistance act ( stafford act , p.l . for example , the fy2016 appropriated levels classify only a portion of the funding provided as disaster relief and therefore subject to the requirements of the bca and the stafford act . the remaining funds are not considered disaster relief for budget scoring purposes and are therefore appropriated within the regular limitations of the current budget agreement . these funds are not subject to a stafford act declaration and may be used according to the authorities of the program . another contentious issue for federal land assistance programs is mitigation . mitigation actions are steps taken to reduce risk before a natural disaster occurs . currently only one mitigation program exists for emergency agricultural land assistance — the ewp floodplain easement program ( described above ) . this program purchases floodplain easements on agricultural land that has a history of flooding ( two of the previous 10 years ) . under the program , the land is permanently taken out of production and restored to a natural function . this program has been authorized since 1997 . however , prohibitions in appropriations acts have limited available funding for the program . some have questioned the use of federal restoration funds in areas with a high risk of damage by natural disasters , arguing that it encourages poor land use decisions . while the alternative of mitigation can potentially reduce the future cost of federal assistance , the initial cost of the permanent easement and restoration is sometimes viewed as too expensive a federal cost .