appendix a . deregulation and restructuring of the electric power market industry restructuring and deregulation are sometimes discussed synonymously , but are slightly different . restructuring is a result of states trying to introduce competition and customer choice , while deregulation breaks up a vertical monopoly on electricity long held by utility companies , separating the electricity functions into competitive generation , from still - regulated transmission and distribution functions . prior to 1935 , holding companies controlled the bulk of the nation's electric and gas distribution networks . the public utility holding company act ( puhca ) of 1935 dismantled much of the existing holding - company structure that exploited the operating utility companies and gave the securities and exchange commission ( sec ) power to promote physical integration of electric utilities in the interest of improving engineering efficiency . local utilities held customers captive and charged rates regulated by state public utility commissions ( pucs ) . in essence , the pucs required electric companies to serve a given area at a given price , but simultaneously guaranteed that these companies would receive stable and , in many cases , very generous profits , and freedom from the threat of rivals' competitive entry . electric utilities that owned their own bulk power transmission lines could restrict their competitors' ability to move power ( and thus offer utility customers competitively priced power ) by restricting access to their transmission lines . military installations relied on either self - generated power or , where local utility service was available , on utility service agreements to purchase electric power . while puhca had created an electric power industry structure that essentially lasted until the mid - 1990s , high energy prices during the 1970s led policy makers to look at dismantling it to promote competitive pricing , among other goals . congress began deregulating the industry with the public utility regulatory policies act of 1978 ( purpa ) , followed by the energy policy act of 1992 ( epact ) that allowed new entities to acquire generation facilities and provide electrical energy for sale to electric utilities . in 1996 , the federal energy regulatory commission ( ferc ) issued order 888 to encourage wholesale competition . prior to order 888 , electric utilities that owned bulk - power transmission lines could restrict their competitors' ability to move power by restricting access to their transmission lines . the ferc order required utilities to allow other electric suppliers access to their transmission lines as an incentive for more competitiveness in the power market . purpa defined a new class of qualifying generating facilities ( qfs ) that would receive special rate and regulatory treatment under ferc . under the purpa definition , qfs include "small power" production facilities that generate less than 80 megawatts using solar , wind , geothermal , biomass , or waste ; that is , renewable energy generators . purpa also required utilities to buy power from qfs within their service territory ( with some exceptions ) at the utility's "avoided cost" of power production via a state authorized "power purchase" contract ( more commonly referred to as a power purchase agreement ) .