the house agreed to h.con.res . 112 on march 29 , 2012 , by a vote of 228 to 191 . the house budget committee report that accompanied the house budget resolution included illustrative examples for achieving budget savings , such as a change in the structure of the medicaid programs and repealing many of the provisions in the aca . the major medicaid proposal would restructure the medicaid program from an individual entitlement to a block grant . the unofficial estimate provided in chairman ryan's path to prosperity report stated that the block grant would reduce federal outlays for medicaid by about $810 billion from fy2013 to fy2022 . cbo estimated repealing the aca medicaid expansion would save $643 billion from fy2013 to fy2022 . cbo's choices for deficit reduction in november 2012 , cbo published the document choices for deficit reform , which provides information about the united states' deficit and debt situation and options to reduce federal spending . the options affecting the medicaid program include repealing the aca medicaid expansion , converting the federal share of ltss into a block grant , and reducing the fmap floor . together , cbo estimated these options would reduce federal medicaid expenditures by $156 billion in fy2020 . states are not allowed to hold the providers harmless for the cost of the provider tax ( i.e. , they cannot guarantee that providers receive their money back ) . the administrative rules , however , waive the application of the hold harmless requirement when the tax is applied at a rate less than or equal to 6% of net patient service revenues , which is referred to as the threshold . to date , no state has imposed a provider tax at a rate above the threshold level . the federal government's share for most medicaid expenditures is determined by the fmap rate . the fmap formula compares each state's per capita income to u.s. per capita income . more context and discussion is provided for each of these recommendations or options in the sections following the table . as discussed above , the aca medicaid expansion is expected to significantly increase medicaid expenditures , even after the supreme court's decision made the expansion optional for states . the federal government will be funding a vast majority of the cost of the expansion due to the enhanced matching rates . an increased fmap rate ( see " federal medical assistance percentage " for more information about the fmap rate ) will be provided for "newly eligible" individuals who will gain medicaid eligibility due to the aca medicaid expansion . states that have experienced a major , statewide disaster and meet other certain conditions receive a temporary increase to their fmap rate . states that opt to cover certain women with breast or cervical cancer who do not otherwise qualify for medicaid and are otherwise uninsured receive the enhanced fmap ( e - fmap ) rate for medicaid expenditures for these women . states receive 100% federal reimbursement for services provided at an indian health service facility . states receive 90% federal reimbursement for family planning services and supplies . states receive a 50% federal matching rate for most administrative expenditures for their medicaid program .