first , petitions for lpr status are filed with u.s . citizenship and immigration services ( uscis ) in the department of homeland security ( dhs ) by the prospective immigrant or by the sponsoring relative or employer in the united states ( in the case of family - sponsored or employment - based immigration , respectively ) . others favor a reallocation toward employment - based immigration to help u.s. employers compete for the "best and the brightest," including foreign professional workers in science , technology , engineering , or mathematics ( stem ) fields . proponents of family - sponsored migration maintain that any proposal to increase immigration levels generally should also include the option of additional family - sponsored visas to reduce wait times — currently up to years or decades — for those already "in the queue. this figure of 112,189 reflected not only principal applicants or petition beneficiaries , but also their spouses and children entitled to derivative status under the ina ) . over half ( 58% ) of all approved petitions pending were 4 th preference siblings of u.s. citizens , and one - quarter ( 25% ) were 1 st preference unmarried adult children and 3 rd preference married adult children of u.s. citizens . second preference family members of lprs totaled 14% of the queue . in addition , immigrants who enter through the family - sponsored and employment based preference categories are subject to a 7% per - country cap ( see " per - country ceilings " below ) . numerical limits on immigration combined with the per - country cap for some categories has resulted in a sizable "visa queue" of foreign nationals with approved immigration petitions who must wait until a numerically limited visa becomes available before they can immigrate permanently to the united states ( see " the visa queue " below ) . the pool of people eligible to immigrate to the united states as lprs each year typically exceeds the worldwide level set by u.s. immigration law . at the end of each fiscal year , the department of state ( dos ) publishes a tabulation of immigrant petitions that have been approved by uscis and forwarded to dos's national visa center . these published figures do not constitute a backlog of petitions to be processed ; they represent persons who have been approved as family - sponsored or employment - based immigrants who cannot yet immigrate to the united states due to numerical limits in the ina . these reviews are intended to ensure that prospective immigrants are not ineligible for visas or admission under the grounds for inadmissibility spelled out in the ina . immigrant admissions and adjustments to lpr status are subject to complex numerical limits and preference categories that give priority for admission on the basis of family relationships , needed skills , and geographic diversity . the national visa center caseload drives the priority dates published in the monthly visa bulletin . family - sponsored preference immigrants dominated the queue of 4.06 million approved lpr visa petitions pending with the national visa center at the end of fy2017 ( figure 4 ) .