congress appropriates funds for inauguration security . this funding is not always specifically identified for presidential inauguration security . the goal of these security operations is to "develop and implement a seamless security plan that will create a safe and secure environment for the general public , event participants , secret service protectees , and other dignitaries. the usss's major events division ( med ) is responsible for nsse planning and coordinates with other usss headquarters and field offices . some of the coordination includes advance planning and liaison for venue and air space security , training , communications , and security credentialing . additionally , med coordinates and conducts liaisons with other federal , state , and local agencies — primarily law enforcement entities . nsse security is planned , exercised , and implemented through a unified command model that is comprised of representatives of participating federal , state , and local agencies with nsse responsibilities . in conjunction with usss , the fbi is the lead agency for intelligence and counterterrorism , while fema is the lead agency for coordinating emergency response . inauguration security is focused on physical screening of the audience and protection of officials . for example , during past inaugurations , dhs and additional federal law enforcement agencies provided personnel and equipment , including screening magnetometers . in total , usss received security assistance in the form of approximately 30,000 law enforcement officers from 58 federal , state , and local law enforcement agencies for multiple inaugural events . additionally , usss partnered with the joint congressional committee on inaugural ceremonies and the presidential inaugural committee ( pic ) to plan logistics and security . the usss uses jccic and pic seating plans and projected audience size to plan security ; however , the usss does not receive a list of ticketed attendees by name . the following section provides information on appropriations that provide funding to these entities for inauguration security . an nsse executive steering committee met to coordinate overall 2017 inauguration planning . this steering committee included: u.s. secret service ( chair ) ; federal bureau of investigation ( co - chair ) ; federal emergency management agency ( co - chair ) ; dc fire department ; dc homeland security and emergency management agency ; dc national guard general services administration ; joint congressional committee on inaugural ceremonies ; national park service ; u.s. attorney's office ; u.s. capitol police ; u.s. coast guard ; u.s. department of defense — joint forces headquarters ; u.s. department of defense — joint staff ; u.s. department of defense — northern command ; u.s. department of defense — office of the secretary of defense ; u.s. department of health and human services ; u.s. department of homeland security ; u.s. military district of washington ; u.s. park police ; washington metropolitan area transit authority police ; washington metropolitan police department ; and white house military office . in general , agencies involved in inauguration security often do not receive specific account - level appropriations for inauguration security operations . instead , inauguration security costs are included in regular fiscal year planning and budget requests .