senate - passed h.r . 1 proposed that $5,379 million in drf funding be designated as being for disaster relief under the bca , with all but $3,461 million ( for army corps of engineers construction activities ) of the remaining funding in the bill designated as emergency funding . 113-2 contains $41,669 million in emergency funding , $5,379 million for the drf designated as disaster relief , and $3,461 million for army corps of engineers construction activities that would count against the discretionary budget caps . one potential method for accommodating disaster response and recovery costs beyond the allowable adjustment for disaster relief would be offsetting the additional spending through rescissions or other means that would reduce the net budgetary scoring of the bill . traditionally , supplemental funding for the disaster relief fund ( drf ) has been treated as emergency spending — it was not counted against discretionary budget caps , nor was an offset required . however , supplemental spending packages have at times carried rescissions or transfers that have offset , to one degree or another , the budgetary impact of other forms of disaster assistance that could be defined as "disaster relief" under the bca . of the 59 bills passed with supplemental appropriations from 1990 to the end of 2012 , 6 were fully offset by rescissions . only one of those actually provided net additional resources for the drf — the emergency supplemental and rescissions for antiterrorism and oklahoma city disaster , 1995 ( p.l . in other cases , the drf was used as an offset for disaster assistance provided through other federal entities . offsetting the administration's supplemental request , however , would have been complicated by two key factors . first , as the federal government is operating under a continuing resolution , there was no baseline appropriation in the current fiscal year to offset from . it is also worth noting the scale of the offset required . the budget authority sought in the request is more than all but 3 of the 12 general appropriations bills for fy2012 , and exceeds the 3 smallest appropriations bills from that year combined — even if none of the nearly $13 billion in the administration's mitigation request were counted . the administration's request , senate - passed h.r . 113-2 did not include offsets , and the administration's request letter and statement of administration policy on h.r . 152 specifically stated the administration's position that the funding could and should be provided without offset . for example , a particular disaster may destroy one community's business district and overwhelm the ability of the state to respond to that impact , while another may significantly damage the majority of the community's public facilities . in the first disaster , the assistance from the federal government may be noteworthy for the relatively large amount of loan assistance provided by the small business administration , while the second disaster may be noteworthy for the relatively large amount of assistance provided through the fema's public assistance ( pa ) program . there is no distinction made in this table for mitigation funding .