it concludes with a discussion of considerations for policymakers . originally , federal housing assistance programs did not offer families much choice about where they were to live if they wished to receive assistance . families seeking assistance would apply to the local public housing authorities ( phas ) that administered federal housing assistance programs ( i.e. , public housing ) and if a subsidized unit became available , it would be offered to the family . it is well documented that for the first several decades of the public housing program , families were directed to specific public housing developments based on their race . the housing developments to which black families were directed were generally in less - desirable geographic areas and of poorer physical condition than those to which white families were directed . this systematic racial segregation was eventually outlawed and several large phas were subject to court - ordered desegregation strategies ( eg , the gautreaux fair housing program , discussed later in this report ) . however , many public housing developments , particularly in urban areas , remained racially segregated . these same housing developments have been characterized by severe distress , both physical and social , offering challenging circumstances and limited opportunities for the families that reside in them . the problems have been most acute in urban areas , where public housing helped contribute to the concentration of extreme poverty in inner - city , primarily black communities , and where joblessness , crime , and myriad other social problems were growing . it is against the backdrop of this history that "choice" has come to be considered a critical component in today's assisted housing policy . the concept of choice in federal housing policy is driven by two policy goals , neither of which the traditional public housing program appeared to have accomplished . one is to support the autonomy of individual families and their right to choose where they wish to live . the other is to promote racial desegregation and poverty deconcentration , by providing low - income families with the option to move to low - poverty and racially integrated areas . both implicit and explicit in this goal is the desire to improve families' well - being , particularly their economic well - being . encouraging moves to low - poverty neighborhoods is premised on the idea that low - poverty neighborhoods create better life outcomes , particularly for children . the disparities in health , education , exposure to violence , and employment outcomes between high - poverty and low - poverty neighborhoods are well documented . however , beyond a general agreement that individuals benefit from living in low - poverty neighborhoods , there are many unresolved questions . researchers have not concluded why , how , and how much neighborhoods matter , and researchers continue to debate which differences in neighborhoods ( eg , differences in resources , social networks , role models , civic engagement , etc. ) lead to differences in neighborhood features ( eg , school quality or crime levels ) .