111-5 ) , are waning under current law . cbo recently projected that the economy will not return to full employment until fy2018 . though atra is likely to increase economic growth in the short - run relative to what growth would have been if the policies of the "fiscal cliff" had taken effect , ongoing large budget deficits could dampen economic growth over the long - run . atra addressed several revenue provisions that had been set to expire at the end of 2012 . these included the "bush - era tax cuts," provisions related to the estate tax , certain tax provisions enacted or expanded as part of the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 , the alternative minimum tax ( amt ) , and a number of temporary tax provisions ( also known as "tax extenders" ) . in addition to these revenue provisions , atra also addressed several spending policies that were scheduled to reduce spending beginning in fy2013 . these included temporary emergency unemployment benefits , payments to medicare physicians under the sustainable growth rate ( sgr ) system , the automatic spending cuts enacted as part of the budget control act of 2011 , and the 2008 farm bill . high debt levels could limit the government's flexibility in meeting its obligations or in responding to emerging needs of its citizens . atra did not address two policies considered to be part of the "fiscal cliff" — the expiration at the end of 2012 of the two - percentage - point reduction in the social security payroll tax and the aca taxes on higher - income tax filers , which are scheduled to take effect in 2013 . as noted above , congress may choose to reconsider several provisions temporarily extended in atra before they expire . in march , the automatic spending reductions from the budget control act of 2011 are scheduled to take effect . at the end of 2013 , unemployment provisions , the farm bill , the "doc fix," and several tax extenders are scheduled to expire . in addition , this section discusses two other issues that congress is likely to consider in early 2013 , appropriations and the debt limit . many budget analysts are concerned about future levels of federal debt and acknowledge that the current spending and revenue policies resulting in large deficits cannot continue indefinitely . however , making significant changes to reduce the deficit at this time may be harmful to the ongoing economic recovery . some economists believe that the uncertainty surrounding the "fiscal cliff" was holding back the recovery as individuals , businesses , and state and local governments did not know what they would be facing in january 2013 , leading some to reduce or delay purchases of goods and services . although atra eliminated uncertainty surrounding some major tax and spending policies , it did not restore fiscal sustainability . the effects on the economy of certain policies enacted to combat the economic downturn , such as the spending and revenue provisions of the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 ( p.l . the continuing resolution currently funding the operations of the federal government expires at the end of march .