redistricting draws the maps . redistricting is a state process that is governed by federal law . much of this law is judicially imposed because , in 1929 , congress let lapse its standards requiring districts to be made up of "contiguous and compact territory and containing as nearly as practicable an equal number of inhabitants. section 1973c ; 2a . race cannot be only factor used in districting — u.s . constitution , 14th amendment , section 1 , the "equal protection clause" ; 3. geographic compactness of districts — ( 17 states require this in congressional districting ) ; 4. contiguity of districts — ( 22 states require this in congressional districting ) ; 5. preservation of the boundaries of political subdivisions ( minimize the splitting of county and towns boundaries between congressional districts ) — ( 18 states require this in congressional districting ) ; 6. maintenance of "communities of interest" — ( 13 states require this in congressional districting ) ; 7. protection of political incumbents — ( 7 states allow for this in congressional districting , but 5 states prohibit this .

 ) ; 8. maintenance of current political representation by preserving the "core" of congressional districts — ( 7 states require and 3 states allow for this in congressional districting ) ; and 9. the promotion of electoral competition or prohibition of partisan considerations within congressional districts — ( 7 states require this in congressional districting ) . as noted above , the responsibility for redistricting congressional districts is in the hands of the states , and , in most states , this authority lies with the state legislatures . however , in a few instances , usually due to the efforts of reform groups , the role of drawing the congressional , state legislative , and other local boundaries has been , seemingly , taken out of the hands of the politicians in the state legislature and given over to an "independent" commission . there is little question that the u.s. congress has the authority to pass federal legislation affecting the redistricting standards of congressional districts . as noted above , there is a long history of such legislation . the apportionment process determines the number of seats in the house of representatives that will be assigned each state , based on population counts . the redistricting process determines where those seats are geographically located within each state . if congress chooses to legislate again in this area , its mandate will come from article i , section 4 of the constitution , granting the authority to congress to change state laws pertaining to congressional elections . the goal of redistricting is to draw boundaries around geographic areas such that each district results in "fair" representation . an effort to favor one group of interests over another by using the redistricting process to distort this fairness is referred to as gerrymandering . aside from distorting representation , it is believed by some that such gerrymandering diminishes electoral responsiveness by minimizing political competition among the parties . many of the "rules" or criteria for drawing congressional boundaries are meant to enhance fairness and minimize the impact of gerrymandering .