appendix a . a chronology of state dsh allotments calculations the medicaid voluntary contribution and provider - specific tax amendments of 1991 ( p.l . 102-234 ) established ceilings on federal medicaid dsh funding for each state . since fy1993 , each state has had its own dsh limit , which is referred to as "dsh allotments. these allotments are calculated by the centers for medicare & medicaid services ( cms ) and promulgated in the federal register . the methodology for calculating these allotments has changed a number of times over the years , and these different methodologies are described below . fy1993 the original state dsh allotments provided in fy1993 were based on each state's fy1992 dsh payments . this resulted in funding inequities because states that had been providing relatively more dsh payments to hospitals in fy1992 locked in higher medicaid dsh allotments ( and vice versa ) . as a result , the dsh allotment a state receives is not entirely based on the number of dsh hospitals in the state or the hospital services provided in dsh hospitals to low - income patients . fy1994 to fy1997 the dsh allotments for fy1994 to fy1997 were based on each state's prior year dsh allotment . the annual growth for each state's dsh allotment depended on whether a state was classified as a "high - dsh" or "low - dsh" state . states with dsh expenditures greater than 12% of their total medicaid medical assistance expenditures ( i.e. , federal and state medicaid expenditures excluding expenditures for administrative activities ) were classified as "high - dsh" states , and "high - dsh" states did not receive an increase to their dsh allotment . states with dsh expenditures less than 12% of their total medicaid medical assistance expenditures were classified as "low - dsh" states , and the growth factor for the dsh allotment for "low - dsh" states was the projected percentage increase for each state's total medicaid expenditures ( i.e. , including federal and state spending ) for the current year . however , "low - dsh" states' dsh allotments could not exceed 12% of each state's total medical assistance expenditures . this is a target but not an absolute cap . as mentioned earlier , the national dsh payment limit is different from the state - specific 12% limit on state dsh allotments because the 12% national payment limit restricts both federal and state spending while the 12% limit for allotments caps only federal spending . the national dsh payment target states that aggregate dsh payments ( including federal and state expenditures ) should not be more than 12% of the total amount of medicaid medical assistance expenditures for all 50 states and the district of columbia . the federal statute limits state dsh allotments ( i.e. , the maximum amount of medicaid dsh federal funds ) to no more than 12% of each state's total medicaid medical assistance expenditures ( i.e. , including federal and state expenditures but excluding administrative expenditures ) , which means the federal share of dsh expenditures cannot be more than 12% of each state's total medicaid medical assistance expenditures .