, procurements subject to the far ) . only those deviations authorized by the far are permitted . contracting officers must use the authorized deviations in provisions clause and the authorized deviations in clauses clause to notify offerors and contractors when a solicitation or contract contains a deviation . class deviations affect multiple contract actions . for civilian agencies ( other than nasa ) , deviations may generally be authorized by agency heads or their designees after consultation with the civilian agency acquisition council ( caac ) . additionally , a copy of each class deviation must be provided to the far secretariat . for dod , the far provides that class deviations will be done in accordance with dfars , which generally grants the director of defense procurement and acquisition policy the authority to issue them . if any agency requires a permanent class deviation , then it should propose a far revision when appropriate . an example of a recent notable class deviation was the one that dod issued regarding the system for award management ( sam ) shortly after this database came into use . the packard commission is the name commonly given to president reagan's 1986 blue ribbon commission on defense . the commission is generally credited with seeking to "link and streamline" the requirements , acquisition , and budget processes , thereby "reducing complexities , regulations , and processes , and enhancing accountability as well as recruiting experienced personnel with strong management credentials. this report provides answers to 25 frequently asked questions regarding the far . these questions and their answers are organized into six broad categories , including ( 1 ) what the far is and what it covers ; ( 2 ) promulgation of the far ; ( 3 ) the relationship between the far and other authorities governing federal procurement ( eg , statutes , agency far supplements , other regulations , policies ) ; ( 4 ) the far in relation to congress and judicial and other tribunals ; ( 5 ) the relationship between the far and federal procurement contracts ; and ( 6 ) other topics . this section includes questions and answers that broadly address what the far is and what it covers , including where the text of the far can be found ; what agencies are subject to the far ; what purchases are subject to the far ; and what transactions fall outside the far's coverage . the questions and answers in this section address the promulgation of the far , including the origins of the far ; the process by which the far is amended ; who typically promulgates regulations amending the far ; the roles of the office of federal procurement policy ( ofpp ) and the office of management and budget ( omb ) in revising and implementing the far ; and how long it generally takes to amend the far . this section addresses the relationship between the far and other authorities governing federal procurement , including statutes , agency far supplements , other regulations , and executive branch policies and guidance .