transparency and accountability . jackson asserted that "in a democracy and a free - market economy , transparency and accountability are simply essential.... tax payers in the united states have access to information on how every dollar is being spent in malawi , and want to see it being used wisely and to good effect. anti - corruption efforts . jackson stated that "corruption must be attacked at every level — from the marketplaces to the medical shelves , and from the border crossings to the board rooms . corruption is a disease that could kill all the great efforts to move this country forward to meet the president's vision of moving from aid to trade. key u.s. bilateral assistance goals in malawi include increased food security and agricultural growth ; poverty reduction ; and stronger institutions to ensure effective social service delivery . others include increased private sector and civil society capacity ; the preservation of biodiversity and strengthening of local capacities to mitigate climate change effects ; and further consolidation of democracy and good governance . state department - and u.s. usaid - administered bilateral assistance to malawi totaled over $172.6 million in fy2011 and stands at an estimated $166.7 million in fy2012 . the obama administration has requested $145.8 million for fy2013 . malawi also receives some usaid regionally programmed aid , and periodic functionally specialized , generally small - scale program aid from other federal agencies and mcc assistance , discussed below . there is a peace corps program in malawi , funded at $2.7 million in fy2012 , with $2.6 million requested in fy2013 . it undertakes work in the areas of education , environment , agriculture , and health . the number of volunteers in the program , 90 in fy2012 , is slated to fall to 80 in fy2013 . u.s. efforts to support good governance in malawi seek to reverse a situation in which , according to the fy2013 state department congressional budget justification for foreign operations ( cbj ) , "government policies , decisions , and management are conducted with minimal transparency and openness , and citizens are not sufficiently empowered to seek accountability from government. such trends were illustrated by the continued postponement of local elections until 2014 and the passage , under mutharika , of laws restricting civil liberties ( as discussed above ) . u.s. programs focus on building the capacity of civil society to contribute to public policy making and implementation monitoring , with an emphasis on enhancing state accountability and transparency . they also support media training , strengthening of local knowledge about human rights and civil liberties , and efforts to counter discrimination against various minorities or marginalized groups . u.s. civic education aid is also planned in the run - up to elections in 2014 . malawi's military receives u.s. international military education and training ( imet ) and has participated in the african contingency operations training and assistance ( acota ) program and a related defense department program , the u.s. africa command's ( africom's ) africa deployment assistance partnership team ( adapt ) program , which focus on peacekeeping training and deployment support .