this provision was not enacted . some in congress may continue to advocate for additional reforms to the nation's food safety system , particularly with respect to coordination and organization among federal agencies . efforts to establish a single federal food safety agency were introduced and debated in the 103 rd congress . the organization of the u.s. food safety system has been debated ever since fda was removed from usda in 1940 . years later , the final report from a 1969 white house conference on food , nutrition and health report highlighted the divergence in food safety policy between usda and the department of health , education , and welfare ( hew ) , where fda resided at that time . in the years following the conference , there were a series of reports and hearings adding to the debate over a single food safety agency . although the idea of a single food agency has the support of gao , the national research council ( nrc ) , and the institute of medicine ( iom ) , it also has its detractors . while some see consolidation as an opportunity for improvement in the efficiency and effectiveness of food safety regulation , others worry that it could unnecessarily compromise day - to - day food safety efforts . fsma did not alter the existing food safety jurisdiction between fda and usda , yet the issue has remained of interest to congress . press reports had suggested that representative rosa delauro intended to reintroduce legislation to create a single food safety agency in the 113 th congress , although such legislation was not reintroduced until the 114 th congress . the safe food act of 2015 ( h.r . 609 / delauro ; s. 287 / durbin ) would create a single independent food safety administration ( fsa ) by transferring and consolidating the food safety authorities at fda and usda as well as portions of the national marine fisheries service at the national oceanic and atmospheric administration . fsa would be responsible for regulating food safety and related labeling , inspection , enforcement , and research functions of both domestically produced and imported foods . according to the bill authors , the new independent fsa would provide a more integrated approach , eliminate duplication , and result in efficient use of available resources and overall cost savings . among those supporting the h.r . 609 and s. 287 are the consumer federation of america and the center for science in the public interest . as part of the fy2016 budget request , the obama administration also proposed to establish a single food agency . according to the administration , a single food safety agency would "provide focused , centralized leadership , a primary voice on food safety standards , and clear lines of responsibility and accountability that will enhance both prevention of and responses to outbreaks of foodborne illnesses. unlike the legislative proposals , the administration's proposal would not create a new independent agency but would instead transfer existing food safety functions into a new agency within the u.s. department of health and human services ( hhs ) .