for example , while h.r . 3990 would no longer retain many of the current esea programs , h.r . 3990 would include a block grant program under which funds could potentially be used for similar activities as were permitted or required under some programs that would not be retained . the uses of funds under the proposed block grant program are discussed in this report . similarly , if an existing program or activity is not specifically mentioned as allowable under a new program , it should not be assumed that funds could not be used to support such programs or activities . it is beyond the scope of this report to discuss proposed programs or activities in great detail . 112-459 part 1 ) . both bills were ordered reported on february 28 , 2012 , on strictly partisan votes ( 23-16 in each case ) . it is unclear whether s. 3578 or h.r . 3990 will be considered on the senate or house floors , respectively . 3990 would take different approaches to reauthorizing the esea , most notably in three key areas: ( 1 ) accountability for student achievement , ( 2 ) teacher quality versus teacher effectiveness , and ( 3 ) targeted support for elementary and secondary education versus the use of a block grant . in addition , both the help committee and education and workforce committee bills would eliminate existing programs , while creating new programs . 3990 would include a block grant program under which funds could potentially be used for similar activities as were permitted or required under some programs that would not be retained . 3990 would address the issues . under current law , there is only one authorization for fie that encompasses 21 subparts , including title v - d - 1 , without specifying a share of the authorization for a given subpart . therefore , under current law , separate authorizations are not listed for the tif or promise neighborhoods program . 112-221 ) by a bipartisan vote of 15-7 . the house education and workforce committee considered and ordered reported two bills that together would provide for a comprehensive reauthorization of the esea: ( 1 ) the student success act ( h.r . 112-458 ) , and ( 2 ) the encouraging innovation and effective teachers act ( h.r . this report examines major features of s. 3578 , h.r . 3990 with respect to current law . the report begins by discussing the approach that each bill takes toward reshaping the esea in key areas . next , the report provides a structured orientation by esea title and part to how the esea would be reconfigured under each bill . then it more thoroughly summarizes the major proposals in the aforementioned bills , focusing on those aspects of the bills that would fundamentally change a portion of current law . the report does not aim to provide a comprehensive summary of these bills or of technical changes that would be made by each measure . the report concludes with an appendix that examines the proposed program authorizations included in each bill .