a strong bilateral partnership is in u.s. interests and benefits both countries . we expect india's importance to u.s. interests to grow in the long - run as india , a major regional and emerging global power , increasingly assumes roles commensurate with its position as a stakeholder and a leader in the international system . with this bilateral partnership based on shared values such as democracy , pluralism , and rule of law , numerous economic , security , and global initiatives are underway , among them unprecedented plans for civilian nuclear cooperation . the two countries also inked a 10-year defense framework agreement in 2005 to facilitate expanded bilateral security cooperation . in the new century , large - scale combined military exercises have become commonplace , and bilateral cooperation on intelligence and counterterrorism is increasing . unprecedented major u.s. arms sales to india are completed and underway ; more are anticipated . enthusiasm and positive trends can be seen in an array of bilateral security - related activities . evidence of a mind change in india since the cold war period includes convincing signs that the u.s. military presence in the indian ocean region ( ior ) is now widely viewed as being benign . the new breadth and depth of u.s. - india security engagement detailed in this report constitute a gradual , but steady strengthening of bilateral defense relations over past decade . still , many concerns remain that india is unable and / or unwilling to be the kind of international security actor u.s. leaders would like to see it become . the current coalition government at the federal level , in power since 2004 , has lately appeared fragile and often shies from undertaking bold initiatives , given its acute dependence on sometimes mercurial regional allies , and with its stature weakened by multiple corruption scandals . the country's endemic poverty is exacerbated by a wider societal corruption and — despite the growth of a large "middle - class" and booming information technology sector — india's gross domestic product per capita in 2011 was only $3,632 , compared to $8,466 for china and $48,442 for the united states . high rates of economic growth seen in india during the 2000s have lately declined even as the population soars , bringing into question whether new delhi's growing but still relatively paltry resources and military capabilities can continue to increase as projected . at present , the sometimes touted equipment and capabilities of india's armed forces — in particular their ability to project power over air and sea — remain quite modest in comparison with those of china . in a broad sense , there has emerged no consensus in new delhi about what india can and should seek through its security cooperation with the united states . those who do offer a set of expectations and demands of the relationship can fail to recognize that , for an american audience , "a viable strategic partnership calls for reciprocity," as flatly put by one senior scholar .