this program is no longer authorized . temporary emergency impact aid for displaced students the temporary emergency impact aid for displaced students program provided federal funding to assist schools in enrolling students who had been displaced by the gulf coast hurricanes . funds were made available to leas and schools based on the number of displaced students that enrolled , irrespective of whether the school in which parents chose to enroll their child was a public or nonpublic school . 109-148 appropriated $645 million for this program . subsequently , p.l . this program is no longer authorized . higher education disaster relief p.l . 110-329 provided an additional $15 million for ihes that were located in an area affected by hurricanes , floods , and other natural disasters that occurred during 2008 and for which the president declared a major disaster under title iv of the stafford act . funds provided through the higher education disaster relief program could be used to defray the expenses incurred by ihes in affected areas that were forced to close or relocate or whose operations were adversely affected by the natural disaster and to provide grants to students who attended such ihes for academic years beginning on or after july 1 , 2008 . in response to multiple disasters , congress has required the secretary to hold affected leas harmless at 100% of their prior - year grant amount under title i - a of the esea . it appears that these provisions may have been enacted as a means of preventing affected leas from experiencing a decrease in funding due to the displacement of students . temporary flexibilities under the idea p.l . 109-148 also provided the secretary with the temporary authority to extend certain administrative deadlines under the idea , such as the deadline for submission of an annual report on the progress of the state and of children with disabilities in the state for the 2005-2006 academic year . in addition , the secretary was authorized to extend the deadline for the initial evaluation of children to determine their eligibility for services under idea . in providing the secretary with the authority to extend these deadlines , congress also included statutory language that clarified that this new authority should not be interpreted as granting the secretary waiver authority over key idea provisions , such as the right to a free appropriate public education or procedural safeguards granted under the act . higher education appropriations to support ihes following the gulf coast hurricanes of 2005 ( i.e. , hurricanes katrina and rita ) were provided in 2005 through p.l . 109-148 ( $200 million ) , in 2006 through p.l . 109-234 ( $50 million ) , and in 2007 through p.l . these funds provided assistance to leas in gulf coast states affected by hurricanes gustav and ike , as well as leas affected by natural disasters in other parts of the nation , such as flooding in the midwest . of the $15 million provided , $13.5 million was provided to florida , louisiana , and texas . table a - 1 details the amount of funding allocated to states under these provisions . hurricane education recovery of the $200 million provided under p.l .