appendix a . appendix b . the reason is likely to be habit and infrastructure . consumers are used to using oil - based products and the infrastructure to supply them is well established . if the incentive of cost savings disappears , it is likely that the mass of consumers will continue using established products . the result would likely be upward price volatility which could destabilize the market and reduce expected economic benefits . similarly , the cost of a new supply infrastructure is likely to be avoided if the anticipated demand growth of natural gas becomes more uncertain . for coal , electric power plants may be idled for some time while fuel prices give natural gas an advantage . but , if natural gas prices rise because of increased demand , coal may regain market share . enthusiasm over the state of natural gas markets has led to plans of increased consumption in all demand categories . however , demand expansion differs among the eia's demand segments . final guidance is expected in spring 2013 . under the clean water act ( cwa ) , epa is developing regulations governing the discharge of wastewater produced in natural gas extraction from shale formations and coal beds . the regulations will be established under epa's effluent guidelines program , which sets national standards for the discharge of pollutants from industrial activities directly to surface waters and municipal wastewater treatment facilities . epa plans to propose regulations for the coalbed methane effluents in 2013 , and for the shale gas extraction regarding wastewater pollutants in 2014 . in may 2012 , the bureau of land management ( blm ) , department of the interior , proposed revisions to its oil and gas development rules in response to the increased use of hydraulic fracturing on federal and indian lands . the proposal would require public disclosure of chemicals used during hydraulic fracturing , tighten requirements related to well - bore integrity , and add requirements for managing water used and produced in hydraulic fracturing operations . the public comment period closed september 10 , 2012 , and the blm is now reviewing comments . a tighter regulatory environment for natural gas exploration and production , if it raises costs significantly , would likely result in slower supply growth , and in the extreme could reduce some of the economic benefits described in this report . if demand increases as the result of expectations of rising supply and low prices , but then regulation slows supply growth , a price spike is the likely result . a price spike could reduce market confidence and set back the use of natural gas , especially in the industrial sector . electric power generation and industrial use of natural gas are different . much more rapid demand expansion can occur in these segments . some companies in the industrial demand sector , as mentioned earlier , have made significant investments predicated on the supply being available and prices remaining low . however , in the past several years , a number of states have adopted stricter production regulations , yet production has continued to grow in those states ( eg , colorado , north dakota , ohio , pennsylvania , and wyoming ) .