if the requirements of e.o . 12866 were extended to the ircs , there could be significant implications for those agencies . president william clinton issued e.o . the executive order , which still remains in place today , replaced e.o . 12866 uses the definition of an independent regulatory agency established in 1980 by the paperwork reduction act ( pra ; 44 u.s.c . 12291 , which was issued by president ronald reagan in 1981 . the current exemption for the ircs from presidential review of agency rulemaking is one of the indicia of agency independence . other elements of independence that provide various degrees of insulation from presidential intrusion into the budgetary , regulatory , and litigation processes are ( 1 ) "for cause" removal protections for the agency heads ; ( 2 ) structural designs ; ( 3 ) exemptions from omb clearance requirements for legislative proposals , testimony , and comments ; ( 4 ) authority to bypass omb when submitting the agency's budget , or to submit the agency's budget to omb and congress concurrently ; and ( 5 ) independent litigation authority . 12291 had similar requirements for agencies to conduct cba and send their rules to oira for review , but its requirement for centralized review applied to all rules , not just "significant" rules . the parts of e.o . the primary cross - cutting requirement for agencies to consider costs and benefits when issuing rules is found in e.o . 12866 that require agencies to complete cba and to submit their rules to oira for review do not currently apply to statutorily designated "independent regulatory agencies," nor did they under president reagan's order . the details of these two requirements are discussed more below ( see sections entitled " cost - benefit analysis requirements under executive order 12866 " and " oira review of regulations under executive order 12866 " ) . the exemption of ircs from various requirements provides them with an element of independence from presidential control . the independent regulatory agencies listed are as follows: the board of governors of the federal reserve system , the commodity futures trading commission , the consumer product safety commission , the federal communications commission , the federal deposit insurance corporation , the federal energy regulatory commission , the federal housing finance agency , the federal maritime commission , the federal trade commission , the interstate commerce commission , the mine enforcement safety and health review commission , the national labor relations board , the nuclear regulatory commission , the occupational safety and health review commission , the postal regulatory commission , the securities and exchange commission , the bureau of consumer financial protection , the office of financial research , office of the comptroller of the currency , and any other similar agency designated by statute as a federal independent regulatory agency or commission . the remainder of this report discusses the two main requirements of e.o . 12866 in greater detail and analyzes the possible implications of extending those requirements to the ircs . 12866 , which requires agencies to assess costs and benefits for "significant" rules , both at the proposed rule and final rule stage .