australia has been in consultations with the united states on this development . the 2011 ausmin joint communiqué stated: australia noted and will continue to consult with the united states as it develops the phased adaptive approach to bmd outlined in the u.s. bmd review , which will allow missile defense to be adapted to the threats unique to the asia - pacific . we are continuing our cooperation to build a more detailed understanding of regional ballistic missile threats ; cooperative research on systems to counter such threats ; and options for practical cooperation in this area . defence minister stephen smith has stated it is a "theoretical possibility" that the jindalee operational radar network ( jorn ) could be incorporated into an anti - missile system . these concerns appear to have been allayed subsequently . ( for a detailed analysis of the rebalancing strategy see crs report r42448 , pivot to the pacific ? the obama administration's "rebalancing" toward asia , coordinated by [author name scrubbed]. ) australia will likely seek to support the u.s. rebalancing to asia strategy with diplomatic and political support , by providing territory to support u.s. posture in the region , by maintaining interoperability , through joint efforts in the southwest pacific , and through joint facilities . while the "boots on the ground" deployment of u.s. marines in darwin is a very significant symbolic deployment , anticipated future expansion of u.s. and australian naval and air cooperation could be strategically more important . the rotational presence of u.s. forces in australia should also enhance the ability of u.s. and australian forces to deploy in a joint fashion to meet regional challenges in the future across a spectrum of contingencies from humanitarian assistance and disaster relief to more traditional security situations . australia figures prominently in the new strategy for several reasons . in addition to their symbolic value , the darwin rotations meet u.s. strategic goals by providing for a more dispersed u.s. force structure in the asia pacific , while providing for more joint training opportunities with australia and other nations in the region and by providing a flexible presence in the region . u.s. marines will reportedly be based at the australian bradshaw and mount bundy training areas in the northern territory . ( go to http: / / www.defence.gov.au / oscdf / adf - posture - review / docs / base_map.pdf for map of key australian defense infrastructure sites. ) the marine force in the northern territory is expected to expand gradually and is not expected to reach its full strength of 2,500 until 2016 . there are several benefits to australia of the marines' deployment: the deployment increases the ability of australian forces to train and learn from american forces ; it provides an opportunity for australian forces to work with marines and other countries in combined exercises and training in or close to australia ; it provides a tangible sign of both countries' commitment to adapting and renewing the alliance ; and the deployment also enhances australia's strategic credibility in asia . there is very strong elite and popular support for the alliance in australia , which finds expression in the leadership of both the ruling labor party and the opposition liberal - national coalition .