88-210 ) was signed into law . this report is divided into three major sections . the first section provides a brief history of federal legislation supporting cte . this is followed by an examination of perkins iv that describes the major programs and provisions . the last section provides statistics on the funding of and participation in perkins iv programs . to reduce reliance on individuals trained in foreign vocational schools , improve domestic wage earning capacity , reduce unemployment , and protect national security , federal funding for vocational education was initiated with the passing of the smith - hughes act in 1917 . about 30 years later , the george - barden act ( p.l . 80-402 ) expanded federal support of vocational education to support vocations beyond agriculture , trade , home economics , and industrial subjects . the national defense education act ( p.l . 85-864 ) , signed into law in 1958 , focused on improving instruction in science , mathematics , foreign languages , and other critical areas . it also provided additional funding for vocational education to prepare individuals for technical occupations related to national defense . in addition to the smith - hughes act , congress provided further support for the development of vocational education in states and territories . a 1934 act provided grants to states for the salaries of faculty of agricultural , home economics , and trades and industrial subjects . this percentage may suggest the effectiveness of the focus on low - income students in the formula allocation process . figure 4 disaggregates cte concentrators by career cluster and by education level . the most popular career clusters at the secondary level are business management ( 21% ) , agriculture ( 17% ) , information technology ( 16% ) , and human services ( 15% ) . the 2007-2008 program year was a transition year to perkins iv from perkins iii . transition year reporting requirements were abbreviated in comparison to the aforementioned full requirements for subsequent years . a 1936 act replaced the 1934 act , added funding for the salaries of faculty in distributive occupations , and further required that states match the federal grants . the vocational education act of 1946 amended the 1936 act to change the allocation of funds for each vocational education subject and allow support for salaries , teacher training , training program development , counseling , and equipment and supplies . in 1963 , the vocational education act ( p.l . in addition to increasing federal support for vocational education schools , including the construction of area vocational education school facilities , the act also provided funding for vocational work - study programs and research , training , and demonstration programs related to vocational education . five years later , the vocational education amendments of 1968 ( p.l . 90-576 ) modified the existing vocational education programs . an additional 27 states were required to develop an improvement plan following py2008-2009 because they did not meet at least 90% of their adjusted levels of performance on every indicator . the number of states requiring an improvement plan increased to 28 states following py2009-2010 .