2517 does not affect doma . no further action was taken on the bill . congress may elect to examine , prohibit , or enact into law administration initiatives that made some benefits available to same - sex partners . congress has the authority to determine if some , all , or none of the benefits that are available to the opposite - sex spouses of federal employees should be made available to the same - sex partners of federal employees . the federal government provides a variety of benefits to federal civilian and military employees and retirees . among these benefits are health insurance ; enhanced dental and vision benefits ; retirement and disability benefits and plans ; survivor benefits ; family , medical , and emergency leave ; and reimbursement of relocation costs . various federal laws and regulations determine who is eligible to receive these benefits . a federal employee who is married to someone of the opposite gender can , pursuant to federal law , extend many of these benefits to his or her spouse . doma affects the application of benefits to the spouses and partners of federal employees . doma defines marriage explicitly as "only a legal union between one man and one woman as husband and wife. doma defines spouse as "a person of the opposite sex who is a husband or a wife. pursuant to doma , these definitions are to be used when "determining the meaning of any act of congress. as such , doma prohibits the extension of any federal spousal benefit to the same - sex partners of federal employees . if they ... are not afforded the same rights , this bill is directly discriminatory against heterosexual couples , and that , to me , is one of the unintended consequences that i have a serious concern [about] and question... . this report , however , does not address the ethical and legal debates surrounding doma and same - sex marriage . as discussed earlier in this report , president obama's june 2 , 2010 , memorandum to the heads of executive branch departments and agencies requires opm to create and present to the president an annual report on agency progress toward the extension of certain benefits to same - sex domestic partners . congress may choose to stop the extension of these benefits by enacting legislation explicitly prohibiting their extension . no legislation has been introduced that would scale back the same - sex partner benefits extended by the obama administration . conversely , congress has the authority to enact into law some , all , or none of the memorandum . congress may choose to hold hearings to examine the implementation of the memorandum . the definition of "domestic partner" is in dispute . doma defines marriage , for purposes of federal benefit programs , as the union of one man and one woman . for the purposes of distributing federal benefits to the partners of opposite - sex couples , the federal government recognizes a spouse from the date of legal marriage to either divorce or death . state and local governments or companies that wish to provide domestic partner benefits need to define "domestic partner" for the purpose of the benefits .