enacted corps supplemental appropriations and h.r . 4667 in the 115 th congress . it also discusses common issues that policymakers consider in deliberating on these supplemental appropriations bills . separately , the appendix lists the disaster events that were explicitly referenced in enacted corps supplemental appropriations from 2003 to 2016 and in h.r . the 115 th congress is considering possible responses to various natural disasters in 2017 . in recent years through supplemental appropriations , congress not only has funded the emergency response and repair activities of the corps but also has provided the corps with funding to study and construct projects that reduce flood risks in areas recently affected by some hurricanes and floods . that is , supplemental appropriations in response to hurricane katrina and hurricane sandy supported new investments in flood - risk reduction infrastructure projects in affected areas to a much greater extent than congress has provided for other flood events . 4667 proposes $12.09 billion for the agency's activities associated with response , repair , and recovery from natural disasters including hurricanes harvey , irma , and maria ; of the $12.09 billion total , $10.425 billion would be for new construction of corps flood - risk reduction projects in areas affected by hurricanes harvey , irma , and maria . during its deliberations on corps supplemental appropriations , congress often considers various issues and special considerations associated with the provision of these funds . these include the role of congress in the authorization of construction of corps projects that receive supplemental funds , whether to maintain requirements for nonfederal cost sharing , and what requirements to include regarding reporting to congress and public transparency associated with supplemental funds . supplemental corps funding debates also raise broader questions for policymakers , such as the effectiveness and efficiency of processes such as those for postdisaster supplemental appropriations and corps annual budget development , especially in regard to identifying and supporting priority investments in reducing the nation's flood risk . table 1 shows account - level funding in enacted corps supplemental appropriations bills and in h.r . of the $33.2 billion in enacted supplemental appropriations legislation , most of this amount ( $31.4 billion ) was provided in 12 appropriations laws enacted between 2005 and 2016 . adjusting prior - year appropriations for inflation , congress provided the corps with approximately $38 billion ( in 2016 dollars ) in supplemental appropriations between 1987 and 2016 . other stakeholders would prefer more attention and funding that supports other programs and measures to reduce the nation's flood risks . ( for an overview of federal flood - related assistance programs , see crs report r45017 , flood - risk reduction and resilience: federal assistance and programs , by [author name scrubbed] et al. ) the discussion below differentiates between five primary types of supplemental funding that the corps received or the 115 th congress is considering: funding for the 2005 hurricanes ; funding for hurricane sandy response and recovery ; funding for "all other" floods , hurricanes , and other natural disasters ; funding for other nondisaster purposes , such as economic recovery and facility security ; and funding proposed in h.r .