this could include syria . the syria freedom support act ( h.r . 2106 ) as passed by the house committee on foreign affairs in march 2012 included a provision that would authorize the president to assist a future democratic syrian government with securing and dismantling its inherited weapons of mass destruction and related facilities . section 106 of the bill provides $250 million in drawdown authority and transfer authority from any other appropriated funds "notwithstanding any other provision of law. the senate fy2012 foreign operations appropriations committee report ( s.rept . 112-85 ) said in regard to the nonproliferation , demining , and anti - terrorism funding , "the committee recognizes that dynamic change in the near east and ongoing threats and humanitarian needs in other regions afford opportunities to conduct and expand nonproliferation , demining , and anti - terrorism programs , including in syria should the current regime fall . the committee recommends additional funding above the budget request to accelerate the u.s. response to such opportunities , which is in the security interests of the united states and regional allies. the national defense authorization act ( h.r . 1960 ) as reported by the house includes section 1205 , which gives authority to the "secretary of defense , with the concurrence of the secretary of state , to provide assistance to the military and civilian response organizations of jordan , kuwait , bahrain , the united arab emirates , iraq , turkey , and other countries in the region of syria in order for such countries to respond effectively to incidents involving weapons of mass destruction in syria and the region. it authorizes up to $4 million for this purpose . damascus has apparently not yet achieved this goal . like egypt , syria has never signed the chemical weapons convention ( cwc ) , which prohibits the development , production , stockpiling , transfer , and use of chemical weapons . however , in 1968 , syria acceded to the 1925 geneva protocol for the prohibition of the use in war of asphyxiating , poisonous or other gases , and of bacteriological methods of warfare , which bans the use of chemical or biological agents in warfare . therefore , "syria has formally renounced both first and retaliatory use of chemical or biological weapons against any state," according to the organization for the prohibition of chemical weapons , which implements the cwc . syria has said that its ratification of the cwc ( and bwc ) is contingent on establishment of a zone free of weapons of mass destruction in the middle east . syrian foreign minister walid moallem stated during a july 29 , 2012 , press conference that damascus supports the establishment of such a zone . "there is no doubt amongst the uk intelligence community that the syrian regime possesses vast stockpiles" of chemical weapons , according to a british parliamentary report published in july 2013 . israel defense forces deputy chief of staff major - general ya'ir nave described syria's chemical weapons arsenal as "the largest in the world" during a june 2012 interview . damascus possesses mustard blister agent , sarin nerve agent , and vx nerve agent , according to official u.s. assessments .