the rest of the funding is for apec - related activities . according to the department of state operations congressional budget justification for fiscal year 2013 , apec - related activities involve 17 different federal departments , agencies , and supported organizations in such areas as advancing regulatory reform , enhancing customs procedures , promoting anti - corruption efforts , and improving transportation security . the 113 th congress will also be asked to provide funding for apec activities , including some related to the key issues discussed in vladivostok . president obama has requested $1.028 million for fy2013 . of that amount , $144,000 is for the 18% share of the apec member assessments provided by the united states . the following table lists the 54 categories of goods included in the apec agreement to lower tariff rates to 5% or less by 2015 by harmonized system code . categories with peak tariff rates above 5% according to u.s. law are highlighted in italics . th is free trade agreement is central to america's economic vision in asia [emphasis added]. for several years , critics in the united states and in asia have questioned the value of apec and its annual leaders' meeting . despite having helped organize the first apec leaders' meeting in 1993 , former australia prime minister paul keating subsequently referred to apec as a "talk shop of debatable output. confidential sources have suggested to crs that given the growth in high - level events in asia at which the president of the united states is expected to attend , the united states could be represented at future apec leaders' meetings by the secretary of state or the vice president . although president obama did not attend this year due to the conflict with the democratic party's national convention , the obama administration is consulting with indonesia , next year's apec host , to set dates for the leaders' meeting so that the president can attend . to the extent that apec remains one of the leading economic and trade fora in asia for u.s. foreign policy , congress will continue to have an active interest in apec's major meetings and any resulting commitments . in addition , congress must appropriate funds to pay the u.s. share to support apec's secretariat and operations . finally , congress may be asked to approve funding for various apec studies and initiatives agreed to at events such as the annual leaders' meeting . at this year's leaders' meeting , the 21 apec members pledged to reduce the tariff rates on 54 categories of environmental goods to below 5% by 2015 . under current u.s. law , 4 of those 54 categories have peak rates above 5% . as a result , the 113 th congress may consider legislation to bring u.s. tariff rates in compliance with the apec commitment . as an apec member , the united states contributes to the support of the apec secretariat in singapore , as well as various apec programs . the 112 th congress provided an estimated $1.023 million to apec - related activities in fy2012 as part of the state department's contributions to international organizations .