the report also examines the specific tax advantages of these plans . distributions from coverdell plans are generally not considered income in the federal need analysis calculation and are therefore not reported on the fafsa , although the value of the coverdell is considered an asset in the federal need analysis methodology and should be reported on the fafsa . for an overview of all tax benefits for higher education , see crs report r41967 , higher education tax benefits: brief overview and budgetary effects , by [author name scrubbed] . as previously mentioned , the specific tax advantage of coverdells is that withdrawals from these plans are excludable from gross income , and hence not subject to income taxation , if they are used to pay for specific education expenses incurred in a given year . these expenses are referred to as adjusted qualified education expenses ( aqee - see shaded text box ) . any amount withdrawn from a coverdell account which does not go toward these expenses is subject to income taxation and may be subject to an additional 10% penalty tax . logically , a taxpayer who receives a coverdell distribution ( the beneficiary or the beneficiary's guardian ) would seek to minimize their income tax liability by withdrawing just enough money from their coverdell to cover aqee and no more . however , especially when coverdells are used for higher education expenses , this is not as straightforward as it may seem due to a variety of factors , including the availability of other education tax benefits and student aid . in order to understand the complex decisions taxpayers must consider when determining the amount of money they should withdraw from a coverdell , this section details the income tax treatment of coverdell distributions , including the definition of aqee , when coverdell distributions may be taxable , and the interaction of coverdell distributions with other education tax benefits . ( an overview of basic gift tax rules is also included. ) therefore , the ownership of the asset is important when determining how it will affect a student's efc . for students who are classified as dependent students for fafsa purposes ( which differs from the classification of dependent for tax purposes ) , coverdells are considered an asset of the parent , as long as the custodial ownership of the plan belongs either to the parent or student . therefore , dependent students benefit from a lower assessment rate on coverdells , which , all else being equal , results in a lower efc and the potential for more federal need - based student aid . for students who are classified as independent students for fafsa purposes , coverdells are treated as an asset of the student , as long as the custodial ownership of the plan belongs either to the student or student's spouse ( if applicable ) . coverdells that are owned by someone other than the student , parent , or spouse are not reported as an asset on the fafsa , but distributions from these coverdells are reported as untaxed income for the beneficiary on the fafsa . in general , income is assessed at a higher rate compared to assets in the federal need analysis methodology .