have imposed sanctions on burma . 113-6 prohibits the use of appropriated funds for imet , fmf , excess defense article and section 1206 assistance in burma , except as otherwise permitted under section 404 of the child soldiers prevention act of 2008 ( p.l . the 113 th congress could decide to continue exert its appropriations authority in two distinct ways . first , it may refuse to fund or bar the usage of funds for certain types of assistance in burma that congress considers inappropriate at this time . second , congress could effectively set assistance priorities by its allocation of funds to differing projects to be conducted in burma . the various presidential waivers have significantly altered the scope of sanctions that remain in force in burma . the general pattern has been to lift the enforcement of global restrictions on political and economic relations , but to keep in effect sanctions on designated individuals or entities deemed to be counter - productive to u.s. policy goals in burma . this selective process of sanction waivers has in some cases made the enforcement of the sanction laws more complex . for certain sanctions — particularly the visa ban , the freezing of assets , and restrictions on the provision of financial services — questions have been raised on whether the department of state and the department of the treasury have acted in full compliance with the law and have taken sufficient steps to fully implement the sanctions laws . as described above , three laws and two presidential documents contain provisions specifying which burmese nationals are to be denied a visa to enter the united states , as well as possible conditions for a waiver . over the last two years , a number of burmese government officials have been issued visas to visit the united states , but it is unclear if in each case the required waiver process was adequately followed , including the requirement that congress be notified in writing that a waiver is to be provided . a similar issue of compliance arises with respect to the requirement that the assets of certain burmese persons be frozen and the restriction of financial services to certain burmese entities . the bfda and the tom lantos block burmese jade act specify two similar but distinct categories of persons subject to the freezing of assets . the tom lantos block burmese jade act designates a number of different people who cannot be provided financial services by u.s. financial institutions . in practice , the specially designated nationals ( sdn ) list maintained by ofac has served as the mechanism for enforcing the provisions of these two laws . several organizations have indicated to the state department and ofac that there are dozens of burmese nationals that appear to meet the criteria set in the two laws that are not included on the sdn list . secretary clinton and other u.s. officials have stated that a more detailed review of the existing sdn list with respect to the burmese sanctions should be conducted .