some of these issues were addressed in tpp . nafta was the first fta to contain an ipr chapter . the wto trade - related aspects of intellectual property rights ( trips ) agreement that came into effect a year later was modeled after the nafta ipr chapter . the chapter also predated widespread use of the internet . since nafta , ipr provisions in u.s. ftas have evolved in several ways and nafta parties may consider expanded provisions . nafta includes provisions on state - owned enterprises , but they are limited in scope . a possible area of renegotiation could include discussions on soes to address issues such as those negotiated in tpp . these could include addressing potential commercial disadvantages to private sector firms from state - supported competitors receiving preferential treatment . all three countries may have an interest in revising the nafta investment chapter to reflect more recent agreements . u.s. ftas , including nafta , and bilateral investment treaties ( bits ) maintain core investor protections reflecting u.s. law , such as obligations for governments to provide investors with non - discriminatory treatment , a minimum standard of treatment , and protections against uncompensated expropriation , among other provisions . since nafta , investment chapters in ftas and the u.s. model bit have undergone changes in order to clarify certain provisions and generally to affirm a government's right to regulate to pursue environmental , health , or safety outcomes . investment chapters , especially the investor - state dispute settlement ( isds ) provision , have drawn increased scrutiny in recent u.s. ftas . nafta was the first fta to contain isds , which allows investors to bring arbitration against a host government to binding arbitration to resolve disputes over alleged violations of a host government's investment obligations . alone among current u.s. ftas , nafta contains a binational dispute settlement mechanism ( chapter 19 ) to review anti - dumping ( ad ) and countervailing duty ( cvd ) decisions of a domestic administrative body . this mechanism was created as a compromise with canada in the cfta , which had sought to eliminate ad / cvd between the two countries . mexico also supported including the provision during the negotiation of nafta . however , some u.s. industry groups that have been adversely affected by chapter 19 decisions have sought elimination of the nafta binational review panel provisions . nafta also created a state - to - state mechanism ( chapter 20 ) to resolve disputes arising from the agreement . this dispute settlement mechanism has rarely been used , in part because the provisions of nafta substantially overlap with those of the wto , which came into force a year after nafta . wto dispute settlement has been used extensively — over 500 cases brought — due to perceived advantages including an appellate mechanism and a growing body of precedent . however , if nafta is revised with provisions not in wto agreements , nafta panels may be used more and their ability to function properly may be examined in any renegotiation . nafta marked the first time that worker rights provisions were associated with an fta . the following selective topics could be some areas of discussion .