112-175 expires . in the 112 th congress , the american horse slaughter prevention act of 2011 ( s. 1176 ) was introduced and would have prohibited the shipping , transporting , moving , delivering , receiving , possessing , purchasing , selling , or donation of horses and other equines to be slaughtered for human consumption . a similar bill may be introduced in the 113 th congress . during the 112 th congress , the egg products inspection act amendments of 2012 ( h.r . 3798 and s. 3239 ) were introduced in the house and senate but did not move forward . the provisions in the bills reflected an agreement between united egg producers ( uep ) and the humane society of the united states ( hsus ) to establish uniform , national cage size requirements , including enrichments , for table - egg - laying hens . the bills would have codified national standards for laying - hen housing over an 18-year phase - in period , included labeling requirements to disclose how eggs were produced , and set air quality , molting , and euthanasia standards for laying hens . egg producers who supported the two bills argued that the legislation was in the long - term interest of american egg farmers . egg producers would benefit from national egg standards that halt costly state - by - state battles over caged eggs that have resulted in a variety of laws across the country . for hsus , which has actively campaigned for cage - free egg production , accepting enriched cages was a compromise , but one that could result in significant federal farm animal welfare legislation . farm group opponents criticized the legislation for mandating management practices for farm animals , something that had not been done in the past . these groups argued that the bills could set a precedent , paving the way for future legislation on animal welfare for other livestock and poultry industries . additionally , opponents were concerned that the capital cost of transitioning to enriched cages would be high , and could be prohibitive for small producers . new bills containing the provisions from the legislation from the 112 th congress may be reintroduced in 113 th congress , and both uep and hsus likely would advocate for passage . egg legislation could also become part of an omnibus farm bill debate during 2013 . the application of federal environmental laws to livestock and poultry operations has been controversial for many farmers and ranchers . as animal agriculture increasingly concentrates into larger , more intensive production units , concerns arise about impacts on the environment , including surface water , groundwater , soil , and air . one of the primary regulatory focuses for animal agriculture is the clean water act , since the release of sediment , nutrients , pathogens , and pesticides from production can degrade the quality of water resources . other issues associated with soil erosion , air particulates and farm chemical emissions , and livestock odor may also be regulated under other federal laws such as clean air act and air emissions and reporting laws .