this legislation has not yet been enacted . this report introduces and analyzes innovation and competition policy issues associated with pharmaceutical patent litigation settlements . it begins with a review of pharmaceutical patent litigation procedures under the hatch - waxman act . the report then introduces the concept of reverse payment settlements . next , the report analyzes the status of reverse payment settlements under the antitrust laws . the report closes with a summary of congressional issues and possible alternatives . as discussed previously , a generic firm's filing of a paragraph iv anda may result in a patent infringement suit brought by a brand - name drug company . in such litigation , if the nda holder demonstrates that the independent generic firm's proposed product would violate its patents , then the court will ordinarily issue an injunction that prevents the generic drug company from marketing that product . that injunction will expire on the same date as the nda holder's patents . independent generic drug companies commonly amend their andas in this event , replacing their paragraph iv certifications with paragraph iii certifications . on the other hand , the courts may decide in favor of the independent generic firm . the court may conclude that the generic firm's proposed product does not infringe the asserted patents , or that the asserted patents are invalid or unenforceable . in this circumstance , the independent generic firm may launch its product once the fda has finally approved its anda . in addition to the issuance of final judgment in favor of either the brand - name drug company or generic firm , another resolution of pharmaceutical patent litigation is possible . this legal situation led to a number of cases with varying details , but a common core fact pattern . upon filing a paragraph iv anda , a generic firm would be sued for patent infringement as provided by the hatch - waxman act . the nda holder and generic applicant would then settle their dispute . the settlement would call for the generic firm to neither challenge the patent nor produce a generic version of the patented drug , for a period of time up to the remaining term of the patent . in exchange , the nda holder would agree to compensate the anda applicant , often with substantial monetary payments over a number of years . opinions about the effects of reverse payment settlements upon social welfare have varied . some commentators believe that such settlements are anticompetitive . they believe that many of these agreements may amount to no more than two firms colluding in order to restrict output and share patent - based profits . such settlements are also said to eliminate the possibility of a judicial holding of patent invalidity , which may open the market to generic competition and benefit consumers . on the other hand , some commentators have found nothing inherently troublesome about reverse payment settlements . among their observations is that there is a general judicial policy in favor of promoting settlement . settlements can allow the parties to avoid the expenses of litigation , achieve a resolution to the dispute in a timely manner , and avoid the risk of an uncertain result in the courtroom .