border floodplain encroachment . discussion of increased u.s. security measures along the border , particularly the border between texas and mexico , may revive concerns regarding compliance with treaty provisions related to the construction of structures in the binational floodplain that increase flood risk . in addition to the water management and conservation issues addressed by the ibwc , the u.s. and mexican governments have worked together on broader environmental issues in the border region since signing the la paz agreement in 1983 . led by the u.s. environmental protection agency ( epa ) and the mexican secretary of environmental resources , the agreement committed the two governments to regularly consult and review environmental concerns . what is mexico doing to address central american migration through its territory ? what is the current level of bilateral cooperation on border security and immigration and border matters , and how might that cooperation be improved ? how well are the u.s. and mexican governments balancing security and trade concerns along the u.s. - mexican border ? to what extent would the construction of a new border wall affect trade and migration flows in the region ? mexico's 2013 constitutional reforms on energy opened up oil , electricity , gas , transmission , production , and sales to private and foreign investment while keeping ownership of mexico's hydrocarbons under state control , as established in its 1917 constitution . although the reforms did not privatize pemex , they did expose the company to competition and hastened its entrance into joint ventures . because of the reforms , mexico has received more than $160 billion in promised investment . however , the reforms ended subsidies that kept gasoline prices low for mexican consumers and failed to reverse production declines and ongoing problems within pemex . pemex's debt increased by more than 60% from 2013 to 2017 . while analysts still predict that the reforms will bring long - term benefits to the country , the peña nieto administration oversold their short - term impacts , which has emboldened those within the lópez obrador government who have opposed private involvement in the sector . the united states sought to help lock in mexico's energy reforms through the nafta renegotiations . nafta includes some reservations for investment in mexico's energy sector . the proposed usmca would reinforce mexico's 2013 constitutional reforms and the current legal framework for private energy projects in mexico . it also would apply similar investor - state dispute settlement mechanisms that currently exist in nafta to the oil and gas , infrastructure , and other energy sectors . in addition , the free trade agreement would allow for expedited exports of u.s. natural gas to mexico , which have increased about 130% since the 2013 reforms . private sector trade , innovation , and investment have created a north american energy market that is interdependent and multidirectional , with cross - border gas pipelines and liquefied natural gas ( lng ) shipments from the united states to mexico surging . in 2018 , the value of u.s. petroleum products exports to mexico totaled $30.6 billion , nearly double the value of u.s. energy imports from mexico ( $15.8 billion ) .