many of these have procedural effects . ( 2 ) other s tanding orders , effective only for the duration of the congress in which they are adopted , are typically established , and renewed in each successive congress , by unanimous consent when the congress first convenes . ( 3 ) some special procedures governing measures of specific kinds , known as expedited procedures , are contained in provisions of statute , which are nevertheless understood as having been enacted pursuant to the constitutional rulemaking power of the chamber to which they apply . ( 4 ) finally , procedural precedents interpreting the import in practice of all these forms of procedural regulation are established by rulings of the chair and votes by the senate on appeals from such rulings . the present report , however , begins from the presumption that proposed procedural changes are sought in the form of a simple resolution amending the standing rules of the senate . several elements of the rules governing proceedings on a resolution to amend the standing rules of the senate are especially important in determining how the senate can consider such a resolution when it is controversial: ( 1 ) the senate can adopt the resolution by a simple majority vote ; ( 2 ) a supermajority vote may be needed in order to limit the time for consideration and ensure that the senate can reach the point of voting on the resolution ; ( 3 ) if this supermajority vote to limit consideration is adopted , amendments to the resolution will be limited to those that are germane and have been filed in advance ; ( 4 ) a supermajority vote also may be required to limit the time for consideration of a motion to take up the resolution ; and ( 5 ) in practice , the resolution could become available for consideration at all only if it had either been reported from committee or the order of business for its consideration was reached in a "morning hour. supporters of a proposed change in senate procedure might be able to avoid some , but not all , of the potential difficulties for their consideration just discussed by couching their proposal in some form other than as a change in the standing rules . first , a standing order may be established , just as may a change to the standing rules , by adopting a simple resolution . the requirement for a supermajority of two - thirds of senators present and voting in order to invoke cloture , however , applies only to changes in the standing rules . for all other matters , including simple resolutions establishing standing orders , cloture requires a supermajority only of three - fifths of the full membership of the senate ( 60 votes , if there is no more than one vacancy ) . if a resolution establishing new procedures were framed as a standing order , or other form of procedural regulation , rather than a change in the standing rules , it would be subject to a requirement for cloture that might be easier to meet .