it is not clear that h.r . 3066 provides fema with the discretion to make such distinctions . if congressional intent is to make funding available to all houses of worship , the proposed amendments might be read to be a legislative determination that all houses of worship provide essential services of a governmental nature . if the requirement to provide governmental services is not intended to restrict access to funding to a subset of religious organizations ( i.e. , those that provide not only religious services , but also social services ) similar to the faith - based funding provisions , the bill may be less likely to pass constitutional muster . however , even if the governmental services limitation narrows the scope of the facilities eligible for funding , the houses of worship that do qualify would appear not to be restricted under the current language of h.r . 3066 from using the funds for sectarian purposes . that is , it does not appear that a church that qualified for fema assistance in the earlier example because of its food bank would be restricted to using fema assistance only to rebuild the part of the facility housing the food bank and not the part of the facility used for worship . accordingly , even with the narrowing of the definition , h.r . 3066 does not limit the use of funds to construction of nonsectarian elements of the facility , such as the building exterior , as discussed earlier . there appear to be no examples of government funding for sectarian elements of religious facilities in which courts have upheld the government's aid unless it includes restrictions on the use of funds for sectarian purposes . congressional interest in these issues has continued in the subsequent years . this report examines the constitutional rules governing federal funding for religious buildings and analyzes the court's previous decisions on this issue . it also analyzes more recent lower court and administrative opinions that have distinguished the court's decisions and allowed public funds to be awarded to houses of worship . finally , the report discusses examples in which congress has proposed or provided funding related to the construction and maintenance of religious buildings , including h.r . 3066 , which would authorize the federal emergency management agency ( fema ) to provide disaster recovery assistance to houses of worship and other buildings operated by religious organizations . the establishment clause of the first amendment provides that "congress shall make no law respecting the establishment of religion. while this generally means that the government cannot finance or sponsor religious activities , the constitutional analysis of public aid to religious organizations differs based on the form of assistance provided . for instance , the court has distinguished cases involving aid that is provided directly to sectarian organizations ( eg , providing funds or materials to a religious organization ) and aid that benefits such groups indirectly ( eg , providing vouchers that may be used at religious schools to parents of schoolchildren ) . in a subset of the court's decisions on direct aid , the court specifically addressed the constitutionality of providing aid for the construction and maintenance of religious facilities in a series of cases heard during the early 1970s .