seq. ) furthermore , if the senate finds it necessary to rely on the motion to authorize a conference committee , then conference committees might be arranged at a later parliamentary stage than under current practice . this could affect which chamber acts first on any resulting conference report . it is most common , in current practice , for the senate to amend a house bill , insist on its amendment , and request a conference . the chamber that asks for the conference traditionally acts last on the resulting conference report ; this is not a rule of either chamber , but simply the general practice of both . as described above , however , the new compound motion would not be in order immediately after the senate passed a house bill with an amendment . therefore , the conference would be authorized only after house action . if the house , upon receiving a senate amendment to a house bill , disagrees to the senate amendment and requests the conference , then under the usual congressional practice it would be the house that acted last on the conference report . in addition to affecting negotiations as to whether to form a conference committee and the floor consideration of the question of authorizing a conference , the change might affect negotiations regarding the ratio of majority to minority conferees . through the approval of s.res . 15 , the senate made two procedural changes that , under the terms of the resolution , will expire at the end of the congress . these two changes are considered "standing orders" of the senate because they did not amend the standing rules of the senate themselves . for the 113 th congress , however , these changes will have the same force and effect as rules . the form of a standing order might have been chosen because it was considered to be more appropriate for a temporary procedural change . in addition , agreeing to a procedural change in the form of a standing order can require a smaller coalition for approval than a change in the standing rules . to invoke cloture on a proposal to directly amend the standing rules requires a two - thirds vote of senators voting , a quorum being present ( which can be as many as 67 senators ) . to invoke cloture on a resolution affecting procedures but not directly amending the standing rules , such as s.res . 15 , would require only three - fifths of the senate , typically 60 . the second resolution the senate approved on january 24 , 2013 , s.res . 16 , made two changes to the standing rules . these changes will remain part of the standing rules and will be in effect in future congresses , unless the senate agrees to amend its rules . 16 created an expedited method by which three - fifths of the senate can end debate on the question of taking up a bill ( or other matter ) at the initiative of a bipartisan group of 16 senators , including both party leaders . under rule xxii , all cloture motions require 16 signatures to receive a vote .