codified at 28 u.s.c . ยง 1350 , the ats is "a jurisdictional provision unlike any other in american law and of a kind apparently unknown to any other legal system in the world. created as part of the judiciary act of 1789 , the ats is an opaque statute initially intended to provide foreign nationals redress for violations of the law of nations . the statute lay dormant until 1980 , when it was used by paraguayan plaintiffs in a case involving the wrongful death of their son in paraguay , at the hands of a paraguayan official . this was the first of the ats "foreign cubed" cases , in which a foreign plaintiff brings a suit against a foreign defendant for torts committed on foreign soil . soon victims of human rights violations used the ats as a vehicle for claims against foreign corporations that aided and abetted local foreign governments in committing human rights abuses . the debate soon focused on whether those corporations could be held responsible for committing those torts under the ats . in april 2013 , the supreme court decided a long - awaited case , kiobel v. royal dutch petroleum co . in this case , nigerian nationals sued royal dutch petroleum co. ( royal dutch ) , a dutch company , and shell transport and trading ( shell ) , a british company , for aiding and abetting the nigerian government in committing human rights violations . the case began when residents of the ogoni region of nigeria began protesting the environmental effect of the companies' oil drilling in ogoni . in response to these protests , the plaintiffs claimed that the oil companies enlisted the aid of the nigerian militia , who went on to rape , beat , and kill ogoni residents , and loot and destroy their property . royal dutch and shell argued that the ats does not extend liability to corporations , and the controversial question of corporate liability was argued before the supreme court . after oral arguments , the court then requested supplementary briefs and arguments on a new inquiry that called into question the past 30 years of ats jurisprudence: "whether and under what circumstances courts may recognize a cause of action under the ats , for violations of the law of nations occurring within the territory of a foreign sovereign. applying a judicially created doctrine called the presumption against extraterritoriality , the court held that because it was not the intent of congress that the ats apply to cases occurring abroad , kiobel and similar foreign cubed cases are not justiciable in federal courts . the presumption acts to prevent courts from making foreign affairs and policy decisions that might best be left to its coordinate political branches . the kiobel court held that nothing in the text , history , or purpose of the ats rebutted the presumption , and unless congress speaks to the jurisdiction of the courts over foreign cubed cases , judicial caution would be best . the court left a door open for cases that "touch and concern the territory of the united states," but only if those cases do so with enough force to rebut the presumption .