it is implementing an inherent executive power . similarly , in hampton v. mow sung wong , the court indicated that certain rules adopted by the u.s. civil service commission barring resident aliens from employment in the federal civil service impermissibly deprived these aliens of due process of law , but that such rules would be permissible if they "were expressly mandated by the congress or the president. here , congress had delegated authority to the president to prescribe regulations for the admission of individuals to the civil service . accordingly , it is possible that when the hampton court referred to the president's power to limit alien eligibility for federal employment , it intended to refer only to the power which had been conferred to him by congress . on the other hand , the court's discussion of the interests of the president that might be sufficient to justify the exclusion of noncitizens from the civil service focused upon the president's power to negotiate treaties , suggesting recognition of some independent constitutional basis for executive branch activity in the field of immigration . the possibility of independent executive branch authority over immigration is significant in that any such authority could potentially help justify certain actions taken by the executive branch ( although actions taken in reliance on such authority could also potentially raise issues if they were arguably within congress's purview ) . however , the executive branch's authority to exercise prosecutorial or enforcement discretion has traditionally been understood to arise from the constitution , as discussed below . courts have historically not required that the executive branch have specific statutory authorization for particular exercises of prosecutorial discretion . thus , immigration officials would not necessarily be precluded from granting deferred action , or taking certain other actions that could permit otherwise removable aliens to remain in the united states , just because federal immigration statutes do not expressly authorize such actions . on the other hand , section 103 ( a ) ( 3 ) of the ina authorizes the secretary of homeland security to "perform such other acts as he deems necessary for carrying out his authority under the provisions of this chapter," and has been construed by some as "commit[ting] enforcement of the ina to [the secretary's] discretion. the federal government recently noted its discretion under section 103 ( a ) ( 3 ) in seeking dismissal of a lawsuit challenging the daca initiative . the secretary's authority under section 103 ( a ) ( 3 ) of the ina is , however , an authority granted to the executive branch by congress and , as such , is distinguishable from the president's constitutional authority to "take care" that the laws be enforced . congress could , for example , potentially limit the discretion granted to the secretary by section 103 ( a ) ( 3 ) of the ina , including by prohibiting particular exercises of discretion . in contrast , congress probably could not directly limit the president's authority under the constitution to "take care" that the laws be enforced .