but the relationship between our countries is unique . for we are two strong democracies whose constitutions begin with the same revolutionary words — "we the people. we are two great republics dedicated to the liberty and justice and equality of all people . and we are two free market economies where people have the freedom to pursue ideas and innovation that can change the world . and that's why i believe that india and america are indispensable partners in meeting the challenges of our time . the united states and india share a number of security perspectives , including those on china and asian balance of power calculations ; terrorism ; afghanistan ; maritime issues ; and weapons of mass destruction . the united states government considers any threats to maritime security and / or freedom of navigation in the asia - pacific region ( including the ior ) to pose a major threat to its own regional interests , as well as to the interests of its allies and partners in asia . concerns about an increasingly assertive or even aggressive china appear to have led american friends in the region to issue new calls for a greater u.s. security role there . in washington , dc , india's rapidly growing military capabilities tend to be viewed by american officials and analysts as providing at least a partial hedge against the emergence of any new hegemonic power on the asian continent . while indian officials refrain from any overt expressions of support for an increased u.s. military presence in the region , india's own disputes with china — and its economic and military disadvantages in comparison with china — create a circumstance in which the u.s. military presence receives tacit welcome . along with this historic shift in indian perceptions of the u.s. military , however , is an increasing chinese wariness at the emerging strategic relationship between the united states and india , and beijing has expressed concerns about potential realignments in asia that could result in china's "encirclement" by unfriendly governments . for example , beijing protested discussions under the george w. bush administration to develop a quadrilateral group of like - minded democracies in asia that would include the united states , japan , australia , and india . still , while indians can at times appear to be overly focused on comparing their country to china , the chinese are generally far more complacent , giving the rivalry an appearance of one - sidedness . according to some analysts , in the long run , and when beijing potentially agitates asia's international relations with non - traditional military and diplomatic pressure , the united states and india will naturally move closer together . many analysts claim that chinese "blunderings" in recent years — mainly what were viewed as a series of ham - fisted policies toward neighbors with whom beijing has territorial disputes — have had the effect of pushing washington and new delhi into closer relations , perhaps overriding other concerns . the 2001 terrorist attacks on the united states instantly made terrorism the primary security threat perceived by americans and their government .