these issues are explained in more detail below . with the establishment of medicare , the home health benefit has been traditionally categorized as a "post - acute care" benefit . however , home health coverage is provided to beneficiaries whether or not they have had a recent hospitalization . prior regulatory and legislative changes have expanded medicare's home health services and eligibility requirements , as well as eliminated cost - sharing requirements . many of the changes to the home health benefit were in response to efforts of deinstitutionalization , moving individuals out of nursing facilities and back into the community , as well as avoiding hospitalizations . in 2001 , beneficiaries with a prior hospitalization represented 48% of all home health episodes . by 2010 , only 34% of home health episodes were for beneficiaries who had a prior hospitalization . while more initial home health episodes are certified to beneficiaries who were recently hospitalized ( 1.9 million episodes in 2010 ) than for beneficiaries admitted from the community ( 1.3 million episodes in 2010 ) , most home health episodes over an entire year are provided to beneficiaries who did not have a prior hospitalization . in 2010 , for home health users who had a prior hospitalization , medicare covered roughly 500,000 subsequent ( second or greater ) home health episodes following the beneficiaries' initial episode , an increase from 300,000 in 2001 . for home health users admitted from the community , medicare covered roughly 3.2 million subsequent home health episodes , an increase from 1.3 million subsequent episodes in 2001 . these figures may suggest that medicare is providing a greater amount of home health coverage to beneficiaries suffering from chronic illnesses , who may require longer treatment plans than beneficiaries recovering from acute illnesses . additionally , since the implementation of the hh pps in october 2000 , medicare ffs home health payments have grown rapidly at an average annual rate of 8.0% between 2001 and 2011 . additionally , the aggregate medicare margin for freestanding hhas has remained consistently high: 13.6% in 2003 and 14.8% in 2011 . the high rate of medicare margins may suggest that estimating the costs of home health services through the hh pps proves to be difficult . this difficulty may arise from large variation in agency costs of home health care , even after controlling for a beneficiary's clinical and functional factors . further , the decline in the share of home health services that are related to prior hospital and snf stays and the resulting rise in medicare part b expenditures and the notable difference in geographic variation of part b per user payments , as shown in figure 7 , may illustrate the changing care needs and geographic differences in health status among medicare beneficiaries . however , it may also point to potential overutilization , as noted by medpac , and the potential complexity in administering home health eligibility criteria where some may look to changes in the medicare home health benefit and home health payment policy that address greater payment efficiencies . the appendix summarizes selected key changes to the home health benefit that have been included in the following pieces of legislation . social security amendments of 1965 ( p.l .