border. to execute this mission successfully , dhs and congress must balance a number of competing priorities and allocate resources accordingly . for example , how should enforcement programs weigh the facilitation of legal trade and travel against the competing goal of preventing illegal entries ? clearly articulated and attainable policy goals help in the development of effective metrics and appropriate benchmarks . how to measure the success of policies designed to curb unauthorized migration may be especially important — and challenging — during a period experiencing net unauthorized migration flows at around zero . two key measurement - related questions are how recent dhs policies like increased border personnel , cbp's consequence delivery system , and ice's secure communities program have contributed to the recent trend of falling illegal inflows ; and the degree to which unauthorized flows will increase as the u.s. economy recovers and new hiring resumes . surveying the border policymaking context as described in figure 1 , members of congress may ask whether the u.s. approach to particular threats is too narrow or perhaps too broad . for example , should policy be designed to prevent all forms of unauthorized migration and illegal movement of goods , or should policies be tailored to target specific threats such as terrorists , transnational gangs , or illegal drugs ? if the answer lies somewhere between — involving both sweeping and targeted programs — how should mediating issues such as resource allocation and the prioritization of one effort over another be weighed ? finally , in addition to setting overall priorities , members of congress may evaluate policies by asking where dhs may get the most effective return on its enforcement investments . in addition to terrorism prevention , some members may emphasize investments in resiliency , or the ability to survive and manage a terrorist attack . members concerned with preventing the inflow of illegal drugs may question whether the enforcement component of overall u.s. drug policy is properly balanced with non - enforcement investments . members focused on countering the movement of bulk cash , counterfeit goods , and other smuggled items across the u.s. borders may weigh the value of investing in enforcement personnel at the border , versus focusing on international cooperation and domestic intelligence collection and information . the answers to these questions depend on the variety of threats america confronts at its international borders . dhs and its congressional supporters may have had the luxury of adopting an "all of the above" approach in the years following the september 11 , 2001 ( 9 / 11 ) , terrorist attacks ; but at a time of fiscal scarcity the department faces increasing pressure to invest prudently , and to ensure that effective enforcement strategy shapes agency budgets rather than the other way around . in addition , because many threat actors are strategic ( i.e. , they may change their tactics in response to enforcement efforts ) , questions about the effectiveness of u.s. border security policy and the costs and benefits of competing approaches should be revisited on a regular basis .