appendix a . details of government assistance for aig assistance prior to tarp involvement initial loan on september 16 , 2008 , the fed announced , after consultation with the treasury department , that it would lend up to $85 billion to aig over the next two years . drawing from the loan facility would only occur at the discretion of the fed . a new ceo was installed after the initial intervention and fed staff was put on site with the company to oversee operations . the interest rate on the funds drawn from the fed was 8.5 percentage points above the london interbank offered rate ( libor ) , a rate that banks charge to lend to each other . aig also was to pay a flat 8.5% interest rate on any funds that it did not draw from the facility . the government received warrants that , if exercised , would give the government a 79.9% ownership stake in aig . three independent trustees were to be named by the fed to oversee the firm for the duration of the loan . the trustees for the aig credit trust were announced on january 16 , 2009 , and the warrants were later exercised . this lending facility ( and its successors ) was secured by the assets of aig's holding company and non - regulated subsidiaries . in other words , the fed could seize aig's assets if aig failed to honor the terms of the loan . this reduced the risk that the fed , and the taxpayers , would suffer a loss , assuming , of course , that the fed would have been willing to seize these assets . the risk still remained that if aig turned out to be insolvent , its assets might be insufficient to cover the amount it had borrowed from the fed . on september 18 , 2008 , the fed announced that it had initially lent $28 billion of the $85 billion possible . this amount grew to approximately $61 billion on november 5 , 2008 , shortly before the restructuring of the loan discussed below in " federal reserve loan restructuring . securities borrowing facility on october 8 , 2008 , the fed announced that it was expanding its assistance to aig by swapping cash for up to $37.8 billion of aig's investment - grade , fixed - income securities . these securities stemmed from the aig securities lending program . as some counterparties stopped participating in the lending program , aig was forced to incur losses on its securities lending investments . aig needed liquidity from the fed to cover these losses and counterparty withdrawals . this lending facility was to extend for nearly two years , until september 16 , 2010 , and advances from the securities borrowing facility to aig paid an interest rate of 1% over the average overnight repo rate . as of november 5 , 2008 , shortly before the facility was restructured , $19.9 billion of the $37.8 billion was outstanding .