more recent data are not available . opinions continue to be divided over the importance and impact of the travel management regulations . some assert that the regulations do not go far enough , preferring that all ohv uses be prohibited in the national forests , because ohvs can damage national forest lands and resources . in august 2010 , several groups requested the fs to end the snowmobile exemption from the travel management regulations , but the agency denied the request in march 2011 . legal action continues , with a lawsuit filed against the forest service in federal court in november , 2012 . others counter that the regulations penalize the majority of ohv users that obey the rules and restrict off - highway uses at a time when other landowners and other federal and state agencies are reducing similar recreational access to their lands . the conflicts between interests continue to persist and may be escalating , in part because of the lack of past efforts to regulate ohv use . in april 2012 , the fs finalized new regulations for land and resource management planning for the national forest system . although access affects land and resource use and management , the new planning regulations did not specifically address transportation planning . the fs noted that the 2012 rule generally did not address management of particular activities or uses , such as forest transportation systems , because separate regulations govern specific uses . tensions over road and trail closures continue to persist . many of the completed travel management plans have been challenged for either being too restrictive or not restrictive enough . the forest service has prevailed on some challenges but lost on others . in addition , some groups have cited an 1866 statute known as "r.s . 2477" as providing county primacy in determining road access to federal lands . the fs generally agreed with the findings in the gao's 2009 report on ohv use on federal lands , according to the fs comments on the draft report . one of the gao recommendations was for the establishment of a nationwide strategy for ohv use and performance measures and timeframes for carrying out ohv goals . in response , the fs developed the route and area designation implementation guide in 2010 . as of december 2012 , the fs was in the process of developing performance measures for ohv goals , and planned to complete and implement the measures by 2014 . in response to the gao recommendation to improve communication with the public about ohv use , the fs established an interactive travel map on their website with improved information about which roads and trails are available for ohv use on national forest lands . in response to the gao recommendation to enhance law enforcement of ohv use , the fs examined fines for ohv related violations and is considering the feasibility of a system - wide standard for fine amounts . a 113 th congress bill , h.r . 145 , contains provisions on motorized recreation on trails in idaho . similar legislation was introduced in the 112 th congress .