both involve the purchase and sale of securities . current law already limits the types of securities that the fed may hold . one approach would be to narrow the statutory list of permissible securities . for example , agency securities could be removed from the list to eliminate purchases of mbs and gse debt . in another variation of the proposal , h.r . 1174 / s. 238 would require that permissible securities other than treasury securities be purchased only if two - thirds of the federal open market committee found that there were "exigent and unusual circumstances," and would limit the holding of these securities to no more than five years . narrowing this authority would not prevent the implementation of qe through purchases of treasury securities , however . another approach would be to put numerical thresholds in statute that would allow conventional operations but prevent unconventional operations ( eg , set a dollar limit on the fed's securities holdings ) . a potential problem with this approach is it could constrain the fed's discretion more than intended , particularly since the fed's securities holdings gradually increase under conventional policy . this points to the underlying tension between the desire for the fed to have broad discretion to rapidly react to unforeseen circumstances and the potential for the fed to use that discretion in such a way that meets the disapproval of some or all members of congress . analysis of more fundamental changes to the federal reserve's powers , such as a return to the gold standard , that would affect its ability to conduct qe are beyond the scope of this report . although the fed has already begun to taper off its asset purchases , a larger than normal balance sheet would remain after asset purchases have ended , potentially complicating an eventual return to conventional monetary policy . quantitative easing has the potential to lead to high inflation if banks decided to begin using their reserve holdings to rapidly increase their lending , which would lead to a rapid increase in the money supply . in that case , the fed would need an "exit strategy" from qe that could be implemented relatively quickly . the most straightforward method would be for the fed to withdraw those reserves from the banking system by selling some of its assets and not replacing assets as they mature . this would reduce the size of its balance sheet on both the assets and liabilities side . it is uncertain how many assets would need to be sold , but to give an order of magnitude , the balance sheet is more than four times larger than it was before the crisis . by april 2010 , the fed's balance sheet consisted predominantly of securities that could be sold in secondary markets . these can mostly be sold relatively quickly in theory , although there could be market volatility in practice . given the fed's concerns about the fragility of housing markets , it is not clear how its mortgage - related holdings could be reduced quickly if the fed became concerned about rising inflation .