reg . 15123 et seq. ) without regard to any other provision of statute or regulation that applies to issuance of such rule . such reissuance ( including this section ) shall not be subject to judicial review and shall not abrogate or otherwise have any effect on the order and judgment issued by the united states district court for the district of wyoming in case numbers 09-cv - 118j and 09-cv - 138j on november 18 , 2010 . besides marking the first legislative delisting under esa , the effect was to return to the april 2009 rule , described above , establishing the dps in the northern rockies and delisting those wolves , except for those in wyoming . the gray wolf became the 49 th species to be delisted under esa , although it was delisted only in the states of montana and idaho plus eastern washington , eastern oregon , and north - central utah . ( it remains listed as either endangered or threatened in all of the other lower 48 states. ) of the previous 48 species delisted , none had been delisted due to specific legislative action . while there may be attempts to point to the language of p.l . 112-10 as a precedent for delisting other species , two facts are unlikely to find parallels in other species controversies: ( 1 ) fws had previously attempted to delist the species , meaning fws believed the science supported delisting ; and ( 2 ) the species had met and exceeded the numeric goals for delisting in the species' recovery plan , although the genetic connectivity was disputed . the language of p.l . 112-10 ( section 1713 ) blocks judicial review of reissuance of the rule , and it appears to leave open the option for a subsequent proposal to re - list the species . on september 10 , 2012 , fws published a rule delisting wolves in wyoming , effective september 30 , 2012 . in may 2011 , fws again proposed to delist the wolves in the western great lakes region . this dps was delisted in december 2011 . in addition , in the may 2011 notice it also proposed designating any wolves in most of the eastern states and canadian provinces as a third species of wolf , to be called the "eastern wolf" ( canis lycaon ) , in addition to the gray and red wolf species . wolves in the east had been considered gray wolves ( canis lupus ) . many scientists agree that they are different , but only enough to constitute a different subspecies . fws adopted the view that they are a different species altogether , and stated: after reviewing the latest available scientific and taxonomic information , the service now recognizes the presence of two species of wolves in the western great lakes: the gray wolf ( canis lupus ) , the wolf species currently listed under the esa , and the eastern wolf ( canis lycaon ) , with a historical range that includes portions of eastern canada and the northeastern united states .