33 in the 115 th congress . if approved by congress in this form , the proposed amendment would , as was the case with the madison amendment , remain current , viable , and thus eligible for ratification , for an indefinite period . resolutions embracing this thesis have been introduced beginning in the 112 th congress . their stated purpose is that of "[r]emoving the deadline for ratification of the equal rights amendment. if enacted , these measures would eliminate the 1979 and 1982 deadlines ; reopen the proposed era for state ratification at the present count of 37 states ; and extend the period for state ratification indefinitely . this report examines the legislative history of the various proposals that ultimately emerged as the proposed equal rights amendment . it identifies and provides an analysis of current legislative proposals and reviews contemporary factors that may bear on its present and future viability . supporters of the era , and particularly the three - state strategy — now , arguably , the one - state strategy , assuming the validity of ratifications by nevada and illinois — identify a number of sources that they claim support their contention that the proposed equal rights amendment remains constitutionally viable . other scholars and observers , however , have raised concerns about , or objections to , these assertions . the arguments and constitutional principles relied on by era supporters to justify the revival of the proposed equal rights amendment include , but may not be limited to , the following: article v , they assert , grants exceptionally broad discretion and authority over the constitutional amendment process to congress . in their interpretation , the example of the twenty - seventh amendment suggests that there is no requirement of contemporaneity in the ratification process for proposed constitutional changes . era proponents claim that the supreme court's decision in coleman v. miller gives congress wide discretion in setting conditions for the ratification process . far from being sacrosanct and an element in the founders' "original intent," the seven - year deadline for amendments has its origins in a political maneuver by opponents of the eighteenth amendment authorizing prohibition . the decision of one congress in setting a deadline for ratification of an amendment does not constrain a later congress from rescinding the deadline and reviving or acceding to the ratification of a proposed amendment . against these statements of support may be weighed the cautions of other observers who may argue as follows: the twenty - seventh amendment is a questionable model for efforts to revive the proposed equal rights amendment ; unlike the proposed amendment , it was not encumbered by two expired ratification deadlines . moreover , it is argued that congress has generally ignored its provisions since ratification . even though the proposed equal rights amendment received an extension , supporters were unable to gain approval by three - fourths of the states . opponents suggest that a "third bite of the apple" is arguably unfair and , if not unconstitutional , at least contrary to the founders' intentions . revivification opponents caution era supporters against an overly broad interpretation of coleman v. miller , which , they argue , may have been be a politically influenced decision .