6528 was not enacted by the 112 th congress . in the 113 th congress , representative lee introduced the audit the pentagon act of 2013 ( h.r . it was referred to the committee on oversight and government reform and the committee on armed services . 559 is nearly identical to the legislation proposed in the 112 th congress . each agency produces a range of reports on its financial activities . senator scott brown introduced the dhs audit requirement target act ( dart , s. 1998 ) on december 15 , 2011 . representative todd platts introduced the house version of the bill on june 8 , 2012 . unlike the audit the pentagon act , the purpose of the dart act is not auditability . the dart act directs dhs to obtain an unqualified audit opinion beginning with its fy2013 annual financial statements . these reports are produced on different timetables and include different data and may be intended for either internal or external audiences . table 1 presents a selection of required annual federal financial reports . these reports provide data and analyses that are particularly useful for stakeholders wishing to examine agencies' financial performance in the previous year . more than two decades have passed since the enactment of the first of the modern financial reporting statutes — the cfo act . as recounted below , the congressional efforts to upgrade federal financial reporting have produced significant achievements ; however , challenges remain . congress has recently considered legislation relating to audits of federal financial statements . in the 113 th congress , representative barbara lee has introduced legislation ( h.r . 1591 ) was signed into law on december 20 , 2012 . 559 ) that would require a 5% reduction in a federal agency's discretionary budgetary authority for failure to produce an annual financial statement or failure to receive either an unqualified or qualified audit opinion on its annual financial statement . the 112 th congress considered similar legislation , as well as legislation on audited annual financial statements at dod and dhs , specifically . in the 112 th congress , senator tom coburn introduced the audit the pentagon act ( s. 3487 ) . s. 3487 would have mandated auditable financial statements by dod for its fy2017 statements . the 2010 ndaa required dod's chief management officer ( cmo ) , in consultation with the under secretary of defense ( comptroller ) , to ensure that its financial statements are validated as ready for audit no later than september 30 , 2017 . s. 3487 differed from the 2010 ndaa in that it would have required the statements to be auditable , not just validated as ready for audit . the legislation also would have required dod to provide a complete and validated statement of budgetary resources by fy2014 . failure to obtain an unqualified opinion on its fy2017 financial statements would have resulted in ( 1 ) the cessation of authorities on reprogramming and availability of funds authorized under the act , ( 2 ) a prohibition of expenditures of funds for major defense acquisition program activities beyond milestone b , and ( 3 ) a reorganization of the cmo position .