in other words , e.o . 12898 may not be used as an enforcement mechanism for environmental justice claims . 12898 agreed to a memorandum of understanding on environmental justice and executive order 12898 ( ej mou ) that reiterated the agencies' commitment to the goals of e.o . ej mou also expanded the opportunity for participation by other federal agencies , noting that e.o . epa has issued guidance with specific instructions on recommended procedures to incorporate environmental justice into its rule - writing process , providing suggestions on when to consider environmental justice and questions to ask in order to successfully address the relevant issues that arise . under the guidance , epa analysts are instructed to "[incorporate] environmental justice into the development of risk assessment , economic analysis , and other scientific input and policy choices during the development of a rule. with respect to its initiative to incorporate environmental justice into the permitting process , epa has endeavored "to develop and implement tools to better enable overburdened communities to have full and meaningful access to the permitting process. to advance environmental justice through its compliance and enforcement actions , ej plan 2014 provides for the enhanced use of enforcement and compliance tools "to address the needs of overburdened communities. in other words , as epa determines where to pursue enforcement actions , it will give priority to cases that affect communities which may be particularly vulnerable . epa also intends to improve its communications with communities that may be at risk of environmental harms . this directive has been reiterated by various federal agencies in recent years under president barack obama . these actions have not provided an independent legal basis for enforcing nondiscrimination principles related to environmental harms . it also will analyze the use of these authorities to prevent such impacts and the likelihood of success for future challenges under each legal theory . the report also will discuss administrative efforts to address "environmental justice," a term used by some advocates to refer to the distribution of environmental quality across various demographic groups , including the environmental protection agency's ( epa's ) plan ej 2014 . many commentators have used the term environmental justice to describe concerns that racial , ethnic , or low - income minority groups are affected disproportionately by environmental harm . in 2011 , epa introduced a strategic plan known as plan ej 2014 to help integrate environmental justice into its programs , policies , and activities . epa has defined environmental justice as "the fair treatment and meaningful involvement of all people regardless of race , color , national origin , or income with respect to the development , implementation , and enforcement of environmental laws , regulations , and policies. 12898 and manifests epa's intent to set a standard for other agencies to address environmental justice . in environmental protection debates , the question of siting potential environmental hazards often leads to disputes over whose proverbial backyard will be affected . many communities often resist the placement of various industrial facilities and waste disposal sites within their boundaries . several studies that first drew awareness to the potential correlation between environmental hazards and minority communities are cited regularly in debates about environmental justice .