other settlements may be forthcoming . as discussed below , the settlement payments will support several objectives . the 2010 deepwater horizon oil spill generated considerable interest in offshore drilling safety and related issues . agencies within doi have the lead regulatory authority for offshore oil and gas development activities , including operational safety and environmental considerations . this section highlights doi regulatory developments and other activities that have addressed some of the safety concerns and other issues raised during and after the 2010 oil spill . epa issued a proposed rule on january 22 , 2015 , that would amend the existing dispersant regulations ( 40 cfr part 300 , subpart j ) . dispersants are chemical agents that enhance the breakup of oil into small oil droplets that mix with the water column . dispersants received considerable attention during the deepwater horizon oil spill response . during the 2010 oil spill , responders used , in aggregate , 1.8 million gallons of dispersants on both the surface water and ( for the first time ) at the site of the uncontrolled well approximately 5,000 feet below the surface . while dispersants have proven effective in breaking up the oil on the surface , stakeholders raised questions about the fate of the dispersed oil and the chemical dispersants and their short - and long - term environmental impacts . cwa section 311 ( d ) requires epa , in cooperation with the states , to prepare a schedule of dispersants , other chemicals , and other spill - mitigating devices and substances . this product schedule includes dispersants and other chemical or bioremediation products that may be authorized for use on oil discharges in accordance with the procedures set forth in the national contingency plan ( ncp ) . epa may add products to the ncp product schedule after companies submit specific data to the agency . data requirements include results from effectiveness and toxicity testing . although epa reserves the right to verify testing data ( and to require additional information ) , the regulations do not establish a toxicity threshold for placement on the schedule . epa's january 2015 proposed rule would , among other provisions: revise and expand the testing requirements that must be performed to determine eligibility for epa's product schedule ; establish minimum criteria for toxicity and revise the minimum criteria for efficacy for a dispersant to be listed on the product schedule ; amend and clarify the process for pre - authorization of dispersant use ; and require monitoring of various environmental parameters when dispersants are used in specific situations ( eg , subsurface application or extended surface application ) . this section provides information about oil spill - related legislative activity from the 111 th congress to the 114 th congress . interest and activity in oil spill matters was substantial during and soon after the 2010 oil spill response ( 111 th congress ) . as time progressed , oil - spill - related legislative activity decreased and , in general , addressed topics not directly related to the deepwater horizon incident . several investigations and commissions — both federal and private — were initiated to examine issues surrounding the deepwater horizon incident .