the state - specific parameters vary widely in both specificity and flexibility . for example , the approximately $100 million allocated for the state of georgia went to the state's general treasury fund , where it may be appropriated by the state's general assembly "for any purposes permitted under state law.... " in contrast , the terms of exhibit b2 detail specific allocations and the purposes of those allocations for north carolina's portion of the direct payment amount . of the approximately $60 million allocated to north carolina , $5.74 million was designated to go to a civil penalty fund established under state law ; $30.6 million was designated to go the north carolina housing finance agency for specified purposes ; $6.69 million was designated to go to conference of district attorneys of the north carolina administrative office of the courts for certain specified purposes ; $2.87 million was designated to go to the state bureau of investigation to enhance its ability to investigation financial crimes ; $4.78 million was designated to go to the consumer protection division of the state's department of justice for certain purposes ; and $8.6 million was designated to go to the state's general treasury fund "as compensation for costs and economic losses sustained by the state due to mortgage fraud and foreclosure misconduct. the regulators reviewed a sampling of mortgage files for which there were foreclosure actions pending during calendar years 2009 and 2010 . the examinations revealed "critical weaknesses in [the] servicers' foreclosure governance processes , foreclosure document preparation processes , and oversight and monitoring of third - party vendors , including foreclosure attorneys. as a result of these findings , the banking regulators , in april 2011 , entered into binding consent orders with all 14 mortgage servicers and several of the third - party service providers that the servicers used in various ways during foreclosure processes ( hereinafter , the "federal banking consent orders" ) . numerous aspects of the federal banking consent orders overlap with the terms of the national mortgage settlement . although the focus of this report is on the national mortgage settlement , at times , it will highlight the points of intersection with the federal banking consent orders . the following is a synthesis of the substantive provisions of the national mortgage settlement's servicing standards , consumer relief , scra , borrower payment , and direct settlement payment and an analysis of how compliance with these substantive provisions may be overseen and enforced . the servicing standards and consumer relief components are discussed together because they have similar oversight and enforcement terms . the servicers' direct settlement payment to both the state and federal parties is approximately $5 billion . the payment is intended to cover the release of the state and federal legal claims that the parties could have raised against the servicers , as well as to resolve certain specific lawsuits previously initiated against some of the servicers named in the settlement . the payments to the federal government generally were distributed to the federal housing administration's capital reserve account ; the veteran housing benefit program fund , which is administered by the department of veterans affairs ; and the rural housing service , which is administered by the department of agriculture .