the small business act does not expressly contemplate such exclusions . however , agency regulations are generally entitled to deference so long as congress has not directly spoken to the precise question at issue , and the agency's reasonable interpretation of the statute is consistent with the purposes of the statute . such awards are here referred to as "sole - source awards. however , where "the statute is silent or ambiguous with respect to the specific issue," the tribunal "must sustain the [a]gency's interpretation if it is 'based on a permissible construction' of the act. small business set - asides are of perennial interest to congress because of their role in effectuating the long - standing declared policy of the congress that the government should aid , counsel , assist , and protect , insofar as is possible , the interests of small - business concerns in order to preserve free competitive enterprise , to insure that a fair proportion of the total purchases and contracts or subcontracts for property and services for the government ( including but not limited to contracts or subcontracts for maintenance , repair , and construction ) be placed with small business enterprises , to insure that a fair proportion of the total sales of government property be made to such enterprises , and to maintain and strengthen the overall economy of the nation . legal questions about small business set - asides have arguably become more common in recent years , particularly since the government accountability office ( gao ) issued its 2008 decision in international program group , inc . in support of this policy , congress has authorized agencies to conduct set - asides and make sole - source awards to small businesses , among other things . specifically , with various provisions of the small business act of 1958 , as amended , congress has permitted federal agencies to conduct competitive set - asides for small businesses , as well as for specific types of small businesses ( i.e. , small disadvantaged businesses ( sdbs ) participating in the "8 ( a ) program," historically underutilized business zone ( hubzone ) small businesses , women - owned small businesses ( wosbs ) , and service - disabled veteran - owned small businesses ( sdvosbs ) ) . the small business act also authorizes federal agencies to make sole - source awards to 8 ( a ) participants , hubzone small businesses , sdvosbs , and wosbs in certain circumstances , as well as grant price evaluation adjustment preferences to hubzone small businesses in unrestricted competitions . in addition , the veterans benefits , health care , and information technology act of 2006 , as amended , grants the department of veterans affairs ( va ) additional authority to conduct competitive set - asides for , and make sole - source awards to , sdvosbs and other veteran - owned small businesses ( vosbs ) . congress has also sought to promote its "declared policy" of assistance to small businesses by requiring the establishment of governmentwide and agency - specific goals for the percentage of federal contract and / or subcontract dollars awarded to small businesses each year .