ยง5801 et seq. ) and the gun control act of 1968 , as amended ( 18 u.s.c . chapter 44 , ยง921 et seq. ) supplementing federal law , many state firearms laws are stricter than federal law . for example , some states require permits to obtain firearms and impose a waiting period for firearms transfers . other states are less restrictive , but state law cannot preempt federal law . federal law serves as the minimum standard in the united states . as noted above , the president's plan to reduce gun violence included a legislative proposal to require "universal background checks. under current law , intrastate transfers between unlicensed persons , who are not "engaged in the business" of dealing in firearms "as a regular course of ... business with the principal objective of livelihood and profit," are not covered by the recordkeeping or the background check provisions of the gca . nevertheless , such private transactions and other matters such as possession , registration , and the issuance of licenses to firearms owners may be covered by state laws or local ordinances . proponents of greater gun control view the fact that unlicensed persons engaging in intrastate firearms transfers are not subject to the recordkeeping and background check requirements of the gca as a "loophole" in the law , particularly within the context of gun shows . this circumstance arguably flowed from two developments . one , in 1986 , congress amended the gca to allow ffls to transfer firearms to unlicensed persons at gun shows located within the state of their business ; however , prohibitions on interstate transfers still applied . under the violent crime control and law enforcement act of 1994 , congress banned for 10 years the possession , transfer , or further domestic manufacture of semiautomatic assault weapons ( saws ) and large - capacity ammunition feeding devices ( lcafds ) that hold more than 10 rounds that were not legally owned or available prior to the date of enactment ( september 13 , 1994 ) . the saw ban prohibited the further manufacture for , and transfer to , private persons certain firearms that ( 1 ) were listed by make and model as saws , or ( 2 ) met a saw "military - style" features test for rifles , pistols , and handguns . semiautomatic assault weapons and lcafds that were legally owned prior to the ban were grandfathered , meaning they were not restricted and remained available for transfer under applicable federal and state laws . the saw - lcafd ban expired on september 13 , 2004 . in the 113 th congress , senator lautenberg and representative mccarthy introduced the large capacity ammunition feeding device act ( s. 33 / h.r . 138 ) , a bill that would have prohibited the manufacture or importation of detachable magazines of over 10-round capacity . while this proposal would have grandfathered existing magazines , it would have also made those grandfathered magazines non - transferable , meaning that those magazines could not have been sold or traded and would have become contraband upon the owner's death .