seq. ) the final revision was released on september 30 , 1999 , and published in the federal register on october 8 , 1999 . it was effective on november 8 , 1999 . it broadened the applicability of the provision from "regulations" to research that has been published and used in "developing an agency action that has the force and effect of law.... " the second proposed revision sought comments on whether the revision should apply only to regulations with impacts of $100 million or more . the final revision defined the term published as in the second proposed revision , but defined research data slightly more restrictively , replacing the term files with information , to prevent the release of video or audio tapes of research subjects . the implications of these differences in language are discussed below in the section on issues . the shelby amendment provides specifically for cost reimbursement via "a reasonable user fee equaling the incremental cost of obtaining the data" "if the agency obtaining the data does so solely at the request of a private party. the omb language pertaining to this issue , which did not change through the three versions of the revisions , allows an agency to obtain reimbursement of the "full incremental cost of obtaining the research data," including the costs incurred by "the agency , the recipient [of the research funding] , and applicable subrecipients," provided that the agency obtains the data "solely in response to a foia request. the supplementary information attached to the second proposed revision said agencies would be allowed to retain that fee "to reimburse themselves , recipients , and applicable subrecipients , for the costs they incur. omb also requested comments on estimates of such incremental costs and on the ways that grant recipients might charge such costs to their awards . the supplemental information attached to the final revision explained a procedure agencies could use to obtain reimbursements for grantees but contained the same cost - reimbursement provisions as in the first and second proposed revisions . the final revised circular became effective in november 1999 . federal agencies that subsequently issued conforming agency regulations allowed the public and interested parties to provide additional comment , as governed by the administrative procedure act . the use of the freedom of information act to provide access to data from federally funded research has produced arguments for both potential benefits and potential disadvantages . a frequently cited benefit is that the mechanisms , federal infrastructure , and case law for foia are well - established . opposition has focused on such issues as timing of access , need for access , the cost of administration , possible inadequacy of the protections provided by foia's exemptions , and potential for abuse . some have suggested that requests should meet a public interest test before data are released . while a number of the early concerns expressed about the revision to circular a - 110 do not appear to have materialized , some discussion of the issues raised may be useful , especially in the event that the provision becomes more widely used .