section 7023 of p.l . 112-74 , the consolidated appropriations act , 2012 , states that for foreign operations ''program , project , and activity'' shall be defined at the appropriations act account level and shall include all appropriations and authorizations acts funding directives , ceilings , and limitations with the exception that for the following accounts: ''economic support fund'' and ''foreign military financing program'' , ''program , project , and activity'' shall also be considered to include country , regional , and central program level funding within each such account ; for the development assistance accounts of the united states agency for international development ''program , project , and activity'' shall also be considered to include central , country , regional , and program level funding , either as: ( 1 ) justified to the congress ; or ( 2 ) allocated by the executive branch in accordance with a report , to be provided to the committees on appropriations within 30 days of the enactment of this act , as required by section 653 ( a ) of the foreign assistance act of 1961 . according to state department's f bureau , sequestration was applied at the account level for international disaster assistance , transition initiatives ( ti ) , complex crises fund ( ccf ) , usaid's capital investment fund ( cif ) , usaid's inspector general ( ig ) , administrative expenses of the development credit authority ( dca ) , u.s . emergency refugee and migration assistance ( erma ) , international military education and training ( imet ) , assistance for europe , eurasia , and central asia ( aeeca ) , and the pakistan counterinsurgency capability fund ( pccf ) . sequestration was applied at the account level and to funding directives for peacekeeping operations ( pko ) , international organizations and programs ( io&p ) , usaid operating expenses ( usaid oe ) , nonproliferation , anti - terrorism , demining , and related programs ( nadr ) , democracy fund ( df ) split between state and usaid , migration and refugee assistance ( mra ) , and international narcotics control and law enforcement ( incle ) . sequestration was applied at the country allocation level and to funding directives for development assistance ( da ) , economic support fund ( esf ) , global health programs ( ghp ) , and foreign military financing ( fmf ) . under sequestration , the department of state and usaid had the authority to reprogram certain funds to protect a particular country or activity , subject to regular notification procedures . that meant , however , that other ppas within those accounts had to be further reduced . transfer authority was also available as defined by section 7009 , title vii , division i of the consolidated appropriations act , 2012 , p.l . in addition , section 3004 of the fy2013 cr ( p.l . 113-6 ) required an additional 0.032% across - the - board rescission to all foreign affairs discretionary accounts in order to meet the bca spending limits . according to omb's september 2012 report , certain foreign affairs funds are exempt from sequestration .