for example , h.res . 213 ( 107 th congress ) , which provided for consideration of the fy2002 legislative branch appropriations bill , contained the following provision: "points of order against consideration of the bill for failure to comply with clause 4 ( c ) of rule xiii are waived. during this period , special rules providing for consideration of regular appropriations bills have also included provisions that provided a blanket waiver of points of order against consideration of the bill . this report proceeds in three sections . the first section provides a general overview of how the consideration of regular appropriations bills has been initiated between fy1996 and fy2015 . the second section discusses the floor consideration of amendments to regular appropriations bills and the types of amending processes that have been established at the beginning of consideration . the third section discusses waivers of points of order both against consideration and of rule xxi , clause 2 , and how the form of those waivers has evolved during this period . for the fy1996 to fy2015 regular appropriations bills , the frequency of each method through which floor consideration was initiated is illustrated in table 1 . during the earlier part of this period , all of the regular appropriations bills received individual floor consideration in all but one fiscal year . since the fy2003 appropriations cycle , however , all regular appropriations bills received floor consideration in only four fiscal years , most recently for fy2010 . over the entire period , special rules were used to initiate consideration of regular appropriations bills in almost all instances . unanimous consent agreements and consideration as privileged measures were also used on some occasions , in 5 of the 20 fiscal years during this period . when a regular appropriations bill is considered as a privileged measure , this procedure generally permits consideration of any amendments to the bill that comply with the rules of the house ( called an "open" amending process ) . providing for consideration by a special rule or uca , however , allows this amending process to be altered . such alterations can place preconditions on the offering of amendments , directly prescribe the specific amendments that will be in order , waive points of order against amendments , or place time limits on their consideration . for fy1996 to fy2015 , the means used for consideration of most regular appropriations bills provided for some type of "open" amending process allowing an unrestricted number of amendments to be offered that comply with house rules . such processes often waived points of order against certain amendments and , less frequently , required that amendments be preprinted in the congressional record in advance of consideration . an exception to this has been the legislative branch appropriations bill . on all but one occasion during this period , the means used for initiating consideration of legislative branch bills provided for a "structured" amendment process , which specified a list of amendments that could be offered and waived points of order against those amendments .