part 807 . importantly , treasury resisted efforts by commenters to narrow the scope of the general term "taxable medical device," by limiting , for example , the term to devices that could exclusively be used by humans or could only be used for a medical purpose , preferring instead to maintain a broad reading of what devices are subject to the excise tax . as a result , devices like infusion pumps , which can be used on both humans and animals , and latex gloves , which can be used for both medical and non - medical purposes , fall within the broad definition of a "taxable medical device. in an effort to limit the ambit of the excise tax imposed on medical device manufacturers , congress explicitly excluded three types of devices from the term "taxable medical device" in irc ยง4191 ( a ) . specifically , congress exempted eyeglasses , contact lenses , and hearing aids from the excise tax . moreover , the statute empowers the secretary of the treasury under the "retail exemption" to exempt "any other medical device" which is determined to be of a "type which is generally purchased by the general public at retail for individual use" from the 2.3% excise tax . whether the new treasury regulations provide the needed clarity to alleviate the "uncertainty and confusion" that some members of congress have feared that the new tax would engender within the medical technology industry remains to be seen . to be sure , the medical device tax regulations , with their safe harbor provisions , clarify that generally devices recognized as over - the - counter devices will not be the subject of the tax , providing an easy to understand exemption to manufacturers , importers , and producers of such products . however , the safe harbor provisions are narrow , and the regulations open - ended two - part test defining the limits of the retail exemption , while providing flexibility as to the scope of the exemption , naturally creates ambiguity with respect to which products are exposed to the excise tax , save those specifically exempted under the regulations . moreover , the limits of the retail exemption , which are based , in part , on regulations that were not crafted with the retail exemption in mind , could prove to be either over or under inclusive of congress's original intent in enacting the medical device excise tax . treasury , in the release of the final regulations , identified several issues raised by the medical device tax regulations that warranted the agency issuing separate clarifying guidance , including the treatment , for purposes of the medical device excise tax , of licensing software and "kits. given the wide variety of items that are categorized as medical devices , some may see a need for further clarification with respect to other medical devices , including potentially expanding the safe harbor provisions . as a result , the december 7 , 2012 , regulations could be only the first step in clarifying the application of a tax that the treasury department acknowledges "may present certain implementation challenges.