some ntds have been tackled more effectively than others . guinea worm disease , for example , is on the cusp of eradication and with expanding mass drug administration campaigns , the prevalence of several ntds is declining , particularly in latin america . despite these advancements , who cautions in the 2020 roadmap that these diseases cannot be banished without expanding global access to clean water and sanitation , improving hygiene practices , strengthening local health capacity ( veterinary as well as human ) , and intensifying case detection and management . the united states has played an important role in combating ntds and will likely be a central player in global efforts to advance the 2020 ntd goals . the section below discusses a range of issues u.s. and international organizations may face as they attempt to reach the who 2020 goals , as well as those set by the administration ( see " u.s. efforts to tackle ntds " ) . some of the discussion includes an analysis of steps the 113 th congress might consider . transmission of most ntds is facilitated by insufficient access to clean water , sanitation , and hygiene ( wash ) . an estimated 880 million children are carrying soil - transmitted helminths , for example , which are spread primarily through openly defecating on the ground . eggs of these intestinal worms , which account for roughly 80% of ntds , can persist in the environment for many years . experts at the cdc assert that wash should be a central component of any effective and sustainable approach to controlling ntds . one estimate indicates that improved sanitation and water safety can reduce the prevalence rates of other ntds as well , including schistosomiasis and blinding trachoma . water and sanitation improvement are particularly important when addressing pathogens that cannot be eliminated by drugs alone , such as sth and schistosomiasis . several experts urge greater investments in water and sanitation and see attainment of global water and sanitation goals as an important step towards eliminating ntds . through the millennium development goals ( mdgs ) , the international community sought to halve the share of people without access to clean water and basic sanitation by 2015. who estimated that between 2005 and 2015 , it would cost $72 billion annually to implement and maintain enough water and sanitation schemes to meet global water and sanitation targets , of which $54 billion would need to be spent on maintaining the systems . in 2010 , members of the organization for economic cooperation and development ( oecd ) committed $7.8 billion towards improving global access to clean drinking water and sanitation . u.s. and global investments in sanitation would need to increase significantly to meet this funding gap . investments in wash are considered important , as mass drug administration campaigns cannot be used in isolation to eliminate ntds . the process of combating diseases by combining responses by practitioners across sectors , particularly those related to health , agriculture , water , construction , and waste disposal , is known as integrated vector management .