table 2 . major provisions of title ii . this table covers provisions for adult education and literacy activities . table 3 . major provisions of title iii . this table covers changes to the wagner - peyser act of 1933 , which was also amended in title iii of wia . wagner - peyser provides authorization for the employment service , which provides job matching and job search assistance for unemployed individuals . table 4 . major provisions of title iv of wia and title v of h.r . this table addresses amendments to the rehabilitation act of 1973 , in particular to the vocational rehabilitation and other employment - related provisions of that act , which authorizes various employment services for individuals with disabilities . title i of the workforce investment act — workforce investment systems — authorizes the establishment of a one - stop delivery system through which state and local wia training and employment activities are provided and through which certain partner programs must be coordinated . title i also authorizes funding for the three major state formula grant programs ( adult , youth , and dislocated worker ) , job corps ( a dol - administered program for low - income youth ) , and several other national programs that are directed toward subpopulations with barriers to employment ( eg , native americans ) . 803 takes a fundamentally different approach from current law to the federal role in the delivery of workforce development services by consolidating multiple programs into a single block grant that is allocated to states by formula . at the same time , h.r . 803 maintains the existing one - stop delivery system as the delivery mechanism for employment and training services . below is a brief summary of the major provisions of h.r . this list is followed by a thematic comparison in table 1 of current law and h.r . 803 repeals 24 programs , activities , and provisions in wia title i , the wagner - peyser act , and related workforce development legislation . major title i programs that are repealed include youth activities , native american programs , migrant and seasonal farmworker programs , reintegration of ex - offender programs , and youthbuild . in addition , h.r . 803 modifies several other programs to increase coordination with the wia system . for example , h.r . 803 specifies that certain refugee assistance programs in the department of health and human services ( hhs ) coordinate training services with wia programs . as part of the elimination and consolidation of multiple programs , h.r . 803 combines funding from 19 programs to create a new , single workforce investment fund ( wif ) . from the $6.25 billion in the wif , the secretary of labor would set aside $31.2 million for technical assistance and evaluations , $62.5 million for native american employment and training programs , $1.56 billion for job corps , and $218.6 million for national emergency / dislocated worker activities .