these grounds are comparable to the inadmissibility grounds . they include foreign nationals who are inadmissible at time of entry or violate their immigration status ; commit certain criminal offenses ( eg , crimes of moral turpitude , aggravated felonies , alien smuggling , high - speed flight ) ; fail to register ( if required under law ) or commit document fraud ; are security risks ( such as aliens who violate any law relating to espionage , engage in criminal activity that endangers public safety , partake in terrorist activities , or genocide ) ; become a public charge within five years of entry ; or vote unlawfully . generally , an immigration judge determines whether an alien is removable . both formal removals and voluntary returns increased steadily during the 1990s . however , voluntary returns ( i.e. , permitting aliens to leave the united states on their own recognizance and at their own expense ) have declined from 1.68 million in fy2000 to 0.2 million in fy2015 while formal removals have increased over the same period from 188,000 in fy2000 to 462,000 in fy2015 ( figure 21 ) . for further background and analysis , see crs report r43892 , alien removals and returns: overview and trends . dhs's immigration and customs enforcement ( ice ) manages four interior enforcement programs that target criminal aliens . the criminal alien program ( cap ) is an umbrella program that includes several systems for initiating removal proceedings against criminal aliens within federal , state , and local prisons and jails . the ina § 287 ( g ) program enables ice to delegate certain immigration enforcement functions to state and local law enforcement agencies pursuant to memorandums of agreement between such agencies and ice . the national fugitive operations program ( nfop ) pursues at - large criminal aliens and fugitive aliens . the priority enforcement program ( pep , formally called secure communities ) is an information sharing program between dhs and the department of justice ( doj ) . under the program , when participating law enforcement agencies submit the fingerprints of people being booked into jails to the federal bureau of investigation ( fbi ) for criminal background checks , the fingerprints are also automatically checked against dhs databases , and potential matches are forwarded to ice's law enforcement support center . in 1986 , congress made deporting aliens who had been convicted of certain crimes an enforcement priority . between 1988 and 1996 , congress enacted measures , including the illegal immigrant reform and immigrant responsibility act of 1996 , which expanded the definition of aggravated felons and created additional criminal grounds for removal . the number of criminal aliens removed from the united states has increased 137% over the past decade , from 73,298 in fy2001 to 198,394 in fy2013 ( figure 22 ) . as a percentage of all removals , criminal aliens accounted for 45% in fy2013 . for further background and analysis , see crs report r42057 , interior immigration enforcement: programs targeting criminal aliens ; and crs report rl32480 , immigration consequences of criminal activity .