congress did not approve this transfer . in contrast , the senate explanatory statement accompanying p.l . 113-6 directed dhs to consider the advantages of merging the office of health affairs and dndo , potentially transferring portions of these offices to other dhs components . the results of the proposed merger , r&d reprioritization efforts , and consolidation might change the productivity of dhs r&d activities , which have been criticized by some stakeholders as having little to show for the federal investment . has the department identified any situations where it had ceded control over its mission and operations to contractor employees ? how many contractors , and which contracts , might be affected by the agency's efforts to achieve a balanced workforce ? [author name scrubbed] , specialist in science and technology policy ( [email address scrubbed] , [phone number scrubbed] ) for more information , see crs report r43064 , the dhs s&t directorate: selected issues for congress . many stakeholders have identified advances in research and development ( r&d ) as key to creating new or improved technologies that defend against homeland security threats . r&d is generally a multi - year endeavor with significant risk of failure . additionally , it may take years to realize any benefits from r&d investments . the administration and congress have differing visions regarding successful r&d performance in dhs , as indicated by marked differences in requested and appropriated funding . in addition , some congressional and stakeholder expectations regarding the effectiveness and efficiency of agency performance have not been met . the 113 th congress may continue to focus attention on whether investments in homeland security research and development net appropriate rewards , how the distribution of investments among homeland security topics and between r&d activities leads to a balanced portfolio , and what the appropriate funding level for dhs r&d is during a time of fiscal constraint . the dhs homeland security r&d activities have substantial scope , as these activities must attempt to meet the needs of both dhs component agencies and other customers outside of the agency , such as first responders . many stakeholders continue to debate the optimal approach to maximizing dhs r&d effectiveness . some advocates call for substantial increases in particular areas of research and development , citing that a dedicated research effort with significant investments is more likely to yield technology breakthroughs . some stakeholders call for a rebalancing of the investment portfolio with an increased focus on technology development , arguing that many prototypes under development in the private sector need only a small boost to convert them to procurable technologies . still other stakeholders call for a rebalancing of the investment portfolio towards long - term research activities , warning that dhs will lack research outcomes to develop into prototypes if long - term research languishes . finally , portions of the stakeholder community suggest using a high - risk , high - reward investment strategy similar to that undertaken by the defense advanced research projects agency ( darpa ) so as to make "leap - ahead" advances relative to terrorist capabilities .