central clearing . argentina permits a single dealer functionality . pre - trade price and volume transparency is required for all exchange or electronic - platform - traded and otc derivatives . post - trade price and volume transparency is required for all exchanges or electronic - platform - traded and otc derivatives . reporting to trade repositories . no laws are in place or are expected to be in place by year - end 2012 that require all otc derivatives transactions to be reported to trade repositories . derivatives operations of banks with cross - border counterparties , the bulk of otc transactions , are subject to reporting and monitoring by the central bank . legislative and / or regulatory steps have been completed toward implementing a reporting requirement . no additional legislative or regulatory steps are needed for a reporting requirement to be effective . regulations require reporting to a governmental authority in place of a specifically designated trade repository . application of central clearing requirements . derivatives under the jurisdiction of the cnv must be centrally cleared . central clearing requirements cover all types of financial entities under the jurisdiction of the cnv . current laws or regulations do not provide for intra - group transactions that are not traded through regulated markets . australia standardization . explicit authority is required to approve otc derivatives trading platforms . transparency and trading . post - trade price and volume transparency is required for all exchanges or electronic - platform - traded and otc derivatives . single dealer and multi - dealer facilities are available for foreign exchange derivatives . such agency rulemakings and proposed legislation raise broad questions for congressional oversight or potential new legislation , such as the following: what connections to the united states would require a non - u.s. person to register as a swap dealer or major swap participant ? which dodd - frank act requirements should apply to the otc derivatives , or swaps , activities of non - u.s. persons ? what about to u.s. persons , and their branches , subsidiaries , and affiliates outside of the united states ? to the extent that title vii of the dodd - frank requirements would apply , under what circumstances should u.s. authorities permit non - u.s. persons to comply with the regulatory regime of a foreign jurisdiction instead of complying with u.s. requirements ? a look at progress achieved by foreign regimes in implementing these g - 20 commitments should help members of congress and u.s regulators in deliberating these questions . in addition , the data on standardized contracts are expected to be reported to trade repositories and made available to regulators and policymakers in order to assess the stability and performance of the derivatives market .