mrs . bond was eventually implicated and indicted in federal court for possession and use of a chemical weapon in violation of 18 u.s.c . reserving the right to appeal , she pled guilty and was sentenced to imprisonment for six years . on appeal , mrs . bond argued that the implementing statute under which she was convicted was either unconstitutional or inapplicable . the united states court of appeals for the third circuit initially ruled that she lacked standing to raise the constitutional issue , since the tenth amendment exists for the protection of state , not individual , rights . the supreme court disagreed and returned the case to the court of appeals for a decision on the merits . mrs . bond's constitutional claim was grounded on the argument that the legislation is an intrusion upon sovereign prerogatives of the states with respect to local criminal offenses . the government has responded that ( 1 ) the authority to negotiate and ratify the chemical weapons convention comes within the president's constitutional treaty making power ; ( 2 ) enactment of legislation to implement the convention comes within congress's authority to make laws necessary and proper to carry into execution the president's treaty making power ; and ( 3 ) mrs . bond's conduct was condemned by a literal reading of the implementing legislation's criminal proscriptions . the supreme court unanimously agreed that mrs . bond's conviction must be overturned . for a majority of the court , the primacy of the states over criminal matters provided a presumption of statutory construction that could not be rebutted in mrs . bond's case . for the three concurring justices — scalia , thomas , and alito — the constitution does not permit the federal government to outlaw mrs . bond's conduct based on the treaty power . a majority of the supreme court preferred not to use mrs . bond's conviction as a vehicle to define the scope of congress's legislative authority under the treaty power . it may be that there is no majority view of the scope of the treaty power . it may be that a majority would prefer to clarify the scope of treaty power without having to find that the federal government has overstepped its constitutional bounds . it may be that a majority considered the bond case an aberration , and found the fact pattern of "this curious case" ill - suited to demonstrate the bounds of the treaty power . it may be a majority of the court finds the missouri v. holland declaration a satisfactory statement of the law . it may be a majority preferred to resolve the case on statutory grounds so as not to call in question other treaty implementing legislation . it may be , as court opinion stated , that a majority would simply prefer to resolve cases using principles of statutory rather than constitutional construction , whenever possible . it may be that several of these factors were in play . the only thing that can be said with certainty is that the third circuit's opinion has been reversed , and the case remanded there for disposition consistent with the supreme court's opinion . although mrs .