wiretap laws . under the federal wiretap statute , it is unlawful to intentionally intercept an "oral communication" by a person "exhibiting an expectation that such communication is not subject to interception under circumstances justifying such expectation.... " currently , commercial microphones can record sounds upwards of 300 feet . use of such a microphone on a drone to record private conversations could implicate the federal wiretap statute . the legal issues discussed in this report will likely remain unresolved until the civilian use of drones becomes more widespread . to that end , the faa has been tasked with developing "a comprehensive plan to safely accelerate the integration" of drones into the national airspace , which focuses on the safety of the drone technology and operator certification . while the deadline for development of the plan has already elapsed , the faa has until the end of fy2015 to implement such a plan . additionally , the faa must identify six test ranges where it will integrate drones into the national airspace . this deadline , 180 days after enactment of the act , has also elapsed without faa compliance . preemption of state and local regulations . the increased presence of drones in domestic airspace raises the question of potential federal preemption of state or local efforts to regulate different aspects of drone use . the doctrine of preemption derives from the supremacy clause of the constitution , which states that federal law , treaties , and the constitution are the "supreme law of the land. a federal law may preempt state or local action in one of three ways: if the statute expressly states its intent to preempt state or local action ( express preemption ) ; if a court concludes that congress intended to occupy the regulatory field , implicitly preventing state or local action in that area ( field preemption ) ; or if the state or local action directly conflicts with or frustrates the purpose of the federal provisions ( conflict preemption ) . with regard to traditional aviation laws , generally , state regulations of aviation safety , airspace management , and aviation noise are preempted by federal laws and regulations . congress vested sole responsibility for the aviation industry and domestic airspace with the federal government in the federal aviation act of 1958 . according to the legislative history , the faa was to have "full responsibility and authority for the advancement and promulgation of civil aeronautics generally , including promulgation and enforcement of safety regulations. in city of burbank v. lockheed air terminal , inc. , the supreme court struck down a local city ordinance that prohibited planes from taking off during certain hours of the day as preempted by the federal regulatory scheme . expressing its fear regarding local control of airspace , the court stated , "if we were to uphold the burbank ordinance and a significant number of municipalities followed suit , it is obvious that fractionalized control of the timing of takeoffs and landings would severely limit the flexibility of the faa in controlling air traffic flow. the supreme court has , however , upheld state regulations imposing taxes on aircraft equipment located within the state .