, the smart grid ) . the electric power industry is in the process of transformation . the electricity infrastructure of the united states is aging , and uncertainty exists around how to modernize the grid , and what technologies and fuels will be used to produce electricity in the future . unresolved questions of transmission and reliability of the grid are arising from potential cybersecurity threats and continuing interest in harnessing renewable energy and other low carbon sources of electricity . concerns about reliability and electricity prices are being complicated by new environmental regulations and the rising availability of natural gas for the production of electric power from unconventional resources such as gas shales . congress will likely be faced with policy issues regarding how the modernization of this vital industry will unfold . as with electric power plants , electric transmission and distribution system components are also aging , with power transformers averaging over 40 years of age , and 70% of transmission lines being 25 years or older . as components of the system are retired , they are replaced with newer components often linked to communications or automated systems ( i.e. with changes in federal law encouraging electricity competition and markets , regulatory changes , and the aging of the electric power infrastructure as drivers , the grid is changing from a largely patchwork system built to serve the needs of individual electric utility companies to essentially a national interconnected system capable of accommodating massive transfers of electrical energy between regions of the united states . damage from storms to transmission and distribution systems appears to be increasing . but undergrounding transmission and distribution systems is not always a solution . however , burning coal results in environmental consequences , such as nitrogen oxides and sulfur emissions . underground lines can be more expensive , and take longer to repair . replacing overhead lines with underground cable is also expensive . these environmental regulatory requirements have been evolving in the last decade due to various challenges to epa's implementation of federal laws . new regulations under development at epa would impose new requirements on coal - fired power plants . some of these rules would be implemented at the federal level , while others would be implemented at the state level . they include the cross - state air pollution rule ( which replaced the clean air interstate rule ) ; the mercury and air toxics standards ( mats ) ( also known as the utility mact ) rule to reduce emissions of mercury , other metallic toxics , acid gases , and organic air toxics ; the proposals to regulate coal combustion residues ; and the clean water act section 316 ( b ) cooling water intake rule . however , only the utility mact rule is currently in effect . epa also issued standards for greenhouse gas emissions which would require all new power plants to restrict carbon dioxide emissions . epa has yet to propose rules for ghg emissions from existing power plants , as is required by court order .