similar to h.r . 4437 , senate - passed s. 2611 would have established mandatory minimum sentences for those convicted of alien smuggling , enhanced penalties for persons carrying firearms during smuggling offenses , and amended the law to allow for the seizure and forfeiture of any property used to commit or facilitate alien smuggling . state and local law enforcement s. 2611 would have "reaffirmed" a state's inherent authority to investigate , identify , apprehend , arrest , detain , or transfer into federal custody aliens in the united states . however , it would have limited such practices at the state and local level to the enforcement of the criminal provisions of the ina . employment eligibility verification s. 2611 would have directed dhs to implement an employment eligibility verification system , which would be mandatory for all employers . employers would have been required to participate in the system with respect to all employees hired on or after the date that is 18 months after at least $400 million is appropriated and made available for implementation . under s. 2611 , employers would have been required to query the system to verify the identity and employment eligibility of an individual after hiring or recruiting or referring for a fee . in addition , dhs could have required any employer or class of employers to participate in the system with respect to individuals employed as of the date of enactment or hired after the date of enactment , if dhs designated such employer or class as a critical employer based on homeland security or national security needs or if dhs has reasonable cause to believe that the employer had materially violated the prohibitions on unauthorized employment . under s. 2611 , individuals who were terminated from employment based on a determination by the verification system that they were not eligible to work could have obtained administrative and judicial review . if they were , in fact , determined to be eligible to work and prevail , they would have been entitled to compensation for lost wages . worksite enforcement under s. 2611 , the current i - 9 system would have remained in place with some modifications . in addition , s. 2611 would have increased monetary penalties for employer violations and would have established a new penalty for employees who falsely represented on the i - 9 form that they were authorized to work . family - based immigration in its handling of family - based legal immigration , s. 2611 would have no longer deducted immediate relatives of u.s. citizens from the overall family - sponsored numerical limit of 480,000 . this change would have likely added at least 226,000 more family - based admissions annually ( based on the current floor of 226,000 family - sponsored visas ) . the numerical limits on immediate relatives of lprs would have increased from 114,200 ( plus visas not used by first preference ) to 240,000 annually . employment - based immigration in terms of employment - based immigration , s. 2611 would have increased the annual number of employment - based lprs from 140,000 to 450,000 from fy2007 through fy2016 , and set the limit at 290,000 thereafter .