while the regulatory regime ( i.e. first , coal - burning electric power plants receive approximately 72 percent of their coal by rail . , under a rate - regulated or competitive environment ) , costs of transmission and distribution , and weather are strong determinants , the cost of fuel is often the major factor affecting electricity production especially for power plants which have already recovered their capital costs of construction . transportation costs for coal have historically been a major consideration in the choice of coal as a fuel . barge transport is used where river access is available . but rail transportation is the most common mode of transit for coal as unit trains offer the ability to transport large shipments to power plants on a regular basis . however , rail transportation can be costly . second , rail transportation costs account for a sizable share of total delivered costs . while , on average , transportation costs account for approximately 20 percent of total [delivered] costs , they can reach as high as 59 percent on shipments of coal originating in the powder river basin . u.s. coal transportation costs are cited as a major reason why many utilities in the new england states have chosen to generate electricity with natural gas , or import coal from overseas as a lower cost alternative . in 2011 approximately 72 million short tons ( mst ) of coal were used by the u.s industrial sector , which represented roughly 7% of total coal consumption in the country . the industrial sector's share of u.s. coal demand has declined substantially since 1949 , when the industrial sector accounted for nearly 45% of annual coal consumption ( see figure 7 ) . the decline of the industrial sector's share of coal consumption is generally a result of three developments since 1949: ( 1 ) reduced coal use for coke production and steel making , ( 2 ) reduced coal use for industrial process applications , and ( 3 ) increased coal use for electric power production , which now represents more than 90% of u.s. coal demand . the energy information administration classifies industrial sector coal consumption into three separate categories: ( 1 ) coke plants , ( 2 ) combined heat and power ( chp ) , and ( 3 ) non - chp . table 1 indicates the amount of coal consumed in 2011 for each of these categories . given the expected increase in natural gas supplies and expected shift in electricity production from coal to natural gas as a primary fuel , the issue of what level of coal generation should be preserved for power generation in the united states may be a question congress will be faced with . while u.s. coal currently used for power generation may have options for markets overseas , the domestic future of coal power generation is clouded by both market prices and environmental regulations . it also has the lowest heat value ranging between 4,000 btus and 8,300 btus . for most of the history of power generation in the united states , coal has been the dominant fuel used to produce electricity .