ma was returned to office in 2012 . kiribati , the marshal islands , nauru , palau , the solomon islands , and tuvalu are among the 23 governments globally that recognize taiwan . in recent years , it appears that china has increased its aid to and engagement with the pacific to pursue other interests as well . in addition to seeking diplomatic leverage , china is thought to seek to gain access to resources , including minerals , timber , and fish , and to extend its influence in the region . china's aid program to the pacific is difficult to quantify but appears to be significant and growing . china is thought to be the third largest aid donor to the pacific , after australia and the united states . new zealand has expressed interest in working with china in aid projects in the pacific . this could help draw china into a collaborative posture in the region . if china resists such efforts to cooperate on development projects with western nations it would then appear that china views its assistance as in competition with western assistance . china's strategy in the pacific , when combined with the projected further expansion of chinese naval capabilities , such as the launch of its first aircraft carrier for sea trials in 2011 , appears to be drawing china militarily closer to the pacific region . china's increasing military capability will likely give it the ability to be more directly involved in the pacific region in the future , though the operational integration of naval capabilities , such as aircraft carriers , may take considerable time to develop . china's relations with fiji offer an example of the impact of china's foreign relations in a south pacific context . expanding foreign assistance from and other ties to china have helped fiji work around the political ostracism that australia , new zealand , and others sought to impose on the regime of commodore bainimarama for leading a coup that undermined democratic government in fiji . commodore bainimarama has stated that it makes sense for fiji to more closely align itself with china which does not care about the nature of the regime . commodore bainimarama stated in january 2013 that the draft constitution would be scrapped and that he would have his legal office draw up a new constitution . new zealand foreign minister mccully reportedly stated that this brings into question whether elections anticipated in 2014 would be free and fair . an examination of the interrelationship of identity , interests , and values yields insight into the nature of bilateral relations between the united states and new zealand . focusing on identity fosters understanding of why some in new zealand have been somewhat skeptical of becoming overly reliant on a single great and powerful friend . looking at interests helps explain the extent to which new zealand seeks to maximize its economic opportunities in a globalized economy as well as its perceptions of china . new zealand's desire for independence in its external relations can also be viewed as a consequence of its historical experience .