medicaid is jointly funded by the federal government and the states . participation in medicaid is voluntary for states , though all states , the district of columbia , and the territories choose to participate . each state designs and administers its own version of medicaid under broad federal rules . medicaid is a means - tested entitlement program that finances the delivery of primary and acute medical services as well as long - term care . while states that choose to participate in medicaid must comply with all federal mandated requirements , state variability is the rule rather than the exception in terms of eligibility levels , covered services , and how those services are reimbursed and delivered . historically , eligibility was generally limited to low - income children , pregnant women , parents of dependent children , the elderly , and people with disabilities ; however , recent changes will soon add coverage for individuals under the age of 65 with income up to 133% of the federal poverty level . the federal government pays a share of each state's medicaid costs ; states must contribute the remaining portion in order to qualify for federal funds . this report describes the federal medical assistance percentage ( fmap ) calculation used to reimburse states for most medicaid expenditures , and it lists the statutory exceptions to the regular fmap rate . in addition , this report discusses other fmap - related issues , including fmap changes in the patient protection and affordable care act ( aca , p.l . 111-148 as amended ) , federal deficit reduction proposals that would amend the fmap rate , and the disaster - recovery fmap adjustment . the federal government's share of most medicaid service costs is determined by the fmap rate , which varies by state and is determined by a formula set in statute . the fmap rate is used to reimburse states for the federal share of most medicaid expenditures , but exceptions to the regular fmap rate have been made for certain states , situations , populations , providers , and services . an enhanced fmap ( e - fmap ) rate is provided for both services and administration under the state children's health insurance program ( chip ) , subject to the availability of funds from a state's federal allotment for chip . when a state expands its medicaid program using chip funds ( rather than medicaid funds ) , the e - fmap rate applies and is paid out of the state's federal allotment . the e - fmap rate is calculated by reducing the state share under the regular fmap rate by 30% . the fmap rate is also used in determining the phased - down state contribution ( "clawback" ) for medicare part d , the federal share of certain child support enforcement collections , temporary assistance for needy families ( tanf ) contingency funds , a portion of the child care and development fund ( ccdf ) , and foster care and adoption assistance under title iv - e of the social security act .