marketing . formalisation of employment . 6.food security system . political participation 1.rights and guarantees for exercising political opposition in general and for the new movements that emerge after signature of the final agreement . media access . ( international crisis group , colombia: peace at last ? , latin america report , number 45 , september 25 , 2012 ) . general agreement for the termination of the conflict and the construction of a stable and lasting peace the below translation has been adapted by crisis group from the text at http: / / colombiareports.com / colombia - news / fact - sheets / 25784-agreement - colombia - government - and - rebel - group - farc.html . the english translation provided here of the general agreement signed by the parties to the negotiations appears in the international crisis group's report colombia: peace at last ? the delegates of the government of the republic of colombia ( national government ) and the revolutionary armed forces of colombia - people's army ( farc - ep ) : as a result of the exploratory meeting held in havana , cuba , between 23 february 2012 and 26 august 2012 , that counted on the participation of the government of the republic of cuba and the government of norway as guarantors , and on the support of the government of the bolivarian republic of venezuela as facilitator of logistics and companion: with the mutual decision to put an end to the conflict as an essential condition for the construction of stable and lasting peace ; attending the clamour of the people for peace , and recognising that: construction of peace is a matter for society as a whole that requires the participation of all , without distinction , including other guerrilla forces that we invite to join this effort ; respect of human rights within the entire national territory is a purpose of the state that should be promoted ; economic development with social justice and in harmony with the environment is a guarantee for peace and progress ; social development with equity and well - being that includes big majorities allows growing as a country ; a colombia in peace will play an active and sovereign role in peace as well as regional and worldwide development ; it is important to broaden democracy as a condition to build solid foundations for peace . with the government's and farc - ep's full intention to come to an agreement , and the invitation to the entire colombian society , as well as to the organisations of regional integration and the international community to accompany this process ; we have agreed: i.to initiate direct and uninterrupted talks about the points of the agenda established here that are aimed at reaching a final agreement for the termination of the conflict that will contribute to the construction of stable and lasting peace . ii.to establish a table of talks that will be opened publicly in oslo , norway , within the first two weeks of october 2012 and whose main seat will be havana , cuba . meetings can take place in other countries .