concerns about recidivism are not unfounded . research published by the bureau of justice statistics found that approximately three - quarters ( 76.6% ) of inmates released in 2005 were rearrested within five years and approximately half ( 55.4% ) were convicted for a new crime . concerns about offenders committing new crimes while on parole have led some jurisdictions to implement intensive supervision programs where parolees are subject to more rigorous conditions of release and more frequent contacts with a parole officer . while intensive supervision programs might in theory reduce the likelihood that parolees commit new offenses while in the community , the body of research on intensive supervision programs suggests that these programs do not reduce recidivism . depending on how recidivism is defined , intensive supervision programs may actually increase "recidivism" because they are more likely to detect technical violations of the conditions of release . this can create a paradox for policymakers: parole might be considered as a means of reducing the prison population , but it might actually increase the number of inmates in prisons as more return to prison for violating the conditions of parole . should congress choose to reinstate parole , policymakers might consider evidence - based measures so that parole helps as many inmates successfully transition back into the community as possible . the options congress could consider are similar to those outlined above for successful probation programs , namely using a validated risk assessment tool to sort parolees into high - and low - risk groups ; ensuring that parolees with a demonstrated need for rehabilitative programming have access to evidence - based , appropriately delivered programs ; requiring parolees who violate their conditions of release to serve intermediate sanctions rather than returning them to prison ; and allowing parolees who strictly adhere to the conditions of their parole to be released early . the debate about whether to house inmates in privately operated correctional facilities has been framed by two overarching questions: ( 1 ) can private facilities incarcerate inmates at a lower cost and ( 2 ) can private facilities provide services that are equal or superior to the services provided in public institutions ? bop attempted to answer these questions , with two evaluations of the taft correctional institution ( tci ) , which was operated as a private facility as a part of a demonstration project . one evaluation of tci and three similar bop facilities was conducted by abt associates , inc , while another was conducted by bop's office of research . both the abt and bop evaluations found that tci was cheaper to operate on a per diem basis than the three comparable bop facilities , but the two evaluations offer different conclusions as to how much was saved by operating tci as a private institution . the two primary reasons for the different conclusions are economies of scale realized by tci and differences in how per diem rates were calculated .