information and technology are rapidly evolving . conflicts between federal and state governments remain , and the argument that environmental regulations hinder economic growth continues to be made . complicating this debate is the fact that a comprehensive national inventory of fugitive emissions from natural gas systems does not exist due to many factors , including costs and technical uncertainties . for these reasons , the choice of policy that returns the most efficient , flexible , cost - effective , and environmentally sound emissions controls on the sector has remained an open question . these federal standards are currently under reconsideration by the trump administration . blm rescinded many of the novel requirements of its rule on september 28 , 2018 . further , many producers in the crude oil and natural gas sector have set forth a series of recommended practices . these practices are sustained by the economic incentives provided by capturing the fugitive releases of natural gas and its byproducts to be sold at market . several voluntary partnerships sponsored by various federal and international agencies also serve to facilitate recommended practices for emissions reductions in the oil and gas industry . epa's natural gas star program , the global methane initiative ( formerly the methane to markets partnership ) , and the world bank global gas flaring reduction partnership are three such programs . the trump administration's fy2018 budget proposed eliminating the natural gas star program and the global methane initiative "as part of the administration's commitment to return epa to its core work. debate continues over the regulation of methane , voc , so 2 , and hap emissions from the crude oil and natural gas sector . some of the more significant debates involving air quality concerns are outlined in the following sections . u.s. natural gas production has grown markedly in recent years . this growth is due in large part to increased activities in unconventional resources brought on by technological advance . many have advocated for the increased production and use of natural gas in the united states for economic , national security , and environmental reasons . they argue that natural gas is the cleanest - burning fossil fuel , with fewer emissions of co 2 , no x , so 2 , pm , and mercury than other fossil fuels ( eg , coal and oil ) on a per - unit - of - energy basis . for these reasons , many have looked to natural gas as a "bridge" fuel to a less polluting and lower ghg - intensive economy . currently , state and local authorities are responsible for virtually all of the day - to - day regulation and oversight of natural gas systems , and many states have passed laws and / or promulgated rules to address air quality issues based on local needs . further to this , organizations such as the state review of oil and natural gas environment regulations ( stronger ) are available to help states assess the overall framework of environmental regulations supporting oil and gas operations in their regions .