that issue is discussed below . the issuance of an executive order frequently raises questions about whether the order exceeds the scope of the president's authority , in relation to the constitutional separation of powers and validly enacted legislation . since the latter half of the 20 th century , these questions have typically been evaluated using the tripartite framework set forth by u.s. supreme court justice jackson in his concurring opinion in the case of youngstown sheet & tube company v. sawyer . what is the legislative and constitutional authority for the executive order ? how do its provisions relate to those in legislative proposals in the 112 th and 113 th congresses ? what has been the reaction of stakeholders to the order and what issues does it raise ? repeated cyber intrusions into critical infrastructure demonstrate the need for improved cybersecurity . the national and economic security of the united states depends on the reliable functioning of the nation's critical infrastructure in the face of such threats . cyberthreats to u.s. infrastructure and other assets are a growing concern to policy makers . information and communications technology ( ict ) is ubiquitous and relied upon for government services , corporate business processes , and individual professional and personal pursuits — almost every facet of modern life . many ict devices and other components are interdependent , and disruption of one component may have a negative , cascading effect on others . a denial of service , theft or manipulation of data , or damage to critical infrastructure through a cyber - based attack could have significant impacts on national security , the economy , and the livelihood and safety of individual citizens . the federal role in what is now called cybersecurity has been debated for more than a decade . much of the recent debate has focused on two issues: sharing of cybersecurity - related information within and across sectors , and the cybersecurity of ci sectors , including federal systems . 13636 attempts to address both of those issues , as well as others . it uses existing statutory and constitutional authority to expand information sharing and collaboration between the government and the private sector , including sharing classified information by broadening a program developed for the defense industrial base to other ci sectors ; develop a voluntary framework of cybersecurity standards and best practices for protecting ci , through a public / private effort ; establish a consultative process for improving ci cybersecurity ; identify ci with especially high priority for protection , using the consultative process ; establish a program with incentives for voluntary adoption of the framework by ci owners and operators ; review cybersecurity regulatory requirements to determine if they are sufficient and appropriate ; and incorporate privacy and civil liberties protections in activities under the order . the information - sharing and framework provisions in particular have received significant public attention . 13636 was issued in the wake of the lack of enactment of cybersecurity legislation in the 112 th congress , apparently at least in part as a response to that . that raises questions about what authority the president has to act on this matter through an executive order .