what benefits if any might that have ? to what extent , if any , would any given unified national security budgeting proposal necessitate changes in the modalities of congressional oversight , of authorizations as well as appropriations ? what impact if any might proposed changes in congressional oversight — for example , holding more frequent joint hearings concerning cross - cutting national security issues , or increasing the size of appropriations committee staffs — have on the effectiveness and / or efficiency of u.s. national security efforts , even without changes in the structure or organization of executive branch national security budgeting ? so the stakes associated with any possible revision of the federal budget system are quite high . while a number of practitioners and outside experts have called for adopting more "unified" approaches toward budgeting for national security , those calls themselves have hardly been unified in the prescriptions they have put forward . they vary greatly in content and — more fundamentally — in intent . in evaluating proposals and options for possible refinements to budgeting for national security activities , congress may wish to consider the following issues . the debates about unified budgeting for national security lack a shared sense of the basic problem that needs to be solved . accordingly , they also lack a shared sense of the basic goal that needs to be achieved . for any given unified budgeting proposal , what problem is it designed to solve — for example , are current u.s. national security efforts perceived to be too expensive , too ineffective , or imbalanced in the distribution of labor across the executive branch ? in reality , how if at all does the current system of budgeting for national security fall short ? what advantages if any might it have over proposed alternative systems ? to what extent might cross - cutting consideration of national security issues be expanded within the formal constraints of the current system ? how do various proposals balance the magnitude of the perceived problem and the anticipated benefits of proposed changes , against the anticipated costs of change in terms of time , energy and resources , together with the risks of unanticipated damage to the rest of the system ? in theory , many different choices could be made regarding the appropriate boundaries of national security writ large , or of explicitly "cross - cutting" issues within the field of national security , for use in unified budgeting approaches . in budgeting for national security activities , regardless of the mechanisms for doing so , what purchase might be gained by considering national security as a whole ? what advantages might examination , instead , of explicitly cross - cutting national security activities , offer ? if either cross - cutting national security issues , or national security issues writ large , deserve explicit attention in the budgeting process , what should those categories include ? what are the broader stakes — for both agencies and issues — of exclusion from or inclusion under a national security umbrella ?