437 , in the house of representatives . s. 150 is similar to the assault weapons ban of 1994 that was in effect through september 13 , 2004 . under intermediate scrutiny , the government has the burden of showing that there is a substantial relationship or reasonable "fit" between the regulation and the important governmental interest "in protecting police officers and controlling crime. circuit held that the district carried this burden and that the evidence demonstrated that a ban on both semiautomatic assault rifles and lcafds "is likely to promote the government's interest in crime control in the densely populated urban area that is the district of columbia. in 2012 , the supreme court of illinois decided wilson v. cook county , a case that evaluated the constitutionality of the blair holt assault weapons ban of cook county , a long - standing ordinance that was amended to similarly reflect provisions of the 1994 assault weapons ban . since heller , cases that have evaluated the constitutionality of state assault weapons bans have generally found them to be valid under the second amendment . regarding the due process claim , the court concluded that the ordinance is not unconstitutionally vague such that it "fails to provide people of ordinary intelligence a reasonable opportunity to understand what conduct it prohibits. the court also dismissed the plaintiff's equal protection claim , finding that the "[o]rdinance does not arbitrarily differentiate between two owners with similar firearms because the banned firearms are either listed , a copy or duplicate , or fall under the characteristics - based test. in 2009 , the california court of appeals decided people v. james , which held that possession of an assault weapon in california remains unlawful and is not protected by the second amendment . while the court acknowledged that the ordinance banned only a subset of weapons with particular characteristics similar to other jurisdictions , it found that it could not "conclusively say ... that assault weapons as defined in the [o]rdinance categorically fall outside the scope of the rights protected by the [s]econd [a]mendment. the court ultimately remanded the second amendment claim to the trial court for further proceedings , because unlike the james and heller ii decisions , the county did not have an opportunity to present evidence to justify the nexus between the ordinance and the governmental interest it seeks to protect . these cases demonstrate that courts evaluating various assault weapons bans , and to a limited extent lcafd bans , have looked to the heller decision and the general framework that has developed in the lower courts for analyzing claims under the second amendment . based on the heller decision where the supreme court indicated that certain weapons fall outside the protection of the second amendment , lower courts have examined whether the prohibited weapons are considered in "common use" or "commonly used" for lawful purposes or "dangerous and unusual. it is uncertain whether , to be protected under the second amendment , the weapon must be in "common use" by the people and if so , must it be in "common use" for self - defense or hunting , or what constitutes "dangerous and unusual.