in response , the d.c . air quality index ( aqi ) : as proposed , updates the aqi ( epa's color - coded tool for informing the public about air quality and associated measures for reducing risks of exposure ) for pm 2.5 by changing the upper end range for "good" category ( an index value of 50 ) on the overall scale ( 0 to 500 based on conversion of pm 2.5 concentrations ) to the level of the revised annual pm 2.5 standard ( 12 µg / m 3 ) . the decision was in response to petitions filed in the d.c . circuit by 13 states , industry , agriculture , business , and environmental and public health advocacy groups , challenging certain aspects of epa's revisions for both pm 2.5 and pm 10 . circuit granted the petitions in part with regard to the pm 2.5 annual standard and the secondary standards for pm 2.5 and pm 10 ( including visibility impairment ) , denying other challenges . concerned with delays in epa's schedule for proposing revisions to the 2006 pm naaqs , the american lung association and the national parks conservation association , and nine states separately filed petitions with the d.c . circuit in november 2011 urging the court to order epa's immediate compliance with the february 2009 remand . subsequently , in february 2012 the two organizations sued epa in the d.c . circuit for failing to fulfill their statutory duty to review the october 2006 pm naaqs within five years , and a coalition of 11 states filed a similar suit with the u.s. district court southern district of new york . circuit initially directed epa to sign a proposed rule concerning its decision regarding revisions to the pm naaqs by june 7 , 2012 , and following a motion filed by the agency , amended the deadline to june 14 , 2012 . as part of a september 4 , 2012 , consent decree , epa agreed to finalize revisions to the pm naaqs by december 14 , 2012 . promulgation of a revised naaqs , such as the pm naaqs , initiates a series of statutorily required actions , ultimately culminating in issuance of permits pursuant to state regulations in a state implementation plan ( sip ) . the first step is designation of attainment and nonattainment areas , based on the accumulated results of ambient air monitoring and modeling data . states first propose to designate certain geographic areas ( eg , counties ) as either "attainment" or "nonattainment," depending on whether the data indicate the concentrations of pollutants will be below or above the naaqs . after extensive dialogue with state officials , epa either approves the proposed attainment and nonattainment areas , or sends back to states proposed revisions . epa and states generally come to an agreement about the area designations . following this designation , approved by epa , states then develop a sip , which consists essentially of state regulations to be implemented by states that would affect the state emissions inventory , and therefore the expected or modeled concentrations of air pollutants .