and i support it . in addition , several industry organizations have expressed support for h.r . in contrast , a labor representative asserted that the bill fails to address several weaknesses present in the current cfats program . 68 was referred to the house committee on energy and commerce and the house committee on homeland security . the act would prohibit the secretary of homeland security from approving a chemical facility site security plan if the plan did not meet or exceed existing state or local security requirements . it would allow the secretary of homeland security to mandate the use of specific security measures in site security plans . the bill would also cause cvi to be treated as sensitive security information in both general and legal proceedings . finally , the act would no longer prohibit third - party individuals from bringing suit in court to require the secretary of homeland security to enforce chemical facility security regulations against a chemical facility . s. 67 , the secure water facilities act , was referred to the senate committee on environment and public works . the act would authorize the epa administrator to regulate community water systems and wastewater treatment facilities for security purposes . s. 67 also would authorize implementation of methods to reduce the consequences of a chemical release from an intentional act . among other provisions , the administrator would be directed to promulgate regulations as necessary to prohibit the unauthorized disclosure of controlled information . s. 67 would authorize the administrator to provide grants or enter into cooperative agreements with states or regulated entities to assist in regulatory compliance . s. 68 , the secure chemical facilities act , was referred to the senate committee on homeland security and governmental affairs . the act would codify aspects of the cfats regulation . it would require facilities to evaluate whether the facility could reduce the consequences of an attack by using a safer chemical or process . the act would authorize dhs to require implementation of those safer measures if a facility has been classified as one of the highest - risk facilities , implementation of safer measures is feasible , and implementation would not increase risk overall by shifting risk to another location . among other provisions , s. 68 also would increase the participation of employees and employee representatives in developing security plans . s. 68 would alter the current information control regime , aligning it with that for sensitive security information . finally , s. 68 would allow third - party individuals to file suit against the secretary of homeland security or submit a petition to the secretary to enforce compliance with statute . s. 814 , the protecting communities from chemical explosions act of 2013 , was referred to the senate committee on homeland security and governmental affairs . the act would levy a civil penalty on owners or operators of a facility that does not file top - screen information when possessing a chemical of interest at above the screening threshold quantity .