key policy issues . during the 113 th congress , the tpp negotiations were of congressional interest , especially in the areas of services trade , ipr protection , worker rights , environmental issues , and regulatory cooperation . given that only three countries from latin america were taking part in the negotiations , this raised some questions among policy makers as to whether the united states should consider broadening trade policy efforts to the region as a whole . because of their geographic location , many caribbean nations are transit countries for illicit drugs from south america and the caribbean destined for the u.s. and european markets . currently , of the 15 countries in the caribbean region , president obama identified 4 — the bahamas , the dominican republic , haiti , and jamaica — as major drug - producing or drug - transit countries in september 2014 pursuant to annual legislative drug certification requirements . many other caribbean nations , particularly in the eastern caribbean , are also vulnerable to drug trafficking and associated crimes . homicide rates in several caribbean countries have increased in recent years because of gangs and organized crime , competition between drug trafficking organizations , and the availability of firearms . in 2009 , the obama administration developed the caribbean basin security initiative ( cbsi ) through a process of dialogue with caribbean countries with the goal of reducing illicit trafficking in the caribbean , advancing public safety and security , and promoting social justice . u.s. funding for the program from fy2010 through fy2014 amounted to an estimated $327 million with assistance in the following five areas: maritime and aerial security cooperation ; law enforcement capacity building ; border / port security and firearms interdiction ; justice sector reform ; and crime prevention and at - risk youth . key policy issues: for fy2015 , the obama administration requested almost $57 million for the cbsi . the house and senate appropriations committees reported out their respective fy2015 foreign aid appropriations bills ( h.r . 5013 and s. 2499 ) in june 2014 . the report to the house bill ( h.rept . 113-499 ) directed not less than the fy2014 level of assistance for the cbsi , or almost $64 million . it also would require a state department report on cbsi funding on a country - by - country basis for fy2010 through fy2014 . the report to the senate bill ( s.rept . 113-195 ) did not include a specific funding level for the cbsi , but indicated its support for the cbsi . nevertheless , the senate report also indicated that cbsi assistance should be made available only for governments that the secretary of state determines demonstrate a clear and convincing commitment to punishing corruption and reforming their security forces . ultimately , congress completed action on foreign aid appropriations in the fy2015 omnibus appropriations measure approved in december 2014 ( p.l . it appears that the cbsi will be funded at not less than $64 million , since the explanatory statement to the omnibus noted that federal departments shall comply with directives and reporting requirement in the house and senate reports to the fy2015 foreign aid appropriations measure .