most need to take out a loan known as a mortgage . this report serves as a primer that explains how the system of housing finance works . it focuses on single - family , owner - occupied housing not on rental , commercial , or multi - family real estate . historically , the government has played an important role in the housing finance system , both supporting the system and regulating it . as described in more detail in the " lender protection " section , the government provides explicit support to certain homeowners through government agencies such as the federal housing administration ( fha ) and implicit support to others , such as through the government - sponsored enterprises ( gses ) fannie mae and freddie mac . when a lender sells a mortgage in the secondary market , the new mortgage holder can hold the mortgage as a whole loan . when held as a whole loan , the mortgage is in the portfolio of the new mortgage holder , and the new mortgage holder bears the risks associated with the mortgage . alternatively , the new mortgage holder may choose to securitize the mortgage instead of holding it as a whole loan . mortgage securitization comes in many different forms , but generally speaking , the process involves a financial institution acquiring and combining ( pooling together ) many different mortgages and then issuing a mortgage - backed security ( mbs ) . an mbs can be divided into different pieces , or tranches , that are sold to investors . the investors do not own the underlying mortgages but are buying the right to receive the future stream of payments that come from those mortgages . a servicer collects the payments of all the borrowers whose mortgages are part of the security and remits the payments to the investors . for investors , purchasing mbs offers several benefits compared with holding whole mortgages . most notably , an mbs is generally more liquid than whole mortgages , meaning it is easier to quickly sell an mbs at the current price . because the market for mbs is more liquid than the market for whole mortgages , mbs might be attractive to investors who would not otherwise choose to invest in mortgages . more investors in the mortgage market , in turn , can mean more funding is available for lenders to offer mortgages . more funding available in the primary market , and the existence of a secondary market where lenders know they can easily sell the mortgages they make , can result in lower interest rates that lenders charge to borrowers . one critical housing decision that households make is whether to rent or to own . multiple factors influence the decision , such as a household's financial status and expectations about the future . homeownership offers advantages such as tax deductions , the possibility of increasing wealth through price appreciation , and relatively stable housing costs . in contrast , purchasing a home has expenses , such as a real estate agent's commission , the time and effort involved in searching for a new home , the cost of a home inspection , and various state and local fees , which might deter homeownership .