this section has four findings . the first sub - section on trends in the ratio establishes three of the basic findings: first , the ratio of unemployed persons per job opening is highly correlated with the unemployment rate between 2001 and 2012 . second , the ratio of unemployed persons per job opening rises during the recessionary periods covered in this data set . in the 2007-2009 recession , the ratio rises to very high levels . third , even though the ratio has reduced , it remains at higher levels than prior to the 2007-2009 recession . the following section discussing the ratio of unemployed persons per job opening as a unique indicator identifies a fourth finding: while the ratio is highly correlated with changes in the unemployment rate , the ratio saw modest improvements coming out of the recent recession sooner than the reductions in the unemployment rate . sector level information on the ratio of unemployed persons per job opening might lead to a better understanding of the trends in the aggregate ratio over time . decomposing the aggregate ratio into its industrial sector shows substantial differences in trends , especially during the height of the 2007-2009 recession . the ratio for the goods - producing sector rises significantly above the other sectors serving to further drive upward the aggregate ratio of unemployed persons per job opening . this section examines the ratio of unemployed persons per job opening for four industrial sectors: ( 1 ) goods - producing , ( 2 ) producer services , ( 3 ) consumer services , and ( 4 ) government . goods production is defined here as the production of tangible items , such as cell phones and hd - tvs . the goods - producing sector is made up of three sub - sectors , or industries . these are mining and logging , construction , and manufacturing . services in turn are defined as the production of everything else within the private - business sector . because services make up a significant percentage of the number of jobs ( 83% in february 2012 ) , this sector is further divided in services that are purchased primarily by producers or by consumers . examples of producer services include financial activities and information services . consumer services include industries such as retail trade and education and health services . table 1 shows the average monthly number of job openings , unemployed persons , and unemployed persons per job opening by sector and industry for 2011 , where "unemployment from an industry" is the industry that the person last worked . the table helps show which industries are assigned to which sectors . also , as shown by the numbers in the table , sectors can make up a large share of unemployed persons or job openings and still have a relatively small ratio of unemployed persons per job opening . a larger ratio of unemployed persons per job opening occurs when the sector has a larger share of unemployed persons relative to its share of job openings . for example , consumer services comprise the largest share of unemployed persons ( 48.1 ) and largest share of job openings ( 49.9% ) .