however , while h.r . 1526 proposed divesting the management authority of the federal o&c lands to state control , in contrast , s. 1784 would have retained federal authority but with very specific management prescriptions . title iii of h.r . 1526 would have created and transferred management authority of the o&c lands to an o&c trust under the guidance of a seven - member advisory board appointed by the governor of oregon . the proposed o&c trust would have had "fiduciary responsibilities to act for the benefit of the o&c counties" and would have managed the lands based on a revised definition of sustained - yield , with half of the land managed on a long - term rotation ( 100-120 years ) . the remaining forest in the proposed trust would have been managed on any rotation age as determined by the board . although management authority would have been transferred to the board , the federal government would have retained all "right , title , and interest" in the o&c lands , enabling pilt payments to continue . even so , section 312 ( a ) ( 2 ) would have deemed that actions on the proposed o&c trust lands would not involve federal action or discretion . this provision would have exempted actions by the proposed o&c trust from reviews under the national environmental policy act ( nepa ) , the endangered species act , and the national historic preservation act . state laws governing management of private timberlands in oregon would have applied . title iii would have also transferred forest stands older than 125 years to the forest service , and they would have been managed under the nwfp with a harvest prohibition on old growth . after those lands were transferred , section 314 ( k ) would have deemed management of the proposed o&c trust to be compliant with esa for the northern spotted owl . however , there are multiple esa species in oregon that may still have required mitigation measures ( eg , the marbled murrelet and multiple populations of salmon ) . the bill also would have limited judicial review of the proposed o&c trust management to the o&c counties ( section 312 ( g ) ( 2 ) ) . additionally , the bill would have designated one new wilderness area , expanded an existing wilderness area , and designated several new wild and scenic river sections within the o&c land areas . revenue from the trust would have been distributed to the counties to pay for operating and management expenses ( including salaries for the board members ) . within 10 years , revenue would have also been used to establish a conservation fund and a reserve fund . in addition , the bill specified that a total of $72.8 million would have been paid to the federal government over seven years . a remaining question was whether the forests could have produced timber to support a level of revenue to accomplish those distributions , or how timber markets would have reacted to an influx of additional supply .