appendix a . summary of all nominations and appointments to independent and other agencies appendix b . nomination action by agency type , 111 th congress appendix c. agency abbreviations independent agencies arc — appalachian regional commission bbg — broadcasting board of governors cia — central intelligence agency cncs — corporation for national and community service csosa — court services and offender supervision agency for the district of columbia dra — delta regional authority epa — environmental protection agency fhfa — federal housing finance agency fmcs — federal mediation and conciliation service gsa — general services administration mcc — millennium challenge corporation nara — national archives and records administration nasa — national aeronautics and space administration nfah — national foundation on the arts and humanities nsf — national science foundation nbrc — northern border regional commission odni — office of the director of national intelligence oge — office of government ethics onhir — office of navajo and hopi indian relocation opic — overseas private investment corporation opm — office of personnel management osc — office of special counsel pc — peace corps sba — small business administration ssa — social security administration sss — selective service system tda — trade development agency usaid — united states agency for international development executive office of the president ( eop ) cea — council of economic advisers ceq — council on environmental quality omb — office of management and budget ondcp — office of national drug control policy ostp — office of science and technology policy oustr — office of u.s. trade representative multilateral banking organizations afdb — african development bank asdb — asian development bank ebrd — european bank for reconstruction and development iadb — inter – american development bank ibrd — international bank for reconstruction and development ijc — international joint commission , u.s. and canada imf — international monetary fund legislative branch agencies ac — architect of the capitol gao — government accountability office gpo — government printing office lc — library of congres . incumbents in full - time pas positions , as of the end of the 111 th congres . this report explains the process for filling positions to which the president makes appointments with the advice and consent of the senate ( pas positions ) . it also identifies , for the 111 th congress , all nominations to full - time positions requiring senate confirmation in 41 organizations in the executive branch ( 28 independent agencies , 6 agencies in the executive office of the president ( eop ) , and 7 multilateral organizations ) and 4 agencies in the legislative branch . it excludes appointments to executive departments and to regulatory and other boards and commissions , which are covered in other reports . a profile of each agency tracks the agency's nominations , providing information on senate activity ( confirmations , rejections , returns to the president , and elapsed time between nomination and confirmation ) as well as further related presidential activity ( including withdrawals and recess appointments ) . the profiles also identify , for each agency , positions requiring senate confirmation , the incumbents in those positions as of the end of the 111 th congress , and the pay levels of those officials .