mccarthy was confirmed by a vote of 59-40 . presidents have used their cabinets in various ways . in some administrations , the cabinet has been a key advisory and decision - making body . sometimes there was a lapse between the president's announcement and his submission of the nomination , so including both measures is a more comprehensive approach . finally , the rows at the bottom of the table present the mean ( average ) and median duration across all confirmed nominations for both measures . ideally , a true measure of the duration of the appointments process would begin as soon as an individual is selected as a candidate for nomination and the vetting process commences . however , for a variety of reasons , data are not publicly available on timing of the early stages of the vetting process . often the public may not be aware that an individual is being vetted for a position until the vetting process is partially or entirely compete , at which time the president makes a formal announcement of his intention to nominate the individual . because of this lack of opportunity for measurement of the entire vetting process , the earliest publicly available point to begin measurement is the date on which the president formally announced his intention to nominate the individual . sometimes the number of days elapsed during the senate's consideration of a nomination is used as a proxy measure for how controversial a nomination is considered to be , or for the level of opposition to a nomination . however , the number of days elapsed during the senate's consideration of a nomination may be affected by other factors as well , such as the senate's or committee's overall workload , other legislative priorities , and committee and floor scheduling decisions . as the data in the appendix tables demonstrate , the duration of the senate's consideration of inter - term cabinet nominations varied considerably during the presidencies covered in this analysis . as discussed above , several methods might be used to measure the duration of the appointments process . one method is to count the number of days elapsed from the president's announcement of his intention to make a nomination until its confirmation . a second method is to focus only on senate consideration by counting the number of days elapsed from a nomination's receipt in the senate to its confirmation . these first two methods provide alternative measures of the total duration of the nomination and senate consideration process . a third method is to examine the number of days elapsed between individual steps within the process . table 2 provides a summary of the information in the appendix tables , by president , using the two different methods of counting the total duration of the nomination process . as shown in the first set of numerical columns in table 2 , measuring from the date of announcement to the date of confirmation , the mean ( average ) number of days to confirm was 61.6 , while the median was 53.0 . in other words , approximately two months elapsed from the president's announcement of his intention to submit a nomination until senate confirmation of that nomination during this period .