the following sections address considerations pertinent to each of these . the earlier discussion of the daily session noted that legislative business actively pending on the floor at the time of a daily recess remains the pending business ( in other words , remains continuous through the recess ) and the business pending at a daily adjournment is thereby converted into unfinished business . corresponding continuities apply in respect of the annual session . the status of legislative business before congress is not affected by a recess of the annual session ( an adjournment for more than three days ) . nor is it affected even by a sine die adjournment , as long as the following annual session is a further session of the same congress ( for example , the second session of the 111 th congress ) . for example , bills introduced before a recess or adjournment of the session remain available for congressional action , and bills previously reported from committee remain on the calendar of measures eligible for floor consideration . in the modern practice , legislative business dies only with the final sine die adjournment of the last annual session of a congress , prior to the convening of the next annual session . when that next session convenes , it will be the first session of a newly elected congress ( for example , the first session of the 112 th congress ) . the practice of the senate with respect to executive business ( nominations and treaties ) differs from the congressional treatment of legislative business . at the sine die adjournment of each annual session , any nominations still pending before the senate are returned to the president , unless the next session is a further annual session of the same congress and the senate otherwise orders . during a recess of ( the annual session of ) the senate , nominations retain their pendency , except that , if the recess is longer than 30 days , they are returned to the president unless the senate otherwise orders . treaties , by further contrast , remain before the senate indefinitely until the senate acts on them , unless the president withdraws them . the constitution provides that within 10 days after a bill passed by congress is presented to the president ( sundays excepted ) , the president is either to sign it into law or return it to congress with his objections ( known as a "return veto" ) . if the president does neither , the bill becomes law at the expiration of the 10 days , "unless the congress by their adjournment prevent its return , in which case it shall not be a law" ( known as a "pocket veto" ) . contemporary practice leaves partially settled some questions about what form of adjournment prevents the return of a bill . clearly , however , these questions relate to the annual session ; an adjournment from day to day , much less a recess of the daily session , would hardly prevent the return of a bill .