appendix a . fundamental differences between medicaid and exchanges the challenges for expanding coverage through medicaid and the aca exchanges , and understanding the implications for individuals and families who move between these two programs are underscored by the fundamental differences between these two sources of coverage . medicaid is a long - standing individual entitlement program that finances the delivery of primary , preventive , and acute medical services as well as long - term services and supports ( ltss ) for a diverse low - income population , including non - disabled children , pregnant women , adults , individuals with chronic disabling conditions , and people age 65 and older . medicaid was designed to provide coverage to groups with a wide range of health care needs that were historically unaddressed in the private health insurance market ( eg , individuals with chronic disabling conditions who require ltss , or care for indigent populations in geographic locations where access to providers is limited ) . because of the diversity of the populations that medicaid serves and their unique health care needs , medicaid offers benefits that are not typically covered in major insurance plans offered in the private market . further , with regard to benefit design states define the specific features of each covered benefit within four broad federal guidelines: within a state , each covered service must be sufficient in "amount , duration and scope" to reasonably achieve its purpose . however , states may place appropriate limits on a service based in criteria such as medical necessity . within a state , services available to the various categorically needy groups must be equal in amount , duration , and scope . these requirements are called the "comparability" rule . benefits must be the same throughout the state , referred to as the "statewideness" rule . with certain exceptions , beneficiaries must have "freedom of choice" among health care providers or managed care entities participating in medicaid . these same coverage guidelines do not exist in the private market . the medicaid program is also unique in that it includes special classes of providers , such as federally - qualified health centers ( fqhcs ) and rural health clinics ( rhcs ) , which provide health care services to populations in areas where access to traditional physician care has been limited and for which the federal statute specifies preferential reimbursement methods . in addition , under medicaid states use federal funds to make disproportionate share hospital ( dsh ) payments to hospitals that treat large numbers of low - income and medicaid patients . the main purpose of these payments is to compensate hospitals for otherwise low medicaid payment rates and uncompensated care . because of these unique coverage and financing requirements , the medicaid program finances care through the nation's safety net for low - income populations . health insurance exchanges , on the other hand , are fundamentally marketplaces to facilitate economic transactions: the offer and purchase of private health plans .