there is interest from some in congress to switch to a territorial based tax system . two measures of the real economic presence of mncs are considered . while there appears to be growing evidence that american companies are engaged in profit shifting , some private industry advocates have expressed concern that attempts to limit the practice may have the unintended consequence of raising the cost of investment financing both at home and abroad . if , for example , the u.s. were to enact a policy that required mncs to pay u.s. tax on income as it were earned by foreign subsidiaries ( eg , repeal deferral ) , the cost of capital would increase since the pool of financing that money represented would now only be available after tax . policymakers here at home have taken notice of possible profit shifting . foreign affiliate employment represents the number of workers employed by u.s. mncs outside of the united states . the second measure is foreign affiliate capital expenditures on property , plants , and equipment . capital expenditures represent investment in physical assets by u.s. mnc affiliates . these two variables were chosen because the bea data guide describes them as good indicators of the size of u.s. - owned business operations in affiliate countries . this section analyzes the bea data to determine the extent to which , if any , u.s. mncs may be shifting profits . to do this , 10 countries , formed into two country groups , are analyzed . the first group consists of the five countries commonly identified as being "tax preferred" or "tax haven" countries , and includes bermuda , ireland , luxembourg , the netherlands , and switzerland . the second group , which provides a baseline for comparison , consists of the five more traditional economies . this group includes australia , canada , germany , mexico , and the united kingdom . the profits reported by foreign affiliates of u.s. mncs in the two country groups are presented and analyzed . one variant of this option would impose a minimum tax on income earned in countries with low tax rates . the tax would be applied to deferred income earned in countries with a tax below a particular rate , for example , 20% . income earned in countries with rates below 20% , thereafter , would be subject to a current u.s. tax of 20% . the income earned in countries with rates above this level would be exempt from u.s. taxation , either entirely or until repatriated . some have expressed concern that designing such a minimum tax may be too complex . an alternative to this approach , which creates a "cliff" effect by encouraging firms to move investment to countries with tax rates just above the minimum , is to impose an overall minimum tax with a credit for taxes paid . the u.s. currently taxes mncs according to what is roughly considered a worldwide based tax system . american companies are generally required to pay u.s. tax on all income , regardless of where it is earned , although they are allowed to defer certain taxes until income is repatriated , and may also claim a limited credit for foreign taxes paid .