permanent representative . mission staff , along with temporary staff from u.s. agencies and departments , work with other national delegations and subject - area experts to further u.s. policy priorities in unesco . such priorities include combating illiteracy , improving water resource management , monitoring climate change , enhancing tsunami early warning systems , preserving world heritage sites , and promoting free media worldwide . the united states also engages with and supports the u.s. national commission to unesco , which includes experts from non - governmental , federal , state , and local government sectors . the controversy over palestinian membership and the broader political climate of fiscal austerity may prompt some policy makers to take stock of u.s. participation in and funding of unesco . this section discusses selected issues that the 113 th congress may wish to consider . the current and future role of unesco as an instrument of u.s. foreign policy remains unclear , and any number of events may influence u.s. actions toward the organization . prospects for u.s. funding of unesco might be viewed in the broader context of fiscal austerity debates . specifically , some policy makers might be less likely to pursue or advocate u.s. funding of or participation in unesco in the current economic climate . the level and extent of unesco's response to the u.s. withholding may also influence u.s. policy toward the organization . if unesco were to implement substantive reform , streamline its budget and programs , or rescind palestine's membership , lawmakers might be more likely to consider restoring u.s. funding for the organization . one of the foremost issues policy makers may face is how , if at all , the united states will engage with the organization given the ongoing financial withholding and loss of a vote in the general conference . the united states remains a member of the executive board ; however , its term will expire in 2015 . many policy makers worry that the united states will lose its influence in the organization while continuing to accumulate arrearages . some observers have suggested that the united states withdraw from the organization as it did in 1984 , while others — including the obama administration — maintain that the united states should remain engaged with the organization to the extent that it can . ( see text box for more details. ) the united states engages with unesco through the u.s. mission to unesco , which is located in paris , france , and headed by a u.s . members are elected to the board by the gc for a four - year term . the united states is currently a member of the board ; its term will expire in 2015 . the dg can also play a key role in negotiations regarding budgets , resolutions , and programs . the executive board and gc include various committees composed of member countries that consider issues related to the functioning of the organization or specific issues related to education , science , or culture . unesco maintains relationships with non - governmental organizations ( ngos ) , foundations , the private sector , and intergovernmental organizations ( igos ) .