safetea also created the small starts program . prior to the enactment of safetea , fta issued a "dear colleague" letter announcing that it would target funding to those projects which received a medium or better rating for cost effectiveness . according to fta this was in response to concerns expressed by congress , gao , and the dot's inspector general about recommending for funding projects that received a medium - low on cost effectiveness . following the passage of safetea , in a notice of proposed rulemaking ( nprm ) on august 3 , 2007 , fta proposed that a medium rating be required for fta to recommend a project for funding , and for cost effectiveness to be weighted as 50% of the project justification measure . the other 50% would consist of land use and economic development combined into one criterion at a weight of 20% , mobility benefits ( 20% ) , environmental benefits ( 5% ) , and benefits to transit - dependent riders ( 5% ) . this proposal was not well received by the house transportation and infrastructure committee , or by those responding to the notice . some of the concerns were that , contravening the intent of safetea , the rule would place too much emphasis on cost effectiveness and would not sufficiently evaluate or weight the economic development effects of transit projects . this , critics contended , would favor projects designed for suburban commuters , such as commuter rail and bus rapid transit projects , over more centrally located transit projects such as streetcars . to accomplish the second goal , fta will take a number of steps including simplifying measures , eliminating the baseline alternative requirement , and improving the ways in which data are submitted to fta and evaluated . one of the simplified measures is to evaluate mobility improvements as the estimated total number of trips generated by the project with an extra weight for trips by transit - dependent people . prior to the rulemaking five measures were used to estimate mobility improvements including incremental travel time saved per passenger mile over the baseline alternative . this change , along with changes to the cost effectiveness measure required by law , will likely improve the rating of projects that generally provide shorter trips , such as streetcars . funding amounts from these other programs tend to be relatively small . in an analysis of new starts and small starts projects from october 2004 through june 2012 , the government accountability office ( gao ) found that almost 92% of federal funding for new starts projects came from the new starts program , 5% from fhwa flex funding ( such as cmaq ) , 1% from other fta programs , and 2% from other federal sources . in small start projects , 80% came from the new starts program , 14% from fhwa flex funds , and 7% from other fta programs . whatever the funding source , the maximum federal share of a new starts project is 80% .