this measure was not enacted . alternatively , congress could consider eliminating federal transit operating assistance altogether . this might lead to improvements in productivity , as without federal support transit agencies might pay more attention to the cost - effectiveness of their services . many government - owned transit agencies contract with private companies to operate some or all of their services , and in some cases private contractors have taken responsibility for building as well as operating rail lines . congress has periodically considered whether to encourage privatization . in the 112 th congress , for example , h.r . 7 included a provision to increase the federal cost share of bus projects from 80% to 90% if the local transit agency contracted out at least 20% of fixed - route bus service . this idea was not adopted in map - 21 . a related issue is federal labor requirements in the transit industry , known as 13 ( c ) . as a precondition of federal transit funding 13 ( c ) requires , among other things , the preservation of existing employment rights , privileges , and benefits and the continuation of collective bargaining rights . these protections are thought to be an impediment to privatization and , hence , advocates of privatization have often called for their repeal . critics of privatization argue that cost savings , if there are any , typically come at the expense of employees in the form of lower wages and reduced benefits . a common criticism of the new starts program is the length of time required to develop and deliver projects , a criticism that several changes in map - 21 sought to address . an issue in reauthorization , therefore , will likely be whether the changes in map - 21 do actually speed the project process , and whether or not this has any effect on the quality of new starts projects . in addition , map - 21 is likely to result in a change in the types of projects funded , as newly eligible core capacity projects may divert funds that would otherwise go to building new systems and extending existing systems , and streetcar and bus rapid transit projects may become more prominent in the mix . the net result may be to reduce federal funding available for traditional light rail and heavy rail projects . special - needs paratransit , also known as demand response or dial - a - ride , is non - fixed - route service for people with disabilities and the elderly , and typically involves the use of small buses , vans , or passenger cars . the demand for special - needs paratransit has grown relatively rapidly since the passage of the americans with disabilities act of 1990 ( p.l . 101-336 ) required that transit agencies with fixed - route service provide "complementary paratransit" to people unable to use fixed - route service due to a disability . many communities offer a range of non - ada paratransit services as well . between 1991 and 2012 paratransit ridership tripled , compared with a 23% increase in public transportation ridership overall . the general aging of the population may portend growing demand in future years .