most of those laws have been eliminated . the obama administration's proposal would have limited the life of a generation - skipping trust to 90 years . the revenue effect would have been negligible over the next 10 years . currently , the internal revenue service ( irs ) has a lien on estate tax deferrals for closely held business , but these liens are for 10 years , shorter than the deferral period . this provision would have extended the liens through the deferral period and was projected to raise $0.3 billion over 10 years . currently , payments for medical care or education made directly to the provider for another are exempt from the generation - skipping tax and the gift tax . taxpayers have been using trusts to eventually pay for these expenses and avoid tax on the accumulations . the obama administration indicated that the original purpose of this provision was to exempt payments between living persons and would have disallowed exemptions for payments to trusts . this provision would have lost revenue in the budget horizon , $0.2 billion . the executor of an estate is responsible for estate tax issues , but there is no clear federal rule about authority to address income tax issues of the decedent form prior years . this provision would have extended authority for addressing federal income tax issues to the executor . it would have involved a negligible revenue loss . this provision would have disallowed the unlimited use of trusts ( called crummey trusts ) to expand the number of annual gift exclusions , by imposing an additional overall limit of $50,000 on gifts made via trusts . this provision was projected to raise $3.4 billion over 10 years . in a grantor trust , an individual is treated as owner for income tax purposes . however , the trust and the individual are treated as separate persons for purposes of the estate and gift tax . this proposal from the obama administration included the assets of the trust in the grantors estate and subjected distributions to the gift tax if the grantor is the owner for income tax purposes . if the grantor ceases to be the owner , the assets would have been subject to a gift tax . this provision is not in the current budget proposal , but was included in prior budgets and was projected to raise $3.3 billion over 10 years at that time . the house version of h.r . 1 would have first increased the exemption levels and repealed the estate tax after 2023 . the revenue estimate indicates a cost of $150 billion from fy2018 to 2027 , but this estimate understates the permanent cost of this proposal because repeal was delayed ( and there is a delay in filing estate tax returns as well ) . in the 114 th congress , h.r . 1105 and s. 860 would have immediately repealed the estate tax and reduced the rate of the gift tax rate . 1105 was reported by the house ways and means committee ( h.rept . the bills would have provided a transition rule for assets placed in a qualified domestic trust by a decedent who died before the effective date .