these policies could take a variety of forms . they could be legislative or administrative , and could provide different types of relief to different subgroups of the unauthorized population . a main focus of these policy discussions has been unauthorized aliens with approved immigrant visa petitions , especially those with u.s. citizen or lpr family members . selected segments of the unauthorized alien population without an affirmative pathway to legal status , such as students who entered the united states as children and aliens with long - term tps , also have been the subject of policy proposals . considering targeted immigration relief for unauthorized aliens may offer policymakers new options for tackling the vexing issue of unauthorized immigration . pursuing a targeted approach , however , would require policymakers to make distinctions among members of the unauthorized population to determine what type of relief to make available to what subgroup . individuals granted deferred action may apply for employment authorization . the uscis adjudicator's field manual describes deferred action , as follows: a dhs field office director may , in his or her discretion , recommend deferral of ( removal ) action , an act of administrative choice in determining , as a matter of prosecutorial discretion , to give some cases lower enforcement priority.… accrual of unlawful presence stops on the date an alien is granted deferred action and resumes the day after deferred action is terminated . dhs and its predecessor , the former immigration and naturalization service ( ins ) , have utilized deferred action to provide relief to members of defined groups . for example , in 1997 , ins issued a guidance memorandum concerning deferred action in cases of battered aliens who were self - petitioning for immigrant status in accordance with the 1994 violence against women act ( vawa ) . more recently , as described below under " unauthorized aliens who arrived as children ," dhs established a deferred action for childhood arrivals ( daca ) program . another form of case - by - case relief for unauthorized aliens falls under dhs's parole authority , as set forth in the ina . parole is discretionary authority that may be exercised by dhs to allow an alien to enter the united states temporarily ( without being formally admitted ) for urgent humanitarian reasons or when the entry is determined to be for significant public benefit . granting parole to unauthorized aliens already in the united states is known as parole - in - place . in recent years , parole - in - place has been used to enable the spouses and children of military service members to adjust status in the united states . as discussed , aliens who have been paroled into the united states are eligible to adjust status under the main ina §245 ( a ) adjustment of status provision . while a stereotypical view of an unauthorized alien may be of a young man with no connections to the united states who crosses the southwest border illegally in search of work , in reality the unauthorized alien population includes individuals who entered the country in different ways , for different reasons , and who have different types of connections to the united states .