china has accepted the invitation . some analysts see security interests being served by the pla's exposure to a demonstration of u.s. allied capabilities and international norms for forces operating in close proximity with one another . this difference has influenced moves by each of the disputants to base people and build structures and other infrastructure on or over small islands and shoals which would not otherwise support life . china's designation of a settlement on woody shoal in the paracels as an administrative capital , and its moves to build a sewage system on the small island , are seen as moves to both demonstrate administrative control over the area and to demonstrate its inhabitability . opponents of accession argue that unclos does not , in and of itself , solve the territorial disputes and because many of china's claims do not rely on unclos's provisions , u.s. accession would do little to make the prc any more willing to submit to dispute resolution procedures . opponents also argue that u.s. accession would do little to change the underlying cause of insecurity in the region — the overlapping claims which parties are unlikely to withdraw , and chinese claims that do not fundamentally rely on unclos . whether to consider unclos accession is just one of the questions arising from the maritime territorial disputes in east asia that the 113 th congress faces . most analysts believe that because the sovereignty disputes themselves are so difficult and raise such wide - ranging issues for u.s. policy , managing them will touch on many of congress's roles in foreign policy , including its oversight of the administration's diplomatic actions in asia , its consideration of military posture and budgets , and its search for ways to limit the potential for conflict and create a more stable environment in the region . in the 113 th congress , on july 27 , 2013 , the senate passed one resolution ( s.res . 167 ) introduced by senator robert menendez , reaffirming the strong support of the united states for the peaceful resolution of territorial , sovereignty , and jurisdictional disputes in the asia - pacific maritime domains . senator menendez introduced another resolution ( s.res . 412 ) on april 7 , 2014 , "reaffirming the strong support of the united states government for freedom of navigation and other internationally lawful uses of sea and airspace in the asia - pacific region , and for the peaceful diplomatic resolution of outstanding territorial and maritime claims and disputes. in the house , representative faleomavoega introduced h.r . 772 in february 2013 , seeking peaceful and collaborative resolution of the south china sea disputes . on april 28 , 2014 , representatives randy forbes and colleen hanabusa introduced the asia pacific region priority act ( h.r . 4495 ) , "to strengthen the united states commitment to security and stability in the asia - pacific region," which among other things calls on the department of defense to conduct an assessment of the maritime balance of forces in the asia - pacific region , with a focus on the chinese people's liberation army and state oceanic administration . the 112 th congress also undertook several legislative actions regarding maritime disputes in asia .