the parties settled in 2008 . nps is still addressing some requirements of the settlement , such as the requirement that the agency develop environmental impact statements and special rules governing ohv use at glen canyon nra and cape lookout national seashore . ( cape lookout has completed public scoping and is developing a draft alternative ohv management plan and environmental assessment ; glen canyon released a draft plan in january 2014. ) also in response to the settlement agreement , nps is encouraging education via the websites of units permitting ohv use . proposals to regulate recreational snowmobile use in nps units have been controversial , with debate often mirroring the preservation / use conflict within the nps mission . user groups contend that snowmobile use is necessary to access park sites in winter and helps support local communities and industry . opponents are concerned about emissions , noise pollution , and wildlife damage from snowmobiles on parklands . in 2000 , nps announced the enforcement of long - standing regulations that would have banned snowmobile use throughout almost all of the national park system ; later it modified its enforcement stance to allow snowmobile use to continue in the 43 park units that had permitted it prior to the announcement . to date , nps has taken no further action on a general policy for snowmobiles . however , nps's management policies state that , outside alaska , special regulations are required to designate snowmobile and oversnow vehicle routes after park planning determines such use to be appropriate . designated routes are limited to those used by motorboats and motorized vehicles in other seasons . nps is to provide for the public enjoyment of parklands while protecting resources , including natural quiet , while the federal aviation administration ( faa ) controls airspace and aircraft overflights . this has created a conflict between resource management and aviation access authorities and their constituencies . grand canyon national park has been the focal point of a conflict between groups seeking to limit overflights of national parks due to concerns about noise and safety , and air tour operators whose economic stability may depend on providing overflights , with ripple effects on local businesses . the national parks overflights act of 1987 ( p.l . 100-91 ) prohibited flights below the canyon's rim and directed nps to recommend a flight control plan for grand canyon that would provide a "substantial restoration of the natural quiet. it required an nps study of the effects of all aircraft overflights , which was submitted to congress in 1994 . aircraft overflights are also a concern for other park units . the national parks air tour management act of 2000 ( p.l . 106-181 , title viii , hereinafter "air tour act" ) regulates commercial air tours at other park units . it requires the faa and nps to create management plans for air tours at individual park units and within a half - mile of their boundaries . each plan could prohibit or limit air tours , such as by route and altitude restrictions .