circuit ) . a nearly equal number of parties , including six states and the district of columbia , have sided with epa . oral argument in the case ( murray energy v. epa ) was scheduled for april 19 , 2017 , but 12 days before the argument , epa requested a delay in the proceedings to review the standards . the court granted the agency's request to delay the oral argument and held the case in abeyance pending further orders . lattanzio. ) the impact of these regulations on wintertime ozone concentrations is yet to be determined , but interestingly the upper green river basin , which was designated nonattainment under the 2008 ozone naaqs , has been designated attainment for the 2015 standard . as noted elsewhere in this report ( " the role of cost ," below ) , epa is prohibited by statute from taking cost into account in setting naaqs . despite that prohibition , in order to comply with an executive order ( e.o . 12866 ) , the agency produces a regulatory impact analysis ( ria ) analyzing in detail the costs and benefits of new or revised naaqs standards when the naaqs are proposed and promulgated . the 2015 ozone naaqs review has raised issues regarding the cost of attainment , background ozone levels , and the schedule for naaqs reviews . the adequacy of the ozone monitoring network and the role of federal versus state and local pollution control measures are other important issues . more recently , epa cited concerns about naaqs review and implementation and identified "naaqs reform" as one of four initiatives that the agency plans to undertake to reduce "unnecessary burdens on the development and use of domestic energy resources. in particular , epa's "back - to - basics" memorandum identified principles to guide forthcoming naaqs reviews . among other things , epa seeks to streamline the naaqs review process and obtain clean air scientific advisory committee advice regarding background pollution and potential adverse effects from naaqs compliance strategies . epa has also formed the "ozone cooperative compliance task force" to review issues related to the ozone naaqs and that the task force "is reviewing administrative options to enable states to enter into cooperative agreements with epa to provide regulatory relief and meaningfully improve ozone air quality. snow cover also helps create temperature inversions that trap polluted air in the basins . in winters with little snow , there have been few exceedances of the standards . in 2012 , epa promulgated standards requiring the reduction of voc emissions from new and modified oil and gas production and transmission operations , including a requirement to use "green completions" on hydraulically fractured onshore natural gas wells . in 2016 , these standards were extended to cover hydraulically fractured oil wells . further , in 2015 , epa proposed control techniques guidelines intended to provide state , local , and tribal air agencies with information to assist them in determining "reasonably available control technology" for reducing voc emissions from existing oil and natural gas sources in ozone nonattainment areas and states in the ozone transport region .