who should evaluate them ? how long should funding exist to tackle the threat of mass shootings ? schools are unique institutions . they have a mission of great importance to our nation — they are responsible for keeping our children safe while educating them and helping prepare them to be responsible and productive citizens . all levels of government are involved to some extent in this mission . as mentioned earlier in this report , 12 of the 78 public mass shootings identified by crs occurred in academic settings . eight of these happened at primary or secondary education facilities . one incident , the december 14 , 2012 , shooting deaths of 20 children and 6 adults at sandy hook elementary school in newtown , ct , has heightened congressional interest in school security . policy makers are examining whether school security can be further enhanced , and if so , how best to accomplish that goal . four of the 12 public mass shootings in education settings involved high school or middle school students as assailants . the federal government has supported efforts to preempt students from engaging in gun violence at school . more broadly , it has promoted policies to curb violence in schools , such as anti - bullying programs , which may or may not stem public mass shootings by student perpetrators . this section of the report focuses on those federal programs and initiatives administered by the department of education that may be relevant in the event of a public mass shooting in a school setting . the president's plan was released following the newtown tragedy — it includes several provisions specifically related to schools . however , funding for these provisions may not be sufficient to provide meaningful assistance to all schools that could potentially benefit . difficult decisions confront policy makers . they must consider how to make the greatest possible improvements in student safety while likely being faced with limited federal resources to devote to safety initiatives . policy makers may have to decide whether funds should be spread across many activities so that each activity gets some additional funding , or whether funding should be concentrated in fewer programs believed to be most cost effective . his victims included three children . all of this interest in such shootings has produced a wide variety of terms and concepts that address an assortment of issues . categorizing types of murder — and mass shootings , more narrowly — can be tricky . in many cases , individual incidents involving assailants who kill one , two , or three people are described as single , double , or triple murder . however , when the number of victims rises or the case involves complicating circumstances such as the killer assailing individuals in different locations or a string of murders committed over a period of days , months , or years , efforts to define and understand murder can grow much more difficult . grants impacting preparedness may shape first responder training , and grants influencing response could affect the development of law enforcement protocols for responding to mass shootings .