ammonium nitrate is also used as a fertilizer . ammonium nitrate is suspected as the source of the explosion at the west fertilizer company . accidental explosions of ammonium nitrate have resulted in loss of lives and destruction of property . these accidents have rarely occurred , but have had high impacts . for example , the ammonium nitrate explosion in 1947 in texas city , tx , where two ships carrying ammonium nitrate coated in wax and stored in paper bags caught fire and exploded , destroyed the entire dock area , including numerous oil tanks , dwellings , and business buildings . congressional policymakers might consider mechanisms to address the data quality issues arising from reporting by facilities . regulatory programs often require facilities to report their chemical holdings , but such reporting creates the potential for the regulatory agency to be unaware if the facility does not report . this may be especially true for federal agencies that rely on state or local implementation of federal requirements . in addition , the quality of such information may be questioned due to its self - reported nature . for example , the government accountability office has found that dhs does not use self - reported vulnerability assessment information in determining the security risk at chemical facilities . because different chemicals often have different reporting requirements , regulated entities often report different information to different regulating agencies . for example , as noted above , dhs , epa , and state regulatory agencies receive different information ; each chemical may fall under some , all , or no regulatory requirements due to particular exclusions or exemptions . consequently , no central overview of facility chemical holdings exists , and may create the potential for inefficient regulation . interested members of congress might focus upon the rate of inspection under the various regulatory programs . under some federal programs , inspection has not occurred at a pace expected by policymakers . for example , the dhs stated that it had inspected and approved site security plan implementation at 166 of 4,298 facilities regulated under cfats as of july 2013 . in 2009 , the epa office of inspector general reported that epa had inspected less than half of the epa - identified high - risk facilities and less than 35% of all facilities reporting under section 112 ( r ) of the clean air act . inspection of facilities reporting their chemical holdings may increase the trustworthiness of supplied information . also , regular inspection may yield benefits in enhanced compliance with best practices and regulatory adherence . of course , increased inspection relies upon a substantial inspector cadre , which would require additional appropriations for support . similarly , delegation of inspection responsibilities for federal programs to state agencies might reduce the number of discrete inspections but increase the costs borne by those states . conversely , additional efficiency might be achieved with a cross - trained inspectorate that might inspect a facility under all , or most , applicable regulatory regimes . congressional policymakers have identified information sharing in the homeland security and intelligence context as a high priority following the events of september 11 , 2001 .