although the d.c . circuit's actual order in noel canning directly implicates only one specific action , against one specific party , within one specific circuit , the court's interpretation of the president's recess appointment authority could have a substantial impact on the future division of power between the president and congress in the filling of vacancies . if affirmed by the supreme court , the likely effect of the reasoning adopted in noel canning would be a shift toward increased senate control over the appointment of government officials and a decrease in the frequency of presidential recess appointments . most prominently , the president would no longer be permitted to make intrasession recess appointments . since 1981 , 329 appointments — more than half of all recess appointments made during that period — have been made during intrasession recesses of the senate . in addition , the president would no longer be permitted to exercise his recess appointment authority to fill vacancies that arose while the senate was in session , or that arose during a different intersession recess . although crs has not been able to determine the precise number of appointments that would have fallen into this category , it would appear that few of the 323 intersession recess appointments made since 1981 filled vacancies that arose during the intersession recess in which the appointment was made . vacancies in positions requiring senate confirmation that no longer qualify for a recess appointment under noel canning would need to be filled through the general process of presidential nomination and senate confirmation . thus , by limiting both the periods in which a president may make recess appointments , and the vacancies that may be filled by such appointments , the decision likely would strengthen the senate's "advice and consent" role , while restricting the president's authority to make unilateral appointments . moreover , the interpretation established in noel canning likely would provide congress with nearly complete control over whether the president's recess authority is triggered in the future . under the decision , it would appear that the necessary predicate for the president to make a recess appointment ( an intersession recess ) must be initiated by a sine die adjournment of the senate . as previously noted , whether the senate enters a sine die adjournment is a decision left to that body — in cooperation with the house — and one in which the president has no direct role . therefore , the senate may effectively control whether the condition necessary to trigger the president's authority to make recess appointments actually transpires . indeed , if the senate chooses not to adjourn sine die during a given congress — a decision well within the senate's discretion and authority — under noel canning no recess appointments may be made . this notion of senate control over the constitutional contingency necessary to trigger the president's recess appointment authority is not , in and of itself , exceptional .