except for p.l . 112-192 , the five laws either extended or reiterated sanctions imposed on burma in previous laws . most of the 28 bills introduced were reported to their respective committees of jurisdiction and saw no further action . under what circumstances should the u.s. government consider reestablishing military - to - military relations ? how does the obama administration view the various ethnic groups , and their associated militias ? should the u.s. government establish closer and open relations with the ethnic organizations ? beyond the possibility of examining the general framework of u.s. policy towards burma , congress may also contemplate pursuing a number of specific issues related to u.s. policy , including the obama administration's implementation of the existing laws specifying aspects of u.s. policy . one issue is the administration's intentions with respect to the special representative and policy coordinator for burma . another issue is the administration of the lists maintained by the secretaries of state and the treasury of burmese nationals subject to political and economic sanctions . a third issue is the timely submission of legally required reports to congress , and the accuracy and comprehensiveness of those reports . section 7 of the tom lantos block burmese jade ( junta's anti - democratic efforts ) act of 2008 , or 2008 jade act , requires that the president appoint a special representative and policy coordinator for burma , "by and with the advice and consent of the senate. it further stipulates that the special representative "shall have the rank of ambassador," and: except for the position of united states ambassador to the association of southeast asian nations [asean] , the special representative and policy coordinator may not simultaneously hold a separate position within the executive branch , including the assistant secretary of state , the deputy assistant secretary of state , the united states ambassador to burma , or the charge d'affairs to burma . ambassador derek j. mitchell was confirmed by the senate as special representative and policy coordinator for burma on august 2 , 2011 , but stood down from the position after his confirmation as u.s . ambassador to burma on june 29 , 2012 . deputy special representative and policy coordinator for burma w. patrick murphy was appointed as acting special representative and policy coordinator for burma on july 23 , 2012 , according to the state department's webpage . the federal vacancies act of 1998 ( p.l . 105-277 ) allows for temporary appointments for positions requiring the advice and consent of the senate no more than 210 days in most circumstances . the time restriction is suspended if a first or second nomination for the position is pending in the senate . given the date posted by the state department , murphy's temporary appointment has exceeded the 210 day limit . congress may consider asking the obama administration about its intentions with respect to nominating someone to serve as special representative and policy coordinator for burma . another aspect of implementation that has drawn criticism is the compilation of lists of burmese persons — people and legal entities — subject to sanctions as required by existing laws .