you're not helping us . the other guys are helping us . you don't really care . thank you , we'll , you know , do what we want to do . on the other hand , though u.s. officials may not entirely embrace aid from non - imf sources for egypt such as qatar , the administration may feel that it must deal cautiously with morsi's government so that the united states does not alienate friendly elements of the egyptian opposition . some policymakers may feel that non - imf lending for egypt may keep egypt's financial situation in shaky , but workable order , and help to stave off a worst case scenario . however , it remains uncertain whether president morsi's government can receive non - imf stop - gap lending indefinitely , and on what terms . and the die is not cast yet . that was the purpose of my visit [to egypt] and the purpose of the money which i am grateful to you for releasing . qatar has put another $2 billion at the availability of egypt just in the last week or so . before that , they put about $4 billion or $5 billion . libya has loaned them $2 billion in the last week or so . and the imf is in negotiating for $4.8 billion . we promised $1 billion and until i took the 190 [$190 million] that you kindly helped us to be able to provide , we didn't provide them with a dime , not a dime . we gave them a promise and a year later , we've given them zero . now , you know , you don't buy your interests and you don't buy your — that's not what foreign aid is about . but i'll tell you , if you're not helpful to people in their time of need , if you're not there , part of the process , it's very , very difficult to have the kind of leverage to say , a diverse pluralistic politics is critical to us when they say , what's it matter to you ? congress could also pass legislation to shape u.s. policy toward egypt at the imf . the obama administration is encouraging president mohammed morsi to reach out to the opposition and the public in order to gain the political support to quickly reach a deal with the imf in order to stave off further economic uncertainty . egyptian leaders are concerned about the political ramifications of required imf reforms , which could be politically unpopular . congress , which annually oversees and appropriates $1.55 billion in bilateral foreign aid to egypt , is following the situation in egypt closely , including the islamist - led government's stated commitment to , among other things , pursuing democratic principles and continued peace with israel . some members of congress are also closely monitoring egypt - imf negotiations . u.s. funds to provide bilateral debt relief to egypt have been tied to egypt committing to an economic program in conjunction with the imf . legislative language also has been proposed that would tie u.s. bilateral economic assistance to egypt to , among other things , an imf program and implementation of reforms under the program .