for each approach , the potential benefits and limitations are discussed . the various approaches can be categorized by the primary mechanism by which , if successful , they would speed the return to work . first , the approach may help assure that uc recipients are pursuing effective job search methods and provide them with assistance in their search . the sharp increase in duration accompanying the recent recession has heightened interest . the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 ( arra ; p.l . 111-5 ) and subsequent legislation provided temporary support for several activities . congress continues to express interest in expediting the return to work and may consider additional measures . this section examines a wide range of approaches that have been tried or proposed for shortening the duration of uc receipt and reducing exhaustions . second , the approach may increase the payoff to recipients for quickly finding new jobs . fourth , the approach may improve recipients' employability by providing them with additional opportunities for education and retraining . ralph e. smith , consultant in economics , wrote this report . readers with questions about the uc program and expediting the return to work may contact [author name scrubbed] . third , the approach may provide additional incentives to potential employers to hire and retain them . the most recent recession led to an unprecedented increase in the number of workers unemployed for more than 26 weeks ( the long - term unemployed ) . as a result , congressional interest in policy initiatives to expedite the return to work grew . this report examines the current initiatives as well as previous demonstration projects within the uc system to reduce long - term unemployment and speed the return to work . several unemployment insurance ( ui ) programs provide benefits to eligible workers when they lose their jobs . in most states , the regular uc program provides up to 26 weeks of income support through the payment of regular state benefits . the permanently authorized extended benefit ( eb ) program extends uc benefits if certain economic conditions exist within the state ; that program is jointly funded by the federal and state governments . as in previous recessions , in june 2008 , congress created an additional temporary federally financed emergency unemployment compensation ( euc08 ) program that further extended the maximum duration of benefit receipt ; the authorization for this program ends on december 28 , 2013 ( december 29 , 2013 , in new york ) . how to quickly and efficiently get uc recipients back to work has long been a subject of interest for researchers and policy makers . in addition , several smaller state and federal programs provide benefits for other certain types of eligible unemployed workers . for detailed information on federal programs available to unemployed workers , see crs report rl34251 , federal programs available to unemployed workers . policy makers and analysts have searched for methods to speed the return to work of unemployment compensation ( uc ) recipients with varying levels of intensity .