appendix a . description of borrower cases and technical notes this appendix presents information on the construction of the three cases used to exemplify borrowing patterns of typical borrowers for purposes of the case simulations used in the analysis of the student loan interest rate policy options presented above . it also presents technical notes detailing assumptions that were made in the analysis of the student loan interest rate policy options examined in this report . estimates of average amounts borrowed by prototypical borrowers the undergraduate student borrower cases used for the analysis in this report were constructed using estimates of average cumulative amounts borrowed by students over differing multi - year periods of undergraduate study . estimates of average amounts borrowed are from the 2007-2008 national postsecondary student aid study ( npsas:08 ) , which is the most recent npsas survey available from the u.s. department of education . for each year , it is assumed that students borrow the year - on - year difference in the average cumulative amount borrowed by undergraduate students , based on the total number of years borrowers have received either subsidized or unsubsidized loans . the parent borrower case was constructed in a slightly different manner because the npsas:08 data are not compiled in a way that allows for a determination of the total number of years a parent has borrowed a parent plus loan . for the parent borrower case , estimates of average amounts borrowed are based on the average parent plus loan amount borrowed on behalf of undergraduate dependent students for the first through fourth years of undergraduate study . estimates of average amounts borrowed by undergraduate dependent students , undergraduate independent students , and parent borrowers are presented in table a - 1 . additional technical notes and assumptions in preparing estimates involving market - indexed loans , the amount of interest projected to accrue is highly dependent on future rates of 10-year treasury notes . for the simulations presented here , all calculations use the actual high - yield rate of 1.81% from the may 8 , 2013 auction for the period from july 2013 through june 2014 ; and cbo projections of 10-year treasury note interest rates ( 2 nd quarter ) for future periods . cbo's projections do not extend past 2023 . projected rates for 2023 are used for future years . comparisons between policy options that involve market - indexed rates and current law would be impacted by any differences in actual rates from the projected rates used in these simulations . in addition , fluctuations in market - rates would have different effects on the rates borrowers pay under a market - indexed , fixed rate structure than under a market - indexed , variable rate structure . unfortunately , these differences are masked when projected rates are held at constant levels for future years . the following loan characteristics were assumed in this analysis: loans are disbursed in two equal disbursements . the first disbursement occurs on september 1 and the second occurs on january 1 . interest starts to accrue on direct unsubsidized loans and direct plus loans once a disbursement is made .