900-922 ) , as amended by the bca . the request totaled $34.9 billion . the energy and water development bill includes funding for civil works projects of the u.s. army corps of engineers ( corps ) , the department of the interior's central utah project ( cup ) and bureau of reclamation ( reclamation ) , the department of energy ( doe ) , and a number of independent agencies , including the nuclear regulatory commission ( nrc ) and the appalachian regional commission ( arc ) . fy2013 discretionary appropriations were considered in the context of the budget control act of 2011 ( bca , p.l . 112-25 ) , which established discretionary spending limits for fy2012-fy2021 . the bca also tasked a joint select committee on deficit reduction to develop a federal deficit reduction plan for congress and the president to enact by january 15 , 2012 . because deficit reduction legislation was not enacted by that date , an automatic spending reduction process established by the bca was triggered ; this process consists of a combination of sequestration and lower discretionary spending caps , initially scheduled to begin on january 2 , 2013 . for further information on the changes to bca procedures made by atra , see crs report r42949 , the american taxpayer relief act of 2012: modifications to the budget enforcement procedures in the budget control act , by [author name scrubbed] pursuant to the bca , as amended by atra , president obama ordered that the joint committee sequester be implemented on march 1 , 2013 . the "joint committee" sequestration process for fy2013 requires the office of management and budget ( omb ) to implement across - the - board spending cuts at the account and program level to achieve equal budget reductions from both defense and nondefense funding at a percentage to be determined , under terms specified in the balanced budget and emergency deficit control act of 1985 ( bbedca , title ii of p.l . for further information on the budget control act , see crs report r41965 , the budget control act of 2011 , by [author name scrubbed] , [author name scrubbed] , and [author name scrubbed] . the american taxpayer relief act ( atra , p.l . 112-240 ) , enacted on january 2 , 2013 , made a number of significant changes to the procedures in the bca that will take place during fy2013 . first , the date for the joint committee sequester to be implemented was delayed for two months , until march 1 , 2013 . second , the dollar amount of the joint committee sequester was reduced by $24 billion . third , the statutory caps on discretionary spending for fy2013 and fy2014 were lowered . the accompanying omb report indicated a dollar amount of budget authority to be canceled to each account containing non - exempt funds . the sequester will ultimately be applied at the program , project , and activity ( ppa ) level within each account . because the sequester was implemented at the time that a temporary continuing resolution was in force , the reductions were calculated on an annualized basis and will be apportioned throughout the remainder of the fiscal year .