each of these considerations is discussed briefly below . when designing surveys , researchers must weigh the value of detailed information against the time required to collect that information . longer survey instruments may be better able to identify mental illness accurately by asking all or most of the questions necessary to assess dsm diagnostic criteria . shorter survey instruments , while more practical to include in a survey , may not identify mental illness as accurately as longer instruments . table 1 provides examples of survey instruments assessing mental illness . survey instruments may be administered in different ways , which may affect both the accuracy of their assessment of mental illness and the feasibility of their inclusion in large surveys . some , such as the structured clinical interview for dsm disorders ( described in table 1 ) , require trained mental health professionals . others require trained interviewers who need not be mental health professionals . still others may be self - administered or administered by interviewers without extensive training . the prevalence estimates described in this report are weighted to reflect the general u.s. population as closely as possible . this is accomplished by assigning a weight to each survey respondent based on information that is available for both the survey respondents and the general u.s. population ( eg , age and gender , among others ) . weighting can correct for known differences between the survey respondents and the general u.s. population ( eg , if people in a certain age range are overrepresented in the survey ) . weighting cannot , however , correct for subpopulations that are excluded from the survey altogether ( eg , the homeless ) . prevalence estimates are not generalizable to excluded subpopulations . the national comorbidity survey replication ( ncs - r ) replicated the original national comorbidity survey ( conducted between 1990 and 1992 ) , which was the first survey to use fully structured research diagnostic interviews to assess a wide range of dsm disorders among a national sample of adults in the united states . the ncs - r was funded primarily by the national institute of mental health within the national institutes of health ( nih ) of the department of health and human services ( hhs ) , with supplemental support from the national institute on drug abuse ( also within nih ) , the substance abuse and mental health services administration ( of hhs ) , the robert wood johnson foundation , and the john w. alden trust . between february 2001 and april 2003 , ncs - r staff conducted in - person interviews with more than 9,000 adults aged 18 or older , drawing the sample from households in the contiguous united states . the sample did not include the homeless , individuals in institutions , or non - english speakers ; these exclusions limit the generalizability of findings based on the ncs - r . the national comorbidity survey replication adolescent supplement ( ncs - a ) was the first survey to use fully structured research diagnostic interviews to assess a wide range of dsm disorders among a national sample of adolescents in the united states .