in these cases the figures are provided below . in other cases it is not possible ( eg , where r&d funding is included in accounts with non - r&d activities ) . for these cases , funding levels will be included in future updates of this report as the information becomes available . the faa budget justification included a request for $340.7 million for r&d and r&d facilities in fy2014 . congress provided $158.8 million for the faa research , engineering , and development ( re&d ) account , $7.2 million ( 4.3% ) less than the request . the re&d budget is focused on improving aviation safety , economic competitiveness , and environmental sustainability . these reports can be accessed via the crs website at http: / / crs.gov / pages / clis.aspx ? also , the status of each appropriations bill is available on the crs webpage , status table of appropriations , available at http: / / crs.gov / pages / appropriationsstatustable.aspx ? congress supports research and development in the department of defense ( dod ) primarily through its research , development , test , and evaluation ( rdt&e ) appropriation . the appropriation supports the development of the nation's future military hardware and software and the technology base upon which those products rely . nearly all of what dod spends on rdt&e is appropriated in title iv of the defense appropriation bill . ( see table 6 . ) however , rdt&e funds are also appropriated in other parts of the bill . for example , rdt&e funds are appropriated as part of the defense health program , the chemical agents and munitions destruction program , and the national defense sealift fund . the defense health program supports the delivery of health care to dod personnel and their families . program funds are requested through the operations and maintenance appropriations request . the program's rdt&e funds support congressionally directed research in such areas as breast , prostate , and ovarian cancer and other medical conditions . congress appropriates funds for this program in title vi ( other department of defense programs ) of the defense appropriations bill . the chemical agents and munitions destruction program supports activities to destroy the u.s. inventory of lethal chemical agents and munitions to avoid future risks and costs associated with storage . funds for this program are requested through the defensewide procurement appropriations request . congress appropriates funds for this program also in title vi . the national defense sealift fund supports the procurement , operation and maintenance , and research and development of the nation's naval reserve fleet and supports a u.s. flagged merchant fleet that can serve in time of need . requests for this fund are made as part of the navy's operations and maintenance appropriation request . congress appropriates funds for this program in title v ( revolving and management funds ) of the defense appropriations bill . the joint improvised explosive device defeat fund ( jieddf ) also contains rdt&e monies . however , the fund does not contain an rdt&e line item as do the three programs mentioned above .