refugee convention and its protocols . chinese non - state entities play a small but growing role in social welfare , policy - making , and political discourse , although many of them rely upon the state for their economic or political survival . in 2012 , the prc government acknowledged the importance of civil society while attempting to harness its capabilities for its own ends , according to some observers . some experts argue that this approach broadens the space for civil society while assuming a government role in shaping it . an editorial in the official global times opined that civil society plays a significant role in addressing and diluting social conflicts . another commentary upheld chinese ngos as important partners in the government's social management and "social innovation" efforts . in other cases , civil society actors have pushed the boundaries of permissible social activity at great personal risk . lawyers , journalists , and activists have been at the forefront in helping to protect and promote human rights and the public interest , although many of them have faced government harassment and deprivation of their freedoms . china has the world's largest number of internet users , estimated at 564 million people , including an estimated 309 million people with accounts on twitter - like microblogging sites . china also has one of the most thorough and aggressive internet censorship systems in the world . human rights organizations report that 78 chinese citizens are serving prison sentences for writing about politically sensitive topics online and 32 journalists are serving jail terms . the prc has among the lowest levels of internet and "new media" freedom in the world and is one of the lowest ranked countries for press freedom . despite government efforts to limit the flow , chinese internet users are able to access unprecedented amounts of information . the web has served as a lifeline for political dissidents , social activists , and civil society actors . "netizens" have helped to curb some abuses of government authority and compelled some officials to conduct affairs more openly . the web also has enabled the public to occasionally engage in civil discourse on a national level . in the short space of three years , microblog sites ( weibo ) , similar to twitter , have become the most important source of news , "most prominent place for free speech," and the country's "most important public sphere. although twitter is blocked in china , many chinese , particularly those with international connections , find ways to access the service . dissident artist ai weiwei continues to be an avid user of twitter , despite efforts by state authorities to silence him . both weibo and twitter helped to keep chinese supporters and foreign reporters apprised of chen guangcheng's status during the diplomatic standoff over his fate . the state has the capability to block news of events and to partially shut down the internet . as noted above , in xinjiang , the government blocked the internet for 10 months following the ethnic unrest in 2009 . nonetheless , politically sensitive news often gets disseminated , if only fleetingly , due to the sheer volume of information on the internet .