the senate version of h.r . 644 would also provide offsets , in title x , for the bill by temporarily extending an increased customs user fee , among other things . the u.s. customs service ( uscs ) , the agency historically responsible for trade facilitation and enforcement , was established by an act of congress on july 31 , 1789 ( 1 stat . 29 ) , and on september 2 , 1789 , was placed under the secretary of the treasury . at that time , the primary role of the service was to collect u.s. customs tariffs , which were the major revenue source for the u.s. government until the federal income tax was established in 1913 . key laws establishing and authorizing the trade functions of the uscs included provisions in the tariff act of 1930 , the customs simplification act of 1953 , and the reorganization plan of 1965 . more recent customs legislation can be categorized into two components . the first is focused on the customs service's traditional role of trade facilitation and enforcement , and the second , which emerged following the 9 / 11 terrorist attacks , has focused on the issue of import security . the homeland security act ( p.l . 107-296 ) placed all or parts of 22 different federal departments and agencies , including the customs service , into the department of homeland security ( dhs ) . dhs's bureau of customs and border protection ( cbp ) has been the lead agency facilitating , enforcing , and securing trade flows since 2003 . under the homeland security act of 2002 ( p.l . 107-296 ) as amended in 2003 , cbp is the lead agency charged with enforcing the trade laws under the mod act and the security measures under the mtsa , the safe port act , and the other post - 9 / 11 laws . cbp's trade strategy emphasizes risk management , which means that cbp collects advance information about shippers , importers , and cargo to evaluate cargo for potential import security and trade enforcement risks , and focuses enforcement efforts primarily on cargo and shippers identified as relatively high risk . conversely , those deemed lower - risk imports ( including , eg , shipments of "trusted traders" ) are less likely to be targeted for cbp enforcement and may be eligible for expedited processing — thus advancing cbp's trade facilitation goal and freeing up resources for targeting higher - risk imports . cbp's trade strategy also emphasizes layered enforcement , meaning that risk assessment and risk - based enforcement happen at a number of different points in the import process , beginning well before cargo arrives at a u.s. port of entry , and continuing long after cargo has been formally admitted to the united states . cbp attempts to target high - risk flows as early as possible in the import process , but its ability to conduct enforcement activities at different stages of the import process is designed to create multiple opportunities to interdict illegal imports . the import process includes three main stages , as illustrated in figure 1 .