in addition , h.r . 4034 would direct the secretary of homeland security , through the under secretary for science and technology , to implement a process for establishing biological agent detector performance standards and evaluation that evaluates performance , develops standards , and promotes their use . the under secretary would also assess acquisition of new biodetection systems in the context of detection system sensitivity and specificity . 4034 would also require the under secretary to assess whether the development of technological screening capabilities for biological agents , pandemic influenza , and other infectious diseases should be undertaken by the directorate of science and technology to support entry and exit screening at ports of entry and for other homeland security purposes . the 113 th congress enacted p.l . 113-76 , the consolidated appropriations act , 2014 , which provided 2014 funding for dhs and other agencies . see " funding " section , above , and crs report r43147 , department of homeland security: fy2014 appropriations , coordinated by [author name scrubbed] , for more information about fy2014 s&t directorate funding . the 113 th congress enacted p.l . 113-6 , the consolidated and further continuing appropriations act , 2013 , which provided fy2013 funding for dhs and other agencies . see " funding " section , above , and crs report r42644 , department of homeland security: fy2013 appropriations , coordinated by [author name scrubbed] , for more information about fy2013 s&t directorate funding . 4034 , the wmd prevention and preparedness act of 2014 , would , among other provisions , direct the secretary of homeland security , through the under secretary for science and technology , to produce and update periodically a terrorism risk assessment of chemical , biological , radiological , and nuclear threats ; and an integrated terrorism risk assessment that assesses all of those threats and compares them against one another according to their relative risk . the under secretary would also perform tailored risk assessments to inform national recovery activities and at least every two years assess the risks posed by synthetic biology . 3410 , the critical infrastructure protection act , would direct the secretary of homeland security , through the under secretary for science and technology , to conduct r&d to mitigate the consequences of electromagnetic pulse ( emp ) events . these activities would include analyzing the risks to critical infrastructures ; determining those critical national security assets and vital critical infrastructures at risk ; evaluating emergency planning and response technologies ; analyzing available technology options to improve critical infrastructure resiliency ; and the capability of critical infrastructure to restore and recover following an emp event . 2952 , the critical infrastructure research and development advancement act of 2013 , would require the secretary of homeland security , through the under secretary for science and technology , to submit to congress a strategic plan for federal physical security and cybersecurity technology research and development efforts for protecting critical infrastructure . the dhs would submit updates every two years . the under secretary for science and technology would coordinate with the under secretary for the national protection and programs directorate and consult with other stakeholders when developing this strategy .