appendix a . comparison of current law and selected reauthorization proposals appendix b. glossary of terms adoption rate — the number of children in foster care who are adopted during a fiscal year for every 100 children who were in foster care on the last day of the previous fiscal year . adoption rate baseline — highest ever adoption rate achieved by the state for any fiscal year that is before the fiscal year for which the adoption incentive rate award is being determined , beginning with fy2002 . title ii of h.r . 4980 , introduced on june 26 , 2014 , draws on language in both of those legislative proposals . in addition to extending funding authority for incentive payments through fy2016 , title ii of h.r . 4980 would make changes to the incentive structure established in the 2008 law — including by changing the award categories to focus more on permanency for children 9 years of age or older , establishing incentive payments for states that appropriately move children from foster care to legal guardianship , determining improvements in state performance based on the rate ( or percentage ) of children leaving foster care to adoption or guardianship ( rather than the number ) , and putting additional focus on achieving permanence through adoption or guardianship for older children . apart from reauthorizing the adoption incentive program , the fostering connections to success and increasing adoptions act of 2008 made several other changes to federal law , which title ii of h.r . 4980 would amend or otherwise address . specifically , the bill would extend $15 million in annual mandatory funding for family connection grants for one year ( fy2014 ) ; that grant program was first established and funded in the 2008 law ; adjust eligibility criteria for title iv - e kinship guardianship assistance ( which was first established in the 2008 law ) to ensure continuous program eligibility for a child who must go to live with a "successor guardian" due to the incapacitation or death of his / her relative guardians ; seek to further ensure siblings have the opportunity to live together while in foster care , by specifying that a 2008 requirement for state agencies to identify and give notice to grandparents and other relatives of children entering foster care includes identifying and providing notice to any parent of a sibling of a child entering care ( provided that parent has custody of the sibling ) ; and require additional reporting by states to ensure they spend any savings resulting from the expanded federal support for title iv - e adoption assistance provided for in the 2008 law , and require that no less than 30% of any identified savings be used by the state to provide post - adoption or post - guardianship services and services to ensure safety and well - being of children who might otherwise enter foster care . this report begins by describing in greater detail the legislation under consideration in the 113 th congress that would reauthorize and extend the adoption incentive payments program and make additional child welfare - related changes described above . ( appendix a includes a table comparing current law with several reauthorization proposals , including title ii of h.r .