1406 in the 113 th congress . 1406 would amend the flsa to permit an employee to receive "in lieu of monetary overtime compensation , compensatory time off at a rate not less than one and one - half hours for each hour of employment for which overtime compensation is required[.] under the act , an employee would be eligible to accrue a maximum of 160 hours of comp time . 1406 , if compensation is paid for accrued comp time , it would be paid at the higher rate of ( 1 ) the employee's regular rate of pay when it is earned or ( 2 ) the employee's final rate of pay . the act specifies that any payment owed to an employee for unused comp time would be considered unpaid overtime compensation . 1406 would require the government accountability office ( gao ) to submit reports to congress , beginning two years after the date of enactment and each of the three years thereafter . the hours of work regulations discussed in this section are national minimums . the flsa allows states to enact shorter maximum work hours . the 113 th congress marks the third time since 1996 that the house has passed a bill to expand comp time to the private sector . in the 104 th congress , the house passed h.r . the report then discusses the changes proposed by h.r . initially enacted in 1938 , the flsa regulates weekly hours of work and overtime wages . the act covers most , but not all , private and public sector employees . exemptions are discussed briefly later in this report . 2391 and in the 105 th congress , the house passed h.r . while some details varied , these bills were largely similar to h.r . 1406 , the use of comp time in lieu of overtime wages would be optional for both the employer and employee . if an employer declines to offer comp time , the changes to the flsa would have no effect and employees would continue to be eligible for overtime wages . if an employer does choose to offer comp time , eligible employees may accept comp time through a written agreement or decline comp time and continue to be eligible for overtime wages . in cases where employees are covered by a collective bargaining agreement , the employee representative may choose to accept or decline comp time . the bill would limit eligibility for comp time to employees who have worked at least 1,000 hours for the employer during the prior 12-month period . 1406 would allow employees to withdraw from a comp time agreement and return to overtime wages at any time . employees who withdraw from a comp time agreement may also request to have any unused comp time converted to a cash payment . employers would be required to comply with this request within 30 days . employers would be permitted to discontinue offering comp time with 30 days' notice , absent a collective bargaining agreement providing otherwise .