of va . in this case , plaintiffs challenged a university regulation that provided funds to student publications , but refused to provide funding to student publications with religious affiliations . the university claimed that it was choosing not to subsidize religious activity . the court found the university's restriction to be unconstitutional . where the government creates a quasi - public forum , as it had in this case by making funds generally available to all university student publications , the government could not then discriminate against students seeking to use that forum on the basis of content . taken together these cases seem to indicate that where congress has appropriated funds to support the government's own message , congress has wide latitude to condition the receipt of those funds on the espousal of the government's approved message , unless that condition invidiously discriminates against the espousal of dangerous ideas . in conditioning the use of federal funds on making sure the funds are only used to support congress's approved message , ample opportunity for the recipients of those funds to exercise their protected constitutional rights outside of the federal program in which they are participating must be preserved . however , where congress has provided funds for private speech or created a public or quasi - public forum , the ability to restrict speech funded by that money on the basis of content is narrower . in 2003 , congress passed the united states leadership against hiv / aids , tuberculosis and malaria act ( leadership act ) , 22 u.s.c . 7601 et seq . the leadership act was intended to address congress's finding that hiv / aids , malaria , and tuberculosis posed grave health threats around the world . congress found that the united states had the capacity to enhance the effectiveness of the fight against these various diseases on a number of fronts including providing financial resources to various aid groups , providing needed vaccines and medical treatments , promoting research , and promoting lifestyles that would diminish the chances of spreading these diseases . particularly in relation to hiv / aids , congress found that it should be the policy of the united states to promote abstinence , marriage , and monogamy as methods of diminishing the spread of hiv / aids , as well as promotion of the use of condoms . in addition to advocating the promotion of monogamous lifestyles , congress also found that "prostitution and other sexual victimization are degrading to women and children and it should be the policy of the united states to eradicate such practices. the findings went on to describe the sex industry , and sex trafficking , as an additional cause of the spread of hiv / aids and that eliminating or reducing prostitution and sex trafficking would reduce the spread of the virus in keeping with the goals of the act . to that end , when congress provided funds in the leadership act to private entities to assist in the fight against hiv / aids , congress conditioned the receipt of those funds in two important ways .