appendix a . capital requirements: provisions in dodd - frank the dodd - frank act includes numerous provisions that seek to strengthen capital requirements of banks and to extend capital regulatory approaches to certain non - bank financial firms and markets . the general thrust of these provisions is that systemically significant firms , derivatives trading platforms , and other financial market utilities should be required to hold extra capital to compensate for the risk that their failure might pose to the system at large . title i requires banking regulators to establish minimum risk - based capital requirements and leverage requirements on a consolidated basis for depository institutions , depository holding companies , and firms designated by the financial stability oversight council ( fsoc ) as systemically significant . these requirements must be no lower than those that were set for depository institutions as of the date of enactment ( july 2010 ) . one example of the effect of this provision is that bank holding companies will no longer be able to include trust - preferred securities in tier i capital . this report provides a framework to help answer the question , "who regulates whom in u.s. financial markets , and how ? at the federal level , the answer often depends on first identifying both the policy problem and the proposed solution . for example , there are federal regulatory overlaps in which one agency can oversee a firm because of the firm's charter , a second agency regulates some of the activities that the firm is engaging in , but a third agency controls a government initiative to resolve or alleviate a problem related to the firm or its activities . on the other hand , there are regulatory gaps in which some of the firms participating in a financial activity do not have regulated charters , and the activity believed to be causing a problem does not have a regulator . thus , answering "who regulates whom" requires first identifying the problem to be regulated , and how . this report provides an analysis of financial regulatory policy . it is not intended as a roadmap of legal jurisdiction ; rather , it helps to match financial regulatory agencies to financial regulatory policies based on the kinds of financial difficulties that they generally address . many of these difficulties are related to what economists call market failures , which can be loosely described as instances in which market prices and participants do not fully take into account all of the costs and benefits of their actions . table 1 presents a list of financial regulators . in the united states , it may be useful to distinguish between regulators that generally focus on prudence ( i.e. , monitoring and regulating the risks that a specific firm engages in ) and regulators that generally focus on disclosure ( i.e. , monitoring and regulating the information that firms and exchanges provide to potential market participants ) . four federal agencies have prudential authority to examine banks , thrifts , and credit unions . two agencies oversee markets for financial contracts ( securities and derivatives ) . the agencies listed in the "other" category regulate housing government - sponsored enterprises ( gses ) and consumer financial products , respectively .