the industry has returned to profitability . the fdic reports that industry full - year net income rose to $154.7 billion in 2013 , representing the highest net income level since 2006 . although lending growth has increased , the fdic reports that most of the earnings increase can be attributed to increases in noninterest ( fee ) income and lower provisions set aside for anticipated loan losses , discussed in more detail below . return on assets ( roa ) and return on equity ( roe ) are commonly used metrics to gauge bank profitability . roa is computed with net income ( total assets minus total liabilities ) in the numerator and average total assets in the denominator . facilitation of the intermediation transaction involves risk . banks face the risk that borrowers can default on their loans , making it more difficult to repay depositors . in addition , banks face funding or liquidity risk stemming from more frequent movements in short - term interest rates . banks must have access to an uninterrupted source of short - term funding ( deposits ) until their long - term loans are fully repaid , which is explained in more detail later in this report , and fluctuations in short rates translates into fluctuations in their profit spreads . furthermore , depositors could suddenly and simultaneously decide to withdraw their deposits , perhaps due to a sudden change in economic conditions or even speculation about deteriorating economic conditions , resulting in financial distress for a bank or several banks . hence , bank profitability and financial risk are inextricably linked . in addition to default and funding risks , financial intermediation increases the vulnerability of borrowers to economic downturns . bank capital includes items such as common shareholder equity , retained earnings , and provisions set aside for loan and lease losses ( discussed in more detail below ) . banks that accept federally insured deposits are required to maintain sufficient capital reserves to protect bank creditors from loan defaults by bank customers . asset ( loan ) defaults are less likely to result in failure of a bank to repay its shorter - term obligations if sufficient capital is maintained to absorb the losses . if , however , a bank's capital falls below minimum regulatory threshold levels , it would be considered undercapitalized and faces the prospect of being shut down by its regulator , which typically appoints the federal deposit insurance company ( fdic ) as the receiver of the insolvent institution . consequently , compliance with regulatory capital requirements implies that capital reserves must grow proportionately with bank asset ( lending ) portfolios . assets in the banking industry are not evenly distributed , which means that banking firms are not identical and , for some metrics , must be analyzed separately to get a more accurate assessment of financial conditions . using data from the fdic , figure 1 illustrates the number of u.s. banks over time by the following size categories of bank asset holdings ( defined below ) : less than $100 million , $100 million - $1 billion , $1 billion - $10 billion , and greater than $10 billion .