this is as true of congress as of the other branches . although the constitution grants congress extensive legislative powers , it vests congress with explicit authority to enact criminal law in only three places . article i , section 8 , clause 6 states that "congress shall have power ... to provide for the punishment of counterfeiting the securities and current coin of the united states. a few lines later , the constitution gives congress authority over three additional classes of crime , when it declares that "congress shall have power ... to define and punish piracies and felonies committed on the high seas , and offenses against the law of nations. finally , the constitution defines the crime of treason , but empowers congress to set its punishment . a casual reader might conclude that congress may enact no other class of criminal statutes . after all , the tenth amendment denies congress any authority that the constitution does not grant it . the congress shall have power to lay and collect taxes ... to provide ... for the general welfare of the united states . the supreme court's comstock decision offered an expansive view of the necessary and proper clause , with caveats . two sex offender registration and notification act ( sorna ) cases , kebodeaux and elk shoulder , treat the caveats and thus the scope of the clause very differently . two other recent appellate decisions , bond and belfast , raise questions of the tenth amendment limits , if any , on congressional authority under the clause . it enjoys no authority that cannot be traced back to the constitution . upon closer examination , however , it becomes clear that the constitution elsewhere gives congress , the president , and the federal courts sweeping powers . moreover , the authority it places in the hands of congress includes an implementing power , that is , the authority to enact laws necessary and proper to the implementation of those other powers — authority that by implication includes the authority to enact reasonably related criminal laws . nevertheless , congress's criminal law enacting powers are not boundless . some limitations reside with the grant of authority . article iii , for example , allows congress to set the punishment for treason , but denies it permission to punish treason with corruption of the blood . the constitution mentions other limitations in areas apart from its grants of authority , like the prohibition on ex post facto laws or abridgement of freedom of speech . the third class of limitations is more difficult to discern . whether understood as contextual , or structural , or implicit in the tenth amendment , they are the limitations of federalism , the limitations that flow from the fact the constitution emerged as a compact between the sovereign it created and the sovereigns that created it . third , ... conditions on federal grants might be illegitimate if they are unrelated to the federal interest in particular national projects or programs... . finally , ... other constitutional provisions may provide an independent bar to the conditional grant of federal funds.