even the d.c . circuit acknowledges "[t]here is no per se rule as to how long is too long to wait for agency action" and that the trac balancing test "sometimes suffers from vagueness. with no clear standard , it can be difficult for regulated entities to estimate when they could expect agency action finally to occur or when it would be appropriate to sue an agency for their delays . however , it seems that two factors always tend to receive ample discussion from the courts . first , statutory deadlines appear to be a significant factor in determining a case of unreasonable delay . when congress signifies that it wants an agency to prioritize an action , the courts are more willing to enforce that priority . second , courts appear to be more willing to compel an agency to act when the action involves public health or safety , compared to mere economic interests . ultimately , however , the determination is made on a fact specific , case - by - case basis . congress often attempts to press agencies to resolve issues and promulgate rules in swift fashion . perhaps congress's most effective tool , discussed above , is the statutory deadline . although in some circumstances courts will decline to enforce the deadline on the agency , claims for unreasonable delay are vastly more successful when there is a statutory deadline imposed by congress . recent scholarship also notes that rulemakings that are undertaken with an imposed statutory deadline are , on average , completed sooner than similar rules with no deadline imposed . it is important to note , however , that when overly imposing deadlines are placed on agency action , agencies often have to act hastily and may reduce the time available for public participation in a rulemaking . in some circumstances , a tight deadline can lead an agency to avoid normal notice and comment procedures by invoking the "good cause" provision under the apa . another tool available to congress is the imposition of "hammer" provisions . these provisions , which may be written in tandem with a statutory deadline , dictate what is to happen if a regulatory deadline is missed . these provisions , therefore , impose a consequence if the agency fails to meet the statutory deadline . the consequences for missing a deadline vary . some laws establish a regulatory scheme that will be put in place if a deadline is missed ; others mandate that the agency's proposed rule would go into effect if a final rule is not promulgated by the deadline . at least one law has withheld funding from an agency until certain rules are promulgated . although these provisions can force an agency to act quickly , they can also be difficult for congress to establish . for example , for laws that require a congressionally mandated regulatory scheme to go into effect if the agency misses a deadline , subject matter expertise may be helpful or necessary to establish a statutorily imposed regulatory scheme . congress also maintains the "power of the purse" and can place restrictions on appropriations or threaten to do so if congress determines that an agency is failing to act in a timely manner .