the most recent change was enacted in 2007 ( p.l . 110-28 ) , which increased the minimum wage from $5.15 per hour to its current rate of $7.25 per hour in three steps . for employees working in states with a minimum wage different from that of the federal minimum wage , the employee is entitled to the higher wage of the two . the flsa extends minimum wage coverage to individuals under two types of coverage — "enterprise coverage" and "individual coverage. an individual is covered if they meet the criteria for either category . the "typical" minimum wage earner tends to be female , age 20 or older , part - time , and working in a food service occupation . the data in table 1 below show selected characteristics of the workers earning at or below the federal minimum wage . the data are based on the universe of the estimated 2.2 million workers who earn $7.25 per hour or less . states may also choose to set labor standards that are different from federal statutes . therefore , to the extent that minimum wage increases raise the income of adult minimum wage households , a minimum wage increase could have a stimulative effect on the economy . proponents of an increase in the minimum wage argue that it could help reduce earnings inequality by setting a higher floor at the lower end of the wage scale . at the level of an individual business , wage compression might occur if the minimum wage increases at the low end of the pay scale were offset by freezes or reductions in pay at higher levels of pay . that is , the spread between the lowest earners and the highest earners at a business might narrow if the business adjusted to higher pay for minimum wage earners by keeping flat or reducing pay for higher earners . economy - wide , the size of the gap between low - wage earners and middle and high earners might decrease depending on how widely wage compression was used as a channel of adjustment to minimum wage increases . a higher wage may lead workers to choose to stay in their jobs longer than they otherwise would have under a lower wage . because high turnover is costly to businesses , proponents of minimum wage increases argue that an increase in the minimum wage may be offset by lower turnover costs . much of the popular discussion about the effects of a minimum wage increase focuses only on one channel of adjustment — employment . in particular , opponents of a minimum wage or of minimum wage increases assert that increases in the minimum wage will result in increased unemployment , either broadly or for particular subpopulations of the labor market ( eg , youth , less skilled or experienced workers ) , or a reduction in hours worked . in a standard competitive model of the labor market , the introduction of or increase in the minimum wage ( a price increase ) results in employment losses ( demand decrease ) .