app . 521 et seq .

 ) the increased deployment of servicemembers resulting from the conflicts in iraq and afghanistan has raised difficult child custody issues that some argue could potentially impact the welfare of military children and the ability of servicemembers to effectively serve their country . of primary concern is the potential for state courts to use a servicemember's previous deployments or the possibility of future deployments when making child custody decisions . according to a 2010 department of defense ( dod ) report , approximately 142,000 members of the armed forces ( active , guard , and reserve ) are single custodians of minor children . additionally , a number of servicemembers have re - married and reside in a household comprised of one biological parent and his or her new spouse . most complex of all situations , perhaps , are those in which a single servicemember has physical custody of a child without ever having obtained an order of custody from any court . although efforts at child custody legislation has received general support in the house , having passed on seven separate occasions and with sixty members from both sides of the aisle signing on to a previous version ( h.r . 6048 , 110 th congress ) as co - sponsors , this has not been the case in the senate . all seven federal child custody bills passed in the house and introduced in the senate since 2008 have not made it out of senate committees . most in the senate agree there should be some level of protection for military personnel in child custody disputes , but they oppose federal legislation as a means to provide it . most concerns in the senate center on the potential for federal intrusion in what is traditionally a state matter and the opinion that the servicemembers civil relief act adequately provides protection to servicemembers in child custody disputes . in a july 28 , 2009 letter to representative turner , senator john mccain noted that child custody laws and litigation , as you know , have traditionally been the province of the states . i suggest that we need to proceed with care in considering federal legislation that would preempt the states in their approaches to the child custody issues you have identified .. . when any of these custodial - servicemember parents deploy , attend military training , or attend a service - mandated school , the question arises: "who takes care of the children while i'm gone ? i also have some concerns about the opposition that has been raised to your proposal from associations with expertise in this area . child custody cases are traditionally a state matter . in addition , the american bar association , led by its standing committee on legal assistance for military personnel , issued a resolution in february 2009 that opposed modifying the scra in the way you have suggested .