appendix a . selected authorities and directives in rcra relevant to ccr management any waste deemed nonhazardous or explicitly excluded from the subtitle c requirements ( such as ccrs ) is subject to rcra subtitle d. in contrast to the directive and authorities provided to epa to promulgate and enforce standards applicable to hazardous waste , subtitle d established state and local governments as the primary regulating and implementing entities for the management of solid waste ( i.e. , household garbage and nonhazardous industrial solid waste ) . under subtitle d , states have the primary authority to implement and enforce standards applicable to the management of nonhazardous solid waste . epa's role in regulating the management of nonhazardous solid wastes is , with certain exceptions , limited to promulgating criteria applicable to rcra's prohibition on open dumping . when would owners and operators of ccr structures be subject to any new regulations ? if a state were to promulgate new regulations , how would that state determine the level of protection that ccr structures would be required to meet ? how would epa interpret its obligation to identify program deficiencies ? would epa identify a program as having a deficiency if epa determined it was not adequate to ensure facility compliance with requirements necessary to protect human health ? for example , would epa identify as a deficiency a state's definition of a "ccr landfill" that epa determined was insufficient to ensure that uses of ccrs that constitute disposal on land are regulated ? when and how often would epa identify program deficiencies ? would epa review a program for adequacy immediately after a state certified that it had a program in place , or would it wait until years after ? would epa make such determinations on an ongoing basis ? would epa establish requirements ( similar to 40 c.f.r . part 239 ) or issue guidance to allow states to determine what epa may identify as a program deficiency ? under a range of circumstances specified in the proposed bills , epa would be required to implement a ccr permit program for a state . given that directive , would epa promulgate regulations applicable to ccr structures that it would then implement under those circumstances ? if so , how much influence would epa regulations have on a state's development of its own regulations ? if epa implemented a permit program for a state , what regulations would epa implement — its own or a state's ? if epa uses its own rules , how would the agency interpret permit program requirements that would otherwise be left to states to interpret ( eg , what constitutes a ccr structure or deadlines that existing ccr structures would be required to meet ) ? how would epa use its existing general authorities under rcra and the latitude provided in the bills to interpret section 4011 in a way that it views as necessary to ensure the viability of the state programs ? some in congress who have expressed concern that epa has "overreached" its existing legislative mandates have supported legislation that would limit epa's role in regulating ccr disposal while encouraging states to create programs to regulate the material according to conditions established in federal law ( i.e.