goal no . 2: the united states should lead the world in mobile innovation , with the fastest and most extensive wireless networks of any nation . goal no . 3: every american should have affordable access to robust broadband service , and the means and skills to subscribe if they so choose . the nbp's recommendations were directed to the fcc , to congress , to the executive branch ( both to individual agencies and to administration as a whole ) , and to nonfederal and nongovernmental entities . the benton foundation maintains a database that tracks the implementation of the nbp recommendations . according to benton , out of a total 218 recommendations , 17% are completed , 40.4% are in progress , 15.6% are started , and 27.1% are not started . many of the key telecommunications issues that are currently being considered by the 113 th congress are focused on improving broadband deployment , and thus are intended to have a positive impact on the nation's progress towards reaching one ( or in many cases , several ) of the nbp goals . for example , the 100 squared goal has been criticized for endorsing an evolution of broadband deployment that could leave rural areas without the next generation broadband service that urban and suburban areas might enjoy . goal no . 2: the united states should lead the world in mobile innovation , with the fastest and most extensive wireless networks of any nation . national broadband map data monitor the availability and extensiveness of wireless broadband networks in the united states . as table 1 shows , lower download speeds ( up to 3 mbps , typically provided by 3g wireless technology ) are available to 90% or more of u.s. households . the availability percentage for next generation wireless ( 4g lte wireless technologies , which can provide over 6 mbps ) is less , at over 78% of u.s. households . these percentages , reflecting june 2012 data , can be expected to rise , given the recent and ongoing buildout and deployment of 4g lte wireless broadband technologies . an assessment of whether or not the united states "lead[s] the world in mobile innovation" is a subjective judgment . the fcc notes that since 2010 , u.s. wireless providers have aggressively built out the newest commercial technology for mobile broadband , known as 4g lte , which offers download speeds in the range of 5 to 12 mbps . according to the fcc , as of the summer of 2010 there was no lte deployment in the united states ; by january 2012 , three mobile wireless providers had launched lte networks which covered an estimated 211 million people . the fcc's most recent international broadband data report asserts that this recent wireless network building is "securing the united states' position as the world leader in lte adoption.