the sba has two venture capital programs . 85-699 , the small business investment act of 1958 , as amended , is the sba's flagship venture capital program . however , there are some differences in the small businesses that tend to seek their services . for example , businesses owned by sbdc clients tend to be somewhat larger , both in terms of annual revenue and employment , than those owned by score and wbc clients . that research also suggests that the influence of startups on net job creation varies by firm size . the sba also sponsors the much smaller new markets venture capital program , which is not discussed here given its relatively small size ( $1.65 million in financing to four small businesses in fy2015 , and no new financing since then ) . it is designed to promote economic development and the creation of wealth and job opportunities in low - income geographic areas by addressing the unmet equity investment needs of small businesses located in those areas . the sba's two largest loan guaranty programs are the 7 ( a ) loan guaranty program ( nearly $25.4 billion approved in fy2018 ) and the 504 / cdc loan guaranty program ( nearly $4.8 billion approved in fy2018 ) . in addition , the sba's microloan program , which includes startups among its targeted audiences , provides direct loans to 144 active nonprofit intermediary microloan lenders to provide "microloans" of up to $50,000 to small business owners , entrepreneurs , and nonprofit child care centers . the microloan program provided $76.8 million in loans to small businesses in fy2018 . the sbic program , authorized by p.l . it is designed to "improve and stimulate the national economy in general and the small business segment thereof in particular" by stimulating and supplementing "the flow of private equity capital and long - term loan funds which small business concerns need for the sound financing of their business operations and for their growth , expansion , and modernization , and which are not available in adequate supply. startups with fewer than 20 employees tend to have a negligible effect on net job creation over time whereas startups with 20-499 employees tend to have a positive employment effect , as do surviving younger businesses of all sizes ( in operation for one year to five years ) . given the relatively high rate of firm deaths among startups , providing sba assistance to startups , especially in the form of a sba guaranteed loan or venture capital investment , is generally viewed as a relatively "high risk - high reward" endeavor , with advocates focusing on the possibility of job creation and opponents focusing on the risk of default . for example , opponents point to the sba's experiences with its sbic participating securities program as an example of the risk in providing venture capital to startups . the sbic participating securities program was established in 1994 , with congressional authorization , to encourage the formation of participating securities sbics that would make equity investments in startup and early stage small businesses .