appendix a . selected laws regulating dietary supplements federal food , drug , and cosmetic act ( p.l . 75-717 ) the ffdca provides fda with the authority to oversee the safety of food , drugs , and cosmetics . nutrition labeling and education act of 1990 ( p.l . 101-535 ) the nutrition labeling and education act ( nlea ) amended the ffdca to require most foods , including dietary supplements , to bear nutrition labeling . it provided required information for labels and required the fda to promulgate regulations regarding nutrition labeling and health claim requirements for foods and dietary supplements . prescription drug user fee act of 1992 ( p.l . 102-571 ) title ii of the prescription drug user fee act is referred to as the "dietary supplement act of 1992" and required a one - year moratorium on fda's implementation of dietary supplement labeling under nlea . dietary supplement health and education act of 1994 ( p.l . 103-417 ) the dietary supplement health and education act ( dshea ) amended the ffdca to create new manufacturing and labeling requirements for dietary supplements , and established the office of dietary supplements within the national institutes of health . public health security and bioterrorism preparedness and response act of 2002 ( p.l . 107-188 ) this law mandates a chain of possession identification ( manufacturer , processor , packer , distributor , and other possessors ) for those firms that seek to import components of drugs , devices , food additives , color additives , or dietary supplements for further processing and export . dietary supplement and nonprescription drug consumer protection act ( p.l . 109-462 ) this law mandates the reporting of any dietary supplement related serious adverse event to the fda within 15 days of the event . serious adverse event reporting is mandatory for manufacturers , packers , or distributors whose name appears on the dietary supplement label . fda food safety modernization act ( p.l . 111-353 ) fsma provides fda with mandatory recall authority for food , including dietary supplements . this law also requires fda to issue ndi guidance no later than 180 after its enactment . appendix b . principal display panel , dietary supplements appendix c. acronyms used in this report government agencies cdc — centers for disease control and prevention cfsan — center for food safety and applied nutrition , office of foods , fda dea — drug enforcement administration dod — department of defense fda — u.s . food and drug administration ftc — federal trade commission gao — u.s. government accountability office hhs — u.s .