, those beneficiaries who park their earnings ) . the report is divided into four sections . the first section provides a brief background on ssdi , including program eligibility criteria , benefits , and the initial determination and adjudication process . the second section discusses the growth in the ssdi rolls since 1980 by examining historical entry and exit trends in the program . the third section investigates some of the causes of growth in ssdi , including changes in the demographic characteristics of the working - age population , changes in opportunities for work and compensation , and changes in federal policy . the fourth section examines various options to manage the growth in the ssdi rolls , namely , ( 1 ) stricter eligibility criteria , ( 2 ) improved administration of the program , ( 3 ) stronger return - to - work incentives , and ( 4 ) policies to encourage employers to help disabled workers continue to work . many of the options discussed in this report could reduce spending by slowing or even reducing the growth of ssdi over the long term ; however , such options are unlikely to produce savings in time to prevent the projected exhaustion of the di trust fund in 2016 . for information on financing options to extend the solvency of the di trust fund in the short term , see crs report r43318 , social security disability insurance ( di ) trust fund: background and solvency issues , by [author name scrubbed] . enacted in 1956 under title ii of the social security act , ssdi is part of the old - age , survivors , and disability insurance ( oasdi ) program administered by the social security administration ( ssa ) . oasdi is commonly called social security . like old - age and survivors insurance ( oasi ) , ssdi is a form of social insurance that replaces a portion of a worker's earnings based on the individual's career - average earnings in jobs covered by social security . specifically , ssdi provides benefits to insured workers under the full retirement age ( fra ) who meet the statutory test of disability and to their eligible dependents . fra is the age at which unreduced social security retirement benefits are first payable ( currently 66 ) . in november 2014 , 10.9 million individuals received ssdi benefits , including 9 million disabled workers , 150,000 spouses of disabled workers , and 1.8 million children of disabled workers . ascribing shares of the growth in the ssdi program to specific factors has engendered disagreement among researchers , advocates , and some members of congress . in general , people who support higher spending on ssdi focus on changes in the demographic characteristics of insured workers . in contrast , individuals who want to limit program spending typically focus on the effect of changes in the economic incentives to apply for ssdi and legislative changes to the program's eligibility criteria .