the fy2014-requested appropriations were taken from s.rept . the amounts recommended by the house committee on appropriations were taken from h.rept . 113-171 and the amounts recommended by the senate committee on appropriations were taken from s.rept . since 1984 , congress has approved five major omnibus crime control bills , designating new federal crimes , penalties , and additional law enforcement assistance programs for state and local governments . the science agencies fund and otherwise support research and development ( r&d ) and related activities across a wide variety of federal missions , including national competitiveness , energy and the environment , and fundamental discovery . the related agencies received a total of $827.9 million , after sequestration , for fy2013 . for fy2014 , the administration requested a total of $962.1 million for the related agencies . the house committee on appropriations recommended $800.5 million for the related agencies while the senate committee on appropriations recommended $962.1 million . federal bureau of investigation ( fbi ) investigates violations of federal criminal law ; helps protect the united states against terrorism and hostile intelligence efforts ; provides assistance to other federal , state , and local law enforcement agencies ; and shares jurisdiction with drug enforcement administration over federal drug violations . drug enforcement administration ( dea ) investigates federal drug law violations ; coordinates its efforts with state , local , and other federal law enforcement agencies ; develops and maintains drug intelligence systems ; regulates legitimate controlled substances activities ; and conducts joint intelligence - gathering activities with foreign governments . bureau of alcohol , tobacco , firearms and explosives ( atf ) enforces federal law related to the manufacture , importation , and distribution of alcohol , tobacco , firearms , and explosives . it was transferred from the department of the treasury to doj by the homeland security act of 2002 ( p.l . federal prison system ( bureau of prisons , bop ) provides for the custody and care of the federal prison population , the maintenance of prison - related facilities , and the boarding of sentenced federal prisoners incarcerated in state and local institutions . office on violence against women ( ovw ) coordinates legislative and other initiatives relating to violence against women and administers grant programs to help prevent , detect , and stop violence against women , including domestic violence , sexual assault , and stalking . office of justice programs ( ojp ) manages and coordinates the activities of the bureau of justice assistance , bureau of justice statistics , national institute of justice , office of juvenile justice and delinquency prevention , and the office of victims of crime . community oriented policing services ( cops ) advances the practice of community policing by awarding grants to law enforcement agencies to hire and train community policing professionals , acquire and deploy crime - fighting technologies , and develop and test innovative policing strategies . most crime control has traditionally been a state and local responsibility . with the passage of the crime control act of 1968 ( p.l . 90-351 ) , however , the federal role in the administration of criminal justice has increased incrementally . the consolidated appropriations act , 2014 includes $881.8 million for the related agencies .