arguments against broad limits to itemized deductions vary . the economic effects of limiting itemized tax deductions might be undesirable for some . second , the form of a limit on itemized deductions might affect which deductions a tax filer might claim . floors usually come in the form of a limit based on a percentage of agi . table 2 provides some estimates of which deductions may "fill" up a taxpayer's cap , if that cap is based on a fixed amount , whereas table 3 provides estimates under a limit in the form of a share of agi . for example , eligible extraordinary medical and dental expenses must amount to at least 10% of agi for most tax filers to claim an itemized deduction ; total expenses less than this floor are not eligible for an itemized deduction . in addition , some itemized deductions are subject to a cap ( also known as a ceiling ) in benefits or eligibility . if a tax filer potentially has deductions that exceed a flat - dollar value cap , then the tax filer must choose which deductions to claim . a reduction in the tax benefit derived from activities eligible for tax deduction can affect tax filer behavior . deductible activities that are more easily adjustable in the short run ( eg , charitable giving ) could be reduced after enactment of a limit on deductions in favor of activities that are more difficult to adjust or plan for in the short run ( eg , state and local income or sales taxes , or extraordinary medical expenses ) . over time , tax filers might adjust their behavior to accommodate for limits in itemized deductions ( eg , renting a residence might be more preferable for some , if they can no longer deduct mortgage interest ) . however , a tax filer might still engage in particular activities for other reasons ( although possibly to a lesser extent ) even without a tax benefit . figure 2 shows what share of a tax filer's itemized deductions is composed of individual itemized deductions . in contrast , limits that are not tied to fixed amounts could be structured in a way that does not cause a trade - off among tax - deductible activities . for example , these limits could be capped based on a share of the tax filer's income . although these limits would be less likely to cause a trade - off between tax - deductible activities , they may reduce the tax - beneficial value of these activities . by reducing the value of those activities ( in terms of tax liability ) , a tax filer might choose to claim a smaller deduction related to a certain activity ( based on the behavioral response for each activity ) . third , the extent to which a limit on itemized deductions increases revenue depends on its structure . limits on itemized deductions increase the amount of income of itemizers that is subject to taxation ( and also potentially tax more of that income under a higher marginal income tax bracket ) , thereby increasing revenue . certain combinations of deduction limits may shift some tax filers to claim the standard deduction instead of itemizing .