special provisions would be included to protect children who are affected by immigration enforcement . senate - passed s. 744 would increase the flexibility of asylum and refugee provisions several ways , including by expanding the time period for an alien to apply for asylum and expanding certain benefits to families of asylees . still others may be interested in legislating on some elements of cir but not others . leaders in both chambers have identified immigration as a legislative priority in the 113 th congress . while the house committee on the judiciary has ordered reported several distinct pieces of legislation that aim to reform immigration law thus far in the 113 th congress , the debate in the senate has focused on a single cir bill: the border security , economic opportunity , and immigration modernization act ( s. 744 ) , which was reported by the senate judiciary committee may 28 , 2013 , and was amended during three weeks of floor debate before being passed by the senate on a yea - nay vote of 68-32 on june 27 , 2013 . this report succinctly summarizes major provisions of s. 744 , as passed by the senate . crs's analysis focuses on eight major policy areas that encompass the u.s. immigration debate: comprehensive reform "triggers" and funding ; border security ; interior enforcement ; employment eligibility verification and worksite enforcement ; legalization of unauthorized aliens ; immigrant visas ; nonimmigrant visas ; and humanitarian provisions . for a more comprehensive discussion of legislation relating to these issues see crs report r43097 , comprehensive immigration reform in the 113 th congress: major provisions in senate - passed s. 744 , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] . some members of congress have raised concerns about proposals for comprehensive immigration reform on the grounds that the "bargain" some people see at the heart of such reform — tougher enforcement on the one hand and legalization plus visa reforms on the other — may be difficult to enforce . to allay the concerns that legalization would go forward without increased enforcement , the first sections of senate - passed s. 744 would make implementation of certain enforcement provisions pre - conditions ( or "triggers" ) for the bill's legalization provisions . these legalization triggers were substantially broadened during the senate floor debate in an effort to strengthen the bill's enforcement provisions . in addition , as passed by the senate , s. 744 would authorize $51.8 billion in direct spending ( i.e. , spending that would go into effect without further congressional action ) for certain border security and immigration enforcement expenses , for initial administrative and startup costs related to the bill , and for workforce training . border security is a core element of the department of homeland security's ( dhs's ) effort to control unauthorized migration , and s. 744 includes a number of sections designed to better secure the southern border . dhs would be required to submit to congress a "comprehensive southern border security strategy" and to establish a "southern border fencing strategy," both within 180 days of enactment , and to begin implementing the comprehensive security strategy immediately upon its submission .