it then comments on their aggregate significance . why the supreme court takes cases is usually speculative . the process by which the court decides which cases in its discretionary docket it will hear is famously opaque , other than the fact that at least four justices must approve any grant of certiorari . few of the cases described in this report even involve a split in the circuit courts , a factor traditionally boosting the likelihood the justices will take a case . some have speculated that the period of no property - rights - related decisions began just as chief justice rehnquist and justice o'connor left the court , in 2005 . these justices indicated a particular interest in property rights in their opinions , and their departure from the court , some conjecture , may have left the issue without a strong champion . no one has yet suggested , however , why their replacements on the court , chief justice roberts and justice alito , or others on the court should at this moment in time be motivated to reenter the area . nonetheless , an informed guess can be made as to the court's motives . in all six of the cases discussed here , the decisions below were against the private property owner . this suggests that the justices ( or at least some justices ) are looking for circumstances where property rights are unfairly burdened . and indeed , in five of its six decisions , the court reversed , ruling ( in four cases unanimously ) for the aggrieved property owner . the one decision to go against the property owner was stop the beach renourishment . as to three of the six cases , there are more specific clues as to the court's intentions . in both stop the beach renourishment and koontz , one or more of the justices on the court when certiorari was granted had previously signed onto a dissent from denial of certiorari expressing concern , or at least interest , in the key issue in the current cases . in koontz , the court noted its desire to resolve a split in the lower - court decisions . undoubtedly , the decision with the greatest potential to alter how government relates to property owners , and thus analyzed at greatest length here , is koontz . enlarging the reach of the supreme court's test for when exactions imposed as conditions on development approval effect takings could , depending on how the decision is read , bring in countless conditions used by local governments to induce land developers to spend money , invest labor , or supply equipment before they can proceed . because the exactions taking test is viewed as friendlier to landowners than alternative takings tests that would otherwise apply , enlarging its scope may lead local governments to impose more modest exaction conditions or use them less frequently . as noted , koontz has more limited relevance to federal programs . for most of the supreme court decisions included here , major questions exist as to their scope and what they mean .