bits . although the united states typically does not renegotiate bits following the release of a new model bit , congress could consider whether "updates" may be needed in certain cases . possible candidates for updates could include the u.s . bits with egypt and tunisia , both signed more than two decades ago . since these agreements came into effect , the 2004 and 2012 u.s. model bit templates have made revisions in multiple areas , responding to the changing nature of the global investment landscape . for example , the u.s . bit with egypt does not include many services ( such as telecommunications , banking , and insurance ) within the scope of "covered investments. in establishing such negotiating priorities , congress could examine the criteria which the administration uses to determine which countries to select to approach for negotiating a bit . in turn , congress also could identify what its negotiation priorities are or should be . factors for consideration may include the potential economic benefit to the united states , the willingness of countries to negotiate , the feasibility of such negotiations , and the foreign policy and development benefits that may be served . the conclusion of high - standard investment agreements with such countries may prove difficult because of divergent views of certain investment - related issues , such as labor and environmental protections . the program is jointly administered by the department of state and the united states trade representative ( ustr ) . the united states uses a "model bit" to negotiate bits and investment chapters of ftas . the united states completed its original model text in 1981 , and its first bit was in 1982 with panama . the u.s. model bit has been revised several times , most recently in 2004 and 2012 . as both a major source of and destination for fdi , the united states has engaged in negotiations through bits and ftas to remove restrictions on foreign investment and other market - distorting measures to maximize the benefits of such investment and provide for reciprocal non - discriminatory treatment for u.s. investors . congress plays an important role in shaping u.s. investment policy through its oversight and legislative responsibilities . the global landscape for foreign direct investment ( fdi ) is undergoing significant transformation . the united states , which remains a major source of and destination for fdi , seeks to facilitate investment flows by reducing restrictions on foreign investment and enhancing protections for investors , while balancing other policy interests . over the past few decades , investment flows have increased with greater economic integration of the global economy and the growth of international value chains . although global fdi flows dipped amid the 2008 international financial crisis , they surpassed pre - crisis levels in 2011 . previous distinctions between advanced country / capital exporters and developing country / capital importers are being blurred as more and more countries are both sources of and hosts for fdi .