reserves are only an estimate of what might be recovered . reserves must be developed from a better defined resource base according to the virginia center for coal and energy research report . a maturity index is used to measure the ratio of the amount of remaining economically recoverable resources to the previously mined tonnages . the interior and appalachian regions have less than a 0 index meaning their recoverable reserves are less than the amount already mined . those areas are far more developed than the western regions . the remaining eastern resources may be thinner and of lower quality overall , which may lead to more mining underground than before because much of the surface resources have already been mined . the united states has the largest amount of coal reserves and resources in the world . the u.s. energy information administration ( eia ) estimates there are about 261 billion short tons of recoverable domestic coal reserves . the total demonstrated resource base ( drb ) is estimated at about 484.5 billion tons . eia statistics show that more than half ( 55% ) of u.s. coal reserves are located in the west , of which montana and wyoming together account for 43% ( see table 3 ) . when including the top five producing states ( three of which are in the east ) , 70% of u.s. coal reserves are accounted for . the united states government owns about one third , or 87 billion short tons ( bst ) , of u.s. domestic reserves , followed by great northern properties limited partnership ( 20 bst ) , and peabody energy corporation ( 9 bst ) . all together , the top three reserve owners account for about 45% of u.s. coal . in recent decades , the u.s. coal industry has changed significantly . coal production has shifted from high - sulfur to low - sulfur driven by the steady demand from electric power plants ( coal's primary customer ) need to comply with environmental standards . coal production has fluctuated since 2002 ( see table 4 ) but overall production has been higher than in previous decades . coal production in the united states reached an all - time high ( in tonnage ) of 1,174.8 million short tons in 2008 , before declining to slightly under 1,100 million short tons from 2009 to 2011 . however , natural gas has been the recent fuel of choice for new power plants , reducing coal's domestic market share from 42% in 2011 to 32% by april 2012 . out of the four major u.s. fuel sources — oil , natural gas , coal , and uranium — coal has the largest domestic reserve base and has accounted for the largest share of u.s. energy production in btus since the early 1980s . in 2005 , coal production was 33% of all u.s. energy production . however , in 2011 , natural gas surpassed coal and accounted for 30% of u.s. energy production because of sharp production increases , while coal fell to 28% of u.s. energy production .