while no action was taken on h.r . 1 in the 113 th congress , tax reform remained a key issue of interest early in the 114 th congress . in january 2015 , the senate finance committee established five bipartisan working groups to evaluate tax reform options . the working groups' reports were released in july 2015 . both the senate finance committee and the house ways and means committee have continued to hold hearings on tax reform in the 114 th congress . there are various policy options for achieving comprehensive tax reform . one option is to enact a base - broadening reform , maintaining the current system with reduced tax rates , in the spirit of the tax reform act of 2014 . a second option is to substantially revise or eliminate the current tax system , instead relying on an alternative tax base for revenues ( eg , taxing consumption rather than income ) . tax reform legislation introduced early in the 114 th congress has tended to take the latter approach , proposing a retail sales tax at the federal level or a flat tax . either option can be designed to be revenue - neutral or change the revenue outlook , depending on the exact provisions of the reform . as an alternative to comprehensive tax reform , congress may choose to consider reforms to certain parts of the code . for example , congress may choose to consider international tax reform options , or evaluate business - only options . toward the end of 2015 , as part of the consolidated appropriations act , 2016 ( p.l . 114-113 ) , certain temporary provisions for individuals and businesses were made permanent . the 114 th congress may consider other targeted tax changes to the taxation of individuals or businesses , absent comprehensive tax reform . tax systems are often evaluated using the criteria of efficiency , equity , and simplicity . one goal of tax reform is to enhance economic efficiency , removing provisions in the code that adversely affect decisionmaking and economic output . changes in tax policy also have equity implications , with respect to "fairness" of the tax code . the current tax code is widely seen as being overly complex . thus , tax reform provides the opportunity to simplify the u.s. tax system . balancing these three objectives often involves trade - offs . balancing the trade - offs in these objectives is one of the challenges policymakers face in implementing tax reform . fundamental or comprehensive tax reform may be achieved either by modifying the existing income tax system or by changing the source of tax revenue ( eg , replacing the current tax system ) . in modifying the existing tax system , base - broadening could raise additional tax revenues . the additional revenues could either be used to reduce tax rates or for deficit reduction . similarly , revenues from a new tax ( eg , a consumption tax ) could be used to offset reductions in current taxes , or to reduce the deficit . much of the recent debate has centered around a revenue - neutral tax reform , with lower rates on individual and corporate income .