finally , h.r . 5794 would have prohibited use of arbitration to resolve a debt collection dispute unless the consumer has agreed to arbitration in writing after debt collection activities have begun and a lawsuit or dispute has arisen . the cfpb is a relatively new agency . establishing the cfpb pursuant to the consumer financial protection act of 2010 , which is part of the dodd - frank wall street reform and consumer protection act ( dodd - frank act ) , congress transferred administrative functions , including rulemaking and reporting on debt collection activities , as well as certain enforcement functions , from other federal agencies such as the ftc and the federal reserve board , to the bureau . the ftc and other agencies , however , retain and share enforcement authority with the cfpb and the cfpb and ftc coordinate their enforcement activities . for more information on the functions of the new cfpb , see crs report r41338 , the dodd - frank wall street reform and consumer protection act: title x , the consumer financial protection bureau , by [author name scrubbed] and crs report r42572 , the consumer financial protection bureau ( cfpb ) : a legal analysis , by [author name scrubbed] . in addition to the problems noted in the cfpb report and the exclusion of first - party debt collectors from fdcpa coverage , several issues have arisen regarding the fdcpa , its implementation and enforcement , and activities beyond the scope of federal consumer protection . consumer advocates have identified problems such as inadequate verification of debt and arbitration clauses that limit consumer ability to litigate potentially illegal debt collection practices . in addition , consumer advocates have criticized arrests of debtors for failure to comply with default judgments affirming debts and ordering payment , as being tantamount to a revival of "debtor's prison. other commentators have criticized fdcpa debt collector treatment such as judicial fdcpa interpretations limiting bona - fide errors as defense to fdcpa violations and limits on voicemail / autodialing to contact consumers regarding debt collection . in recent years , some of the issues discussed above have been addressed in proposed legislation although none advanced beyond introduction . as of the date of this report , one bill to revise the fdcpa has been introduced in the 113 th congress . s. 508 would define child support as a debt and is similar to s. 1383 in the 112 th congress . among the various bills introduced in the 112 th congress to address consumer debt collection , h.r . 2361 would have prohibited a debt collector from bringing or threatening to bring a lawsuit against a consumer to collect a time - barred debt and required a debt collector to disclose to a consumer that ( 1 ) a time - barred debt has been sold to the debt collector by the creditor ; ( 2 ) the collector may not sue the consumer for payment of the debt because the statute of limitations has expired ; and ( 3 ) any payment by the consumer on the debt may restart the clock on the statute of limitations .