circuit . under their view , the president lacked authority to make these recess appointments because no inter - session recess occurred as the senate did not adjourn sine die , and moreover , the vacancies to which the members were appointed were pre - existing vacancies . between january 4 , 2012 , the date of appointment for the three nlrb members at issue in noel canning , and august 5 , 2013 , when the board consisted of three senate - confirmed members , it is believed that the nlrb issued approximately 700 decisions and approved the appointments of several regional directors . during this time , the senate was not holding pro forma sessions . finding becker's appointment to be invalid , the third circuit concluded that the three - member panel "acted without power and lacked jurisdiction when it issued the order. in light of the supreme court's noel canning decision , however , the nlrb has sought a rehearing of new vista . on august 11 , 2014 , the third circuit granted the board's petition for rehearing . a unanimous supreme court affirmed the judgment of the d.c . circuit , concluding that the three recess appointments to the nlrb were constitutionally invalid . however , the court was sharply divided when it came to the reasoning for why the appointments were infirm . despite adopting a broad reading of the recess appointments clause , such that the president can make appointments during an inter - or intra - session recess of longer than 10 days to any vacancy , the majority of the court ruled the appointments invalid because it determined that the senate was only in an intra - session recess of three days , a period of time deemed insufficient to trigger the president's recess appointment power . a minority of justices , in contrast , ruled the appointments invalid based on a narrow interpretation of the clause as articulated by the d.c . the court's june 2014 decision has called into question the validity of the board's actions during this 19-month period . since the court's decision , the board has attempted to clarify how it will address its relevant actions . on july 9 , 2014 , for example , the nlrb's general counsel indicated that the agency had already set aside its orders in 43 cases that were pending in federal appellate courts when noel canning was decided . in addition , on july 18 , 2014 , the nlrb unanimously ratified all of the administrative , personnel , and procurement matters taken by the board between january 4 , 2012 and august 5 , 2013 . although the nlrb has not indicated formally how it will address the remaining decisions that were issued during the relevant period , its approach is likely to follow the actions taken by the agency in 2010 , when approximately 550 board decisions were similarly called into question following the supreme court's decision in new process steel , l.p. v. national labor relations board .