appendix a . legislation introduced in the 113 th congress affecting drug compounding the following table summarizes selected provisions of the two pieces of legislation on compounding introduced to date in the 113 th congress . it includes provisions that address issues discussed in this report , but it does not provide a full summary of the legislation . appendix b . congressional hearings on cds 2012-2013 ( in reverse chronological order ) "examining drug compounding," hearing of the subcommittee on health of the committee on energy and commerce , u.s. house of representatives , may 23 , 2013 . executive session , s. 959 pharmaceutical compounding quality and accountability act , hearing of the committee on health , education , labor , and pensions , u.s. senate , may 22 , 2013 . ordered to be reported with an amendment in the nature of a substitute favorably . "pharmaceutical compounding: proposed legislative solution," hearing of the committee on health , education , labor , and pensions , u.s. senate , may 9 , 2013 . "a continuing investigation into the fungal meningitis outbreak and whether it could have been prevented ? , hearing of the subcommittee on oversight and investigations , committee on energy and commerce , u.s. house of representatives , april 26 , 2013 . "pharmacy compounding: implications of the 2012 meningitis outbreak," hearing of the committee on health , education , labor , and pensions , u.s. senate , november 15 , 2012 . "the fungal meningitis outbreak: could it have been prevented ? this report will be updated as necessary . source : house committee on energy and commerce: http: / / energycommerce.house.gov / hearings ; senate committee on health , education , labor and pensions: : http: / / www.help.senate.gov / hearings / . appendix c. selected adverse events involving compounded drugs and solution . drug compounding has historically been the focus of state governments through their regulation of pharmacies . adverse event reporting is not required by federal regulators for producers of cds as it is for prescription , non - prescription drugs , and dietary supplements . without knowing the total number of compounded products made , as well as the total number of adverse events , it is difficult to ascertain the overall safety of cds or to understand the benefits and risks of using cds . the publicly - available information on cds is published by public health authorities , fda inspections of facilities listed on websites , records of state licensing boards , and reports in professional journals documenting adverse events . adverse events can be voluntarily reported to the fda medwatch database , but without mandatory reporting , the completeness of the information cannot be ascertained . labeling specifying that a drug or another product is compounded is not a universal requirement . due to the complexity of the supply chain and the growth of non - traditional compounding , patients and providers may not realize that a drug has been compounded . unlike traditional compounding where a patient is given a prescription by a physician for a cd , non - traditional cds are not necessarily identified as compounded .