710 , truth in trials act . this bill would amend the federal criminal code ( title 18 of the u.s. code ) to provide an affirmative defense for conduct regarding the medical use of marijuana in a prosecution or proceeding for any marijuana - related offense under any federal law . preemption is generally implied in two situations . first , under field preemption , a state law is preempted where a "scheme of federal regulation is so pervasive as to make reasonable the inference that congress left no room for the states to supplement it.... " second , under conflict preemption , a state law is preempted "where compliance with both federal law and state regulations is a physical impossibility ... or where state law stands as an obstacle to the accomplishment and execution of the full purposes and objectives of congress. regardless of the type of preemption at play , the task of evaluating the preemptive effect of a federal law is "one of determining congressional intent. by making its intent clear , congress may choose to preempt all related state laws , no state laws , or only select state laws . the united states is a party to various treaties that impose international obligations relating to the control of marijuana . these treaties generally seek to curb the use of controlled substances while carving out exceptions for "medicinal and scientific" uses . the principle governing treaty in international drug control , which has been agreed to by more than 180 nations , is the single convention on narcotic drugs ( single convention ) . the single convention imposes restrictions on the manufacturing , distribution , and trade in narcotic drugs by establishing a multi - schedule classification structure that applies varying controls for each schedule . this framework later served as the blueprint for the csa and other foreign drug control statutes . "cannabis" is listed as a schedule i substance under the single convention and is therefore subject to the agreement's most restrictive controls . for example , parties must "take such legislative and administrative measures as may be necessary ... to limit exclusively to medical and scientific purposes the production , manufacture , export , import , distribution of , trade in , use and possession of drugs" ; limit the quantity of the drug manufactured and imported to "the quantity consumed ... for medical and scientific purposes" ; and furnish the international narcotics control board with information , estimates , and statistics related to the consumption and production of the drug . in addition to the single convention , the 1971 convention on psychotropic substances requires that specific controls be placed by parties upon thc , the physiologically active chemical in marijuana , while the 1988 united nations convention against illicit traffic in narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances requires parties to establish criminal penalties for the possession , purchase , or cultivation of marijuana for nonmedicinal consumption , but only to the extent that such action is consistent with the "constitutional principles and basic concepts of [the country's] legal system.