in addition , h.r . 5611 required a report by the narab association to the president , congress , and the naic , whereas subsequent legislation required the report be made solely to the president and the naic . legislative provisions creating a narab appeared as part of broad financial regulatory reform legislation in the 105 th congress and the 106 th congress , ultimately becoming law as part of glba in the 106 th congress . glba sought to address insurance producer complaints about the variation in state licensing requirements through a sort of provisional federal preemption of state laws . the law called for the creation of a private , nonprofit licensing body , the narab , whose insurance producer members would have been authorized to operate across state lines without individual licenses from every state . membership in narab would have been open only to people already holding a state insurance producer license and who fulfilled other criteria . although established by federal authority , the narab to be created by the provisions in glba would have been entwined in the system of state regulation . 2554 ( 111 th congress ) and h.r . 1112 ( 112 th congress ) changed this makeup to an 11-person board ( with 6 insurance commissioners and 5 insurance industry representatives ) to be appointed by the president with senate confirmation . s. 2342 ( 112 th congress ) and the current legislation again changed the narab board to be comprised of 13 people ( 8 insurance commissioners and 5 insurance industry representatives ) who are presidentially appointed and senate confirmed . the naic would have appointed the seven members of the narab board and had other oversight authorities . the narab i language in glba also offered the states the opportunity to avoid creation of the narab organization if a majority of them created among themselves systems of either uniformity or reciprocity in insurance producer licensing within a three - year window after passage of glba . the naic was given the authority to determine whether the states met this glba standard , with the possibility of federal judicial review of the determination . the individual states and the naic reacted relatively quickly to this opportunity with the promulgation of an naic model law that would provide for reciprocity . a sufficient number of states adopted laws providing for insurance producer licensing reciprocity that the naic determined the glba standards to avoid creation of the narab organization were met . as a result , the narab organization was not created . the first legislation specifically providing for the creation of a narab that the congressional research service has been able to identify was introduced in the 102 nd congress ( title iv of h.r . whether the public benefits resulting from licensure outweigh the costs is determined by policy makers on a case - by - case basis . some form of licensure for those in the financial services industry has been generally accepted and is required in federal law for people involved in securities transactions with the public , for example . legislation to mandate the creation of a narab organization , similar to p.l .