appendix a . number of contractors vs . number of troops in iraq and afghanistan appendix b. dod contract obligations appendix c. select legislative history concerned over dod's use of contractors in iraq and afghanistan , congress has held oversight hearings and enacted legislation aimed at improving operational contract support . this appendix summarizes legislation affecting operational contract support in recent years . does dod have an appropriately sized and capable acquisition workforce ? what steps are being taken to ensure that the infrastructure is in place to better track contractor data and measure contractor performance so that commanders and decisions makers will have necessary information upon which to make more informed decisions ? does dod have the information technology capabilities necessary to support operational contract support planning and execution ? in light of potential budget constraints , will dod sufficiently fund efforts needed to institutionalize operational contract support and prepare for the use of contractors in future military operations ? to what extent is dod including contractor scenarios in post - and field - exercises ? are dod efforts sufficient to prepare the operational force for how contractors will be used in future operations ? to what extent are lessons learned in contractor management and oversight being incorporated into doctrine and strategy ? observers believe education and training are critical elements in preparing for future operations . richard ginman , director , defense procurement and acquisition policy , department of defense , recently testified before congress that "the curriculum for each phase of joint and service - specific professional military education should include [operational contract support] content appropriate for each phase of an officer's professional development. potential questions for congress include: to what extent is dod adapting what is taught in military educational institutions to address operational contract support ? most analysts believe that effective use of contractors to support military operations requires dedicating sufficient resources to plan for , manage , and oversee the use of contractors . yet many analysts have argued that insufficient resources are dedicated to operational contract support . this raises a number of potential questions for congress: does dod have sufficient numbers of planners to effectively prepare for the integration of contractors into future operations ? national defense authorization act for fy2007 ( p.l . 109 – 364 ) section 854 directed dod to develop joint policies for requirements definition , contingency program management , and contingency contracting during combat operations and post - conflict operations . national defense authorization act for fy2008 ( p.l . 110 – 181 ) section 841 established the commission on wartime contracting to investigate federal agency contracting for: the reconstruction of iraq and afghanistan ; the logistical support of coalition forces operating in iraq and afghanistan ; and the performance of security functions in such operations .