like the court in lopez , the d.c . circuit declared that "[t]he supreme court has repeatedly held that the manufacture of goods which may ultimately never leave the state can still be activity which substantially affects interstate commerce. regarding the prohibition on transfers , the court similarly remarked that "the supreme court precedent makes clear that the transfer of goods , even as part of an intrastate transaction , can be an activity which substantially affects interstate commerce. the u.s. constitution specifies the enumerated powers of the federal government . these powers , however , have been interpreted broadly so as to create a large potential overlap with state authority . accordingly , states have enacted their own laws regarding the unlawful possession and disposition of firearms , as well as the manner in which firearms may be carried . congress , too , has enacted legislation related to firearms control . states may generally legislate on all matters within their territorial jurisdiction . indeed , criminal law , family law , property , and contract and tort law , among others , are typical areas of law that are regulated at the state level . it includes , among others , the national firearms act of 1934 , the gun control act of 1968 , the firearm owners' protection act of 1986 , and the brady handgun violence prevention act of 1993 . generally , congress has relied on its authority under the commerce clause to enact such statutes . the commerce clause states: "the congress shall have power ... to regulate commerce with foreign nationals , and among the several states , and with indian tribes. although a plain reading of the text might suggest that congress has only a limited power to regulate commercial trade between persons in one state and persons of another state , the clause has not been construed quite so narrowly , particularly in the modern era . since the 1930s , the u.s. supreme court has held that congress has the ability to protect interstate commerce from burdens and obstructions "no matter what the source of the dangers which threaten it. over time , the court concluded that congress had considerable discretion in determining which commercial activities , including intrastate commercial activities , "affect" interstate commerce , as long as the legislation was "reasonably" related to achieving its goals of regulating interstate commerce . furthermore , the court in wickard v. filburn also held that an activity , "though it may not be regarded as commerce , it may still , whatever its nature," be regulated by congress if , in the aggregate , "it exerts a substantial economic effect on interstate commerce. under this prevailing interpretation of the commerce clause , the supreme court has upheld a variety of federal laws , including those regulating the production of wheat on farms , racial discrimination by businesses , and loan - sharking . federal firearms laws have been challenged periodically on grounds that congress did not have authority under the commerce clause to pass them . this section examines lower courts' decisions regarding the constitutional validity of certain federal firearms laws , particularly the application of these laws to intrastate possession and intrastate transfer of firearms .