administrations . nevertheless , nearly five years into the reform process , implementation has lagged at the federal level and faced significant challenges in states that have begun operating under the new system . congress is likely to closely monitor the actions taken by the peña nieto government and state governments in mexico to advance the reform process as it oversees current u.s. justice sector programs and considers future support to mexico . judicial reform is one part of that effort . that initial strategy was designed in response to the calderón administration's request for specific forms of u.s. equipment , training , and technical assistance to help mexico combat drug trafficking and organized crime . when faced with funding decisions , congress may seek to balance the need to ensure that u.s. funds are provided in a way that is flexible enough to respond to changing events in mexico , while also retaining adequate control over the way those funds are being spent . congress may also consider weighing in on how implementing agencies divide the assistance provided for judicial reform between the federal and state level reform efforts . finally , congress may examine the extent to which u.s. agencies are balancing "top down" support for government entities engaged in the reform process with "bottom up" support to civil society groups . many argue that the award - winning documentary film , presumed guilty , which was theatrically released in 2011 , did more to galvanize support for the reforms than any government - sponsored efforts . the state department used roughly $100,000 in international narcotics control and law enforcement ( incle ) funding to help promote the film in mexico . another area that could be expanded is u.s. support for culture of lawfulness programs that seek to educate all sectors of mexican society on the importance of upholding the rule of law . congress has an oversight interest in ensuring that , as implemented , the new criminal justice system is strengthening human rights protections . some have urged congress to make future conditions more specific by , for example , conditioning aid on whether mexico is videotaping confessions and interviews with witnesses so as to prove that torture or other ill treatment is not occurring . others have argued against changes to the conditions on u.s. assistance , preferring that the current conditions be more strictly enforced . congress may also examine how best to ensure that u.s. implementing agencies correctly sequence and coordinate support to key actors within the criminal justice system ( police , prosecutors / defense attorneys , courts ) . at the federal level , is the amount of assistance being provided to the pgr and the courts adequate when compared to the aid provided to the interior ministry ( which now includes the federal police and penitentiary system ) ? if one federal entity seeks u.s. cooperation more aggressively than another , should that entity receive more assistance ? at the state level , are usaid's judicial reform efforts being coordinated with the police assistance that the state department is providing ? are police in states that have adopted or are close to adopting the new criminal justice system being adequately trained to carry out investigations in support of the public prosecutor ?