data on educational gains are available for all participants . data on other outcomes ( such as entering employment or postsecondary education ) are more limited . the report begins with a description of the law itself . this description focuses on aefla's largest component , the state grants program . the second half of the report uses program data to describe the implementation of the state grants program , including the data on providers and participants . aefla was enacted as title ii of the workforce investment act of 1998 ( wia ; p.l . it replaced the national literacy act of 1991 ( p.l . 102-73 ) and the adult education act of 1966 ( p.l . aefla authorized such sums as necessary to carry out its functions from fy1999 through fy20003 . when the program was not reauthorized , the general education provisions act ( gepa ) automatically extended aefla authorization for one year . since the expiration of this extension , the program has continued to be funded through the annual appropriations process . aefla reauthorization has been debated in the context of broader efforts to reauthorize wia . as discussed in the prior section , aefla specifies certain requirements for state grants ( and local subgrants ) but leaves many decisions to the states and localities . this section will use program data from the nrs to illustrate the nature of states' and localities' adult education services , providers , students , and outcomes . nrs data are typically reported by program year ( py ) , which runs nine months behind the fiscal year ( eg , py2011-2012 was from july 1 , 2011 , to june 30 , 2012 ) . as such , the data discussed in this section will not align precisely with fiscal year information discussed elsewhere in this report . when interpreting the data in this section , it is important to note that many states contribute beyond their aefla - required match . localities and private entities may also contribute to adult education activities , and federal funds subsequently account for only a minority of the funds used to provide local adult education services . aefla - funded adult education services are typically administered at the local level . nrs data ( and most other adult education literature ) divides these services into three primary categories . adult basic education ( abe ) includes instruction for adults whose literacy skills are below the high school level . in py2011-2012 , about 47% of adult education students were enrolled in abe classes . adult secondary education ( ase ) includes instruction for adults whose literacy skills are approximately at the high school level . this includes adults who are seeking to pass the general education development ( ged ) test or obtain a high school credential . in py2011-2012 , about 13% of adult education students were enrolled in ase courses . english literacy ( el ) is instruction for adults who are not proficient in the english language . in py2011-2012 , about 40% of adult education students were enrolled in el courses . states have diverse adult education populations and there are large variations among the states in terms of enrollment levels in each program .