when available , data are provided on each type of rule . table 2 presents the total number of major rules published during each calendar year since 1997 , as reported by gao . "economically significant" rules are those rules that fall into category ( 1 ) of "significant" rules , or those that may ( 1 ) have an annual effect on the economy of $100 million or more or adversely affect in a material way the economy , a sector of the economy , productivity , competition , jobs , the environment , public health or safety , or state , local , or tribal governments or communities . for rules that are considered "economically significant," agencies are required to complete a detailed cost - benefit analysis under section 6 ( a ) ( 3 ) ( c ) of e.o . although the definition of an "economically significant" rule is very similar to the definition of a major rule , the definition of a major rule is a bit broader . both definitions have a similar $100 million threshold , but the definition of major rule also includes other categories ( see section entitled " "major" rules " above ) . rules in the gao database are those that have been submitted to gao under the cra ( 5 u.s.c . data begin in 1997 because the cra was enacted in 1996 , making 1997 the first full year for which data are available . a 2011 crs report examined the 100 major rules published in 2010 and concluded that rules are determined to be "major" for a variety of reasons , not just due to compliance costs . for example , 37 of the rules appeared to be major because they involved transfers of funds from one party to another , most commonly the transfer of federal funds through programs such as grants , medicare or medicaid funds , special pay for members of the military , and crop subsidy payments . ten other rules appeared to be major because they prompted consumer spending or because they established fees for the reimbursement of particular federal functions ( eg , issuance of passports and oversight of the nuclear power industry ) . thirty - nine rules appeared to be major because they were expected to result in at least $100 million in annual benefits , costs , or both . the definition of a "significant" rule , found in e.o .