appendix a . legislative history of medical child support provisions just as temporary assistance for needy families ( tanf ) recipients must assign their child support rights to the state , so too must medicaid recipients assign their medical support rights to the state . the impetus for the federal government moving into the arena of financial child support was to reduce federal expenditures on the former aid to families with dependent children ( afdc ) entitlement program ( replaced in 1996 by the time - limited tanf block grant program ) . similarly , the impetus for the federal government moving into the arena of medical support for those children eligible for child support was to reduce federal costs in the medicaid program . this section of the report summarizes major medical child support provisions . 95-142 , medicare - medicaid anti - fraud and abuse amendments ( h.r . 3 ) , enacted october 25 , 1977 the first link between child support and medical support came as an attempt to recoup the costs of medicaid provided to public assistance families under title xix of the social security act . is it fair to ask the american taxpayer — who works hard to support his own family and to carry his own burden — to carry the burden of the deserting father as well ? perhaps we cannot stop the father from abandoning his children , but we can certainly improve the system by obtaining child support from him and thereby place the burden of caring for his children on his own shoulders where it belongs . back in the early days of the cse program , families receiving aid to families with dependent children ( afdc ) benefits comprised about 85% ( fy1978 data ) of the cse caseload . afdc families were automatically eligible for and entitled to medicaid benefits . in fact , during that period the primary goals of the cse program were ( 1 ) to reduce public expenditures on the afdc ( and medicaid ) program by obtaining child support from noncustodial parents on a consistent and ongoing basis and ( 2 ) to help some families to remain self - sufficient and off public assistance by providing the requisite cse services . 98-369 , the deficit reduction act of 1984 ( h.r . 4170 ) , enacted july 18 , 1984 this law mandated states to require that medicaid applicants assign their rights to medical support to the state ( section 1912 ( a ) of the social security act ) . 98-378 , the child support enforcement amendments of 1984 ( h.r . 4325 ) , enacted august 16 , 1984 , and corresponding regulations section 16 of p.l . 98-378 required the hhs secretary to issue regulations requiring state cse agencies to petition for inclusion of medical support as part of any new or modified child support order whenever health care coverage is available at "reasonable cost" to the noncustodial parent of a child receiving afdc , medicaid , or foster care benefits or services . federal regulations further stipulated that any employment - related or other group coverage was considered reasonable , under the assumption that health insurance is inexpensive to the employee / noncustodial parent .