yes . the wpa provides that an employee , former employee , or applicant for employment has the independent right to seek review of whistleblower reprisal cases by the mspb no more than 60 days after notification is provided to such employee that the investigation was closed or 120 days after filing a complaint with the osc . if in any investigation the special counsel determines that there are "reasonable grounds to believe" a prohibited personnel practice exists or has occurred , the special counsel must report findings and recommendations , and may include recommendations for corrective action , to the merit systems protection board ( mspb ) , the agency involved , the office of personnel management ( opm ) and , optionally , to the president . if the agency does not act to correct the prohibited personnel practice , the special counsel may petition the mspb for corrective action . the mspb , before rendering its decision , is required to provide an opportunity for oral or written comments by the special counsel , the agency involved , and the opm , and for written comments by any individual who alleges to be the victim of the prohibited personnel practices . proceedings for disciplinary action against an officer or employee who commits a prohibited personnel practice may be instituted by the special counsel by filing a written complaint with the mspb . after proceedings before the mspb or an administrative law judge , if violations are found , the mspb may impose ( i ) disciplinary action consisting of removal , reduction in grade , debarment from federal employment for a period not to exceed five years , suspension , or reprimand ; ( ii ) an assessment of a civil penalty not to exceed $ 1,000 ; or ( iii ) any combination of disciplinary actions described under clause ( i ) and an assessment described under clause ( ii ) . in addition , the agency where the prevailing party was employed or had applied for employment may be held responsible for reasonable attorney's fees . in the case of presidentially appointed and senate confirmed employees in "confidential , policy - making , policy - determining , or policy - advocating" positions , the complaint and the statement of facts , along with any response from the employee , are to be presented to the president for disposition in lieu of the presentation to the board . adopted 1989 . amended 1994 , 2012 . see p.l . 112-199 , §§ 101 ( a ) , ( b ) ( 1 ) ( b ) , ( 2 ) ( b ) , ( c ) , 102-104 ( b ) ( 1 ) , 105 , 112 , 126 stat . sponsor: senator daniel k. akaka cosponsors: 14 house: on passage passed without objection senate: resolving differences - senate agreed to house amendment to the bill ( s. 743 ) by unanimous consent . at least every 60 days throughout its investigation , the osc must give notice of the status of the investigation to the individual who brought the allegation .