sec . availability of fiscal year 2011 funds for research and development relating to the b – 2 bomber aircraft . of the unobligated balance of amounts appropriated for fiscal year 2011 for the air force and available for procurement of b – 2 bomber aircraft modifications , post - production support , and other charges , $20,000,000 may be available for fiscal year 2012 for research , development , test , and evaluation with respect to a conventional mixed load capability for the b – 2 bomber aircraft . appendix a . existing bomber force this appendix presents additional information on the u.s. air force's existing fleet of b - 52h , b - 1b , and b - 2 bombers . 52h stratofortress mission the b - 52h is a long - range , heavy bomber that can perform a variety of missions . the bomber is capable of flying at high subsonic speeds at altitudes up to 50,000 feet ( 15,166.6 meters ) . it can carry nuclear or precision guided conventional ordnance with worldwide precision navigation capability . features in a conventional conflict , the b - 52h can perform strategic attack , close - air support , air interdiction , offensive counter - air , and maritime operations . however , as potential a2 / ad equipped adversaries throughout the world become more prevalent and more capable , the question remains: will the air force's legacy bomber force keep pace with sustainment and modernization efforts in order to remain a credible response to such adversaries , or will they become increasingly irrelevant because the nation cannot afford them ? in large part , decisions by congress will determine just how much longer the b - 52 , b - 1 , and b - 2 will remain relevant , and ultimately , will likely determine the future of the nation's long - range strike capabilities . two b - 52hs , in two hours , can monitor 140,000 square miles ( 364,000 square kilometers ) of ocean surface . all b - 52hs can be equipped with two electro - optical viewing sensors , a forward - looking infrared camera , and an advanced targeting pod , to augment targeting , battle assessment , and flight safety . during desert storm , b - 52s delivered 40% of all the weapons dropped by coalition forces . it is also capable of ocean surveillance , and can assist the u.s. navy in anti - ship and mine - laying operations . pilots wear night vision goggles , or nvgs , to enhance their vision during night operations . night vision goggles provide greater safety during night operations by increasing the pilot's ability to visually clear terrain , avoid enemy radar , and see other aircraft in a lights - out environment . starting in 1989 , on - going modifications incorporate the global positioning system , heavy stores adapter beams for carrying 2,000 pound munitions , and a full array of advance weapons currently under development . the use of aerial refueling gives the b - 52h a range limited only by crew endurance . it has an unrefueled combat range in excess of 8,800 miles ( 14,080 kilometers ) .