113-9 ) was enacted . the act gave faa authority to transfer up to $253 million to faa operations using available monies from unspent airport funds , which were not subject to sequestration , and from other available sources within faa . on may 2 , 2013 , a bipartisan group of 25 senators transmitted a letter to secretary of transportation ray lahood and faa administrator michael huerta . the letter indicated that the $253 million transfer authority was "far above the amount required to prevent furloughs," stressing further that "[c]ongressional intent is clear: the faa should prevent the slated closure of 149 contract towers by fully funding the contract tower program. on may 10 , 2013 , secretary lahood announced that the funds transfer authority under p.l . 113-9 was sufficient to end faa employee furloughs and keep the 149 towers open for the remainder of fy2013 . while this action appears to have settled debate over the pending closure of control towers in fy2013 , long - range plans for tower closures , cutbacks in operating hours , or both may be revisited in future policy debates regarding the faa budget . the financing and continued operation of low - activity towers , in particular , remain significant issues for future faa budgets . in general , the funding and operation of civil air traffic control towers in the united states and u.s. territories fall into one of four categories: ( 1 ) tower operations funded through faa's operations budget and staffed with federal air traffic controllers ; ( 2 ) contract tower operations fully funded through faa's operations budget but staffed with controllers employed by the contractor under the federal contract tower ( fct ) program ( also known as the contract tower base program ) ; ( 3 ) contract tower operations partially funded through the faa's operations budget and partially funded by local or state government funding and managed and staffed by contractor personnel , referred to as the contract tower cost - share program ; and ( 4 ) non - federal control towers that receive no funding from the federal government and are staffed with non - federal controllers . regardless of funding and operation , faa maintains responsibility for the regulation and oversight of operations and safety at all civil air traffic control towers in the united states . contract towers and contract controllers must be certified by faa and must follow faa directives . faa funds for tower operations are derived from appropriations to the faa's operations and maintenance ( o&m ) account , which is funded partially from the airport and airways trust fund ( aatf ) and partially from the treasury general fund . these sources provide funding for both the contract tower program and faa - staffed towers . when a tower closes , either overnight or permanently , the airport will typically remain open to traffic as an uncontrolled airport . in some rare instances , an uncontrolled airport may close late at night for noise abatement or due to safety concerns in mountainous areas , but runway lights and other navigational aids remain functional so it could serve as an emergency landing site for an aircraft in distress .