the chinese government welcomes their role in expanding its domestic industry . similarly , the chinese embrace investments by foreign parts makers , which build parts there to service the automakers from their home countries . all of these disputes have arisen since december 2001 , when china was admitted to the wto . by comparison , in the united states , just over 10 million vehicles were produced in 2012 . however , chinese state intervention in the auto and auto parts industries could limit the benefits for non - chinese manufacturers relative to what would occur under more open markets and trade . when china joined the wto in 2001 , it appeared to signal that it was on a path toward accelerating its transition to a market economy . however , ustr has noted that since 2006 , there has been a "troubling trend in china toward intensified state intervention," and that china seems to be "embracing state capitalism more strongly. at a november 2011 wto review of china's wto compliance , the u.s. representative stated that the auto sector was one sector that the u.s. highlighted as having been particularly plagued by government intervention . in addition to the commercial opportunities presented by the chinese market , there have also been growing pains in the u.s. - china motor vehicle trade relationship . a half - dozen trade disputes have developed in the past 12 years , many resulting in wto rulings and changes in chinese laws and regulations affecting the motor vehicle industry . when japanese auto companies began to export extensively to the united states in the 1980s and 1990s , many in congress argued that japanese auto policies were unfair , and legislation was introduced to limit imports of japanese cars . this pressure led japanese auto firms to restrain auto exports to the united states and to build u.s. auto plants . so far , china is exporting auto parts and not automobiles to the united states . parts employment fell in every year from 2001 to 2009 , as many companies filed for bankruptcy . while the industry has added 100,000 jobs since its low point of 386,000 in july 2009 , the sector provides roughly 350,000 fewer jobs than it did at the start of this century . meanwhile , parts imports have been rising throughout the past decade , from about 21% of the total u.s. parts market to nearly a third in 2010 . ten years ago , the chinese auto industry was in its infancy , with a very low level of production and sales , few imports or exports , and vehicles whose quality was not up to par with cars and trucks produced in countries with larger and more sophisticated auto industries . the recession that hit the united states , japan , and europe did not affect china's economy so severely . as vehicle production and sales lagged in europe , north america , and japan , they expanded dramatically in china , more than doubling from 2009 to 2012 . no other nation's auto industry has seen such robust growth in the past decade .