additional accounts and programs have been created . for example , the flame account was established in fy2010 , with appropriations that previously had gone entirely to wfm suppression then being allocated between two different accounts . a further complication is that costs for one wildfire season ( using a calendar year ) often are covered by appropriations for two fiscal years , and sometimes appropriations are enacted in one fiscal year to cover costs incurred in previous fiscal years . suppression is the work associated with extinguishing or confining a fire . site rehabilitation includes efforts undertaken , generally within three years of a wildfire , to repair or improve fire - damaged lands unlikely to recover to a management - approved condition within a specified time frame or actions taken to repair or replace minor facilities damaged by fire . a number of federal , state , and local agencies can and do respond to wildfires . states are responsible for responding to wildfires that begin on nonfederal ( state , local , and private ) lands , except for lands protected by the federal agencies under cooperative agreements . the wfm appropriation is distributed among two programs: f ire o perations and o ther f ire o perations . the f ire o perations program receives the bulk of the wfm appropriation and funds two activities: preparedness and suppression . appropriations for preparedness are used to support efforts that assist with fire prevention and detection , equipment , training , and baseline personnel . suppression appropriations are used primarily for wildfire response . the o ther f ire o perations program funds hazardous fuels reduction activities , such as restoring forest vegetation type and structure to improve a forest's resilience and resistance to catastrophic wildfires . the other fire operations program also funds joint fire research and science programs ( eg , nifc operations ) and programs to provide financial and technical assistance for state and volunteer wildfire management . table 1 contains annual total wildfire management appropriations from fy2007 to fy2016 . appropriations for preparedness , suppression , hazardous fuels reduction , flame , and additional suppression appropriations are discussed in more detail below . wildfire management appropriations began to increase in the late 1990s and increased significantly after fy2000 , partly in response to the severe 2000 fire season ( figure 1 ) . as measured in constant 2015 dollars , wildfire appropriations have varied between $3.8 billion in fy2001 and nearly $5.0 billion in fy2008 and in fy2016 ( to date ) . from fy2007 to fy2016 , combined fs and doi wildfire management appropriations have averaged $3.8 billion . the majority of wildfire management appropriations go to fs . from fy2007 to fy2016 , fs received on average 76% of the total wildfire management appropriations and doi received 24% . in addition , fs wildfire management appropriations constitute a large portion of total fs discretionary funding . for example , in fy2016 , fs wildfire management appropriations are approximately 61% of the agency's discretionary funds , although not all of those funds counted against discretionary spending limits . figure 2 reflects the proportion of fs discretionary funding between wildfire and non - wildfire activities over the past 10 years .