what are members tweeting and posting about ? the use of twitter and facebook by members of congress is an evolving phenomenon . as members continue to embrace new technologies , their use of twitter , facebook , and other forms of social media may increase . these mediums allow members to communicate directly with constituents ( and others ) in a potentially interactive way that is not possible through mail or e - mail . for members and their staff , the ability to collect and transmit real time information to and from constituents could be influential for issue prioritization , policy decisions , or voting behavior . further research on how the adoption and use of social media platforms — such as twitter and facebook — could provide insight into changing approaches to representation , messaging to constituents , communications outside a member's district or state , and potential regulation . traditionally , members represent a geographic constituency . social media , however , provides members with an "additional tool for contacting the geographic constituency , but ... also ... to reach groups outside of their official jurisdiction who share ideological goals and priorities. subsequently , while members represent a geographic district , social media could allow "surrogate representation" by members of other non - geographic constituent groups . the consequences of such representation are not known , but could alter the representational strategies of individual members within congress . as part of representation , members not only represent a geographic constituency , but they are also concerned with their personal message and how it impacts reelection efforts . while official member communication cannot include campaign rhetoric , members know that what they say on official social media channels can be used in elections . subsequently , how members use social media continues to evolve . some reports have suggested that members are dedicating additional staff ( or hiring new staff ) to handle social media as part of their messaging and communications strategy . in the current budget climate , how members allocate staff is crucial . if members are spending more resources on social media , it is possible that the priorities of other representational functions may change . electronic communications have also raised some concerns . while a complete discussion of this is beyond the scope of this report , a few observations warrant mentioning . first , existing law and chamber regulations on the use of communication media such as the franking privilege have proven difficult to adapt to the new electronic technologies . currently , house regulations treat social media communications similarly to solicited franked mail . but several key differences between electronic communications and franked mail — most notably the lack of marginal cost , the inability to differentiate between constituents and non - constituents , and the ability of campaign challengers to adopt identical applications — raise questions about both the suitability and necessity of applying the franking model to social media communications . second , the use of electronic communications is rapidly changing , sometimes over the course of just months . just 10 years ago , facebook and twitter did not exist .