the major points of contention are discussed below . argentina's economic policies reflect a certain distrust of international institutions and the government's priority for financial independence , social equity , and what may be considered a commitment to "populist" solutions . this review of these economic policies is not meant to suggest that there is one ideal macroeconomic model that is being violated . rather , even in recognizing that countries can govern themselves well under alternative policy frameworks and priorities , what stands out for many in the case of argentina is the sense that policy choices have introduced major distortions in the economy and that deteriorating external accounts , among other factors , are increasing the risk of financial crisis , particularly if history is any judge . trade protection , managed exchange rates , and capital controls are policy adjustments required to address problems that materialize in a constrained economic system ( eg , subsidy - driven fiscal expansion , price controls , inability to borrow internationally ) that cannot easily accommodate current account deficits , a market exchange rate , or standard macroeconomic responses to combat high inflation . among the more obvious policy corrections would be to introduce more flexibility in the exchange rate , ease away from an expansionist monetary policy , and begin correcting fiscal deficits . in their absence , argentina increases the risk of eventually experiencing a more serious economic adjustment . it may be premature , however , to foretell the demise of the argentine economy . despite increasing bottlenecks , thresholds that predict collapse so far appear not to have been breached for inflation , current account and fiscal balances , or debt , and argentina has shown a proclivity for surviving economically . the expected strong soy crop for 2013 and absence of external shocks may allow the argentine government to continue with the current economic program for some time . even if there were a desire for a policy correction in buenos aires , however , it could be difficult to implement and still avoid a "hard landing" and attendant political and social ramifications . in fact , it may be that a change in policy toward foreign stakeholders will not occur until either a new government takes office , a new crisis erupts in the wake of large and unsustainable macroeconomic distortions , or both . international stakeholders , both public and private , find themselves challenged by this system , along with many argentines . stakeholders , including the united states , criticize argentina for eschewing standard norms of economic behavior and the rule of law , and in response , have sought remedy in national courts and international arbitration , eliminated financial and trade benefits , and previously introduced hardline legislative resolutions . one indication of the breadth of dissatisfaction over argentina's policies is the call for effectively removing argentina from the g - 20 , despite the lack of precedent and formal procedure for doing this . notwithstanding these initiatives , argentina has not been moved to change course , and the 113 th congress may decide to consider once again u.s. options for addressing bilateral concerns with argentina . u.s. - argentine economic relations have long history of mutually beneficial engagement .