the senate passed s.con.res . 8 on march 23 , 2013 with a vote of 50-49 . in contrast to the house budget resolution , the senate budget resolution maintains all the changes included in the aca , including the aca medicaid expansion and the health insurance exchanges . according to senate budget committee estimates , the senate resolution includes $275 billion in health care savings , which are derived from encouraging health care delivery system reforms ( i.e. , bundled payments or value - based reimbursement programs ) and reducing fraud and abuse . in addition , the senate budget resolution assumes the costs of a permanent fix to the sgr physician payment system and eliminates the medicare sequestration cuts . figure 1 and figure 2 compares the outlays provided for function 550 and function 570 in the president's budget , the house resolution , and the senate resolution . function 550 includes most direct health care services programs , most notably medicaid . other health programs in this function fund anti - bioterrorism activities , national biomedical research , activities to protect the health of the general population and workers in their places of employment , health services for under - served populations , and training for the health care workforce . some of the hhs agencies in this function include the national institutes of health , centers for disease control and prevention , health resources and services administration , and the food and drug administration . the major mandatory programs in this function are medicaid , chip , federal and retirees' health benefits , and health care for medicare - eligible military retirees . 111-148 as amended ) when the center for consumer information and insurance oversight ( cciio ) was established within cms . cms is the largest purchaser of health care in the united states with medicare and federal medicaid expenditures accounting for 29.7% of the total national health expenditures in 2011 . in 2010 , cms provided health insurance to 114 million individuals through medicare , medicaid and chip , which is roughly one in three americans . this report summarizes the president's budget estimates for each section of the cms budget . then , for each legislative proposal included in the president's budget , this report provides a description of current law and the president's proposal . the explanations of the president's legislative proposals are grouped by the following program areas: medicare , medicaid , program integrity , private health insurance , and program management . at the end of each of these sections , there is a table summarizing the estimated costs or savings for each legislative proposal . the cms budget includes a mixture of both mandatory and discretionary spending . however , a vast majority of the cms budget is mandatory spending , such as medicare benefits and grants to states for medicaid . the president's budget estimates that under current law cms mandatory and discretionary net outlays would amount to $845.5 billion in fy2014 . this is an increase of $51.2 billion , or 6.4% , over the estimated net outlays for fy2013 . the president's fy2014 budget increases the baseline for medicare spending by assuming that congress will block a proposed reduction in physician payments .