pursuant to p.l . 113-187 , federal records are defined in 44 u.s.c . ยง3301 as follows: records includes all recorded information , regardless of form or characteristics , made or received by a federal agency under federal law or in connection with the transaction of public business and preserved or appropriate for preservation by that agency or its legitimate successor as evidence of the organization , functions , policies , decisions , procedures , operations , or other activities of the government or because of the informational value of the data in them . according to the congressional reports to accompany p.l . 113-187 , the amended definition of federal record seeks to "shift the emphasis away from the physical media used to store information to the actual information being stored , regardless of form or characteristic. previously , the statutory definition of record included references to certain types of materials or platforms on which records could be created or captured , such as "books , papers , photographs" and "machine - readable formats. the amended definition , instead , refers more generically to "recorded information. records are further defined in the code of federal regulations ( 36 c.f.r . ยง1222 ) , which clarifies that the format or platform used to create the information would not affect whether it would qualify as a federal record . additionally , the archivist of the united states has stated that the system used to create the record should not affect an agency's determination as to whether information qualifies as a record . for example , when federal employees use personal e - mail to conduct official business , the communication is considered a federal record . 113-187 expressly empowers the archivist , in cases where there is disagreement over whether particular materials constitute a federal record , to determine "whether recorded information , regardless of whether it exists in physical , digital , or electronic form , is a record" for purposes of the fra and states that his determination "shall be binding on all federal agencies. nothing in the fra would suggest that an agency would have the authority to override the archivist's final determination . the presidential and federal records act amendments of 2014 also amended the definition of what does not constitute a federal record . pursuant to 44 u.s.c . ยง3301 , as amended , neither of the following constitutes a federal record: library and museum material made or acquired and preserved solely for reference or exhibition purposes ; or duplicate copies of records preserved only for convenience . pursuant to 36 c.f.r . ยง1220.18 , examples of non - record materials would include copies of information "kept only for reference" and "museum materials intended solely for reference or exhibit. if an agency cannot clearly determine whether an item is a record , nara's regulations require the agency to treat the item as a record . as noted earlier in this report , pursuant to provisions in the presidential and federal records act amendments of 2014 ( p.l . 113-187 ) , in any case where the archivist determines recorded material to be a record , that final determination is binding on the agency .