some potential issues are described below . the atr rule may also affect the gses . in its report , corelogic argues that the "irony of the [temporary agency / gse qm option] is that it reinforces the role that the gse's play in the market , making it harder to enact gse reform. offering qm status to loans that meet the gses' underwriting standards , some argue , reinforces the dominant role that the gses play in the market . others argue that the final rule may reduce some of the uncertainty that has prevented private capital from entering the mortgage market and partially displacing the gses . prior to the release of the final rule , some argued that the regulatory uncertainty about what would be included in the final rule may have been one of the factors that discouraged private capital from entering the housing finance system . an analysis of the final rule by deloitte argues that the "rule may remove many of the uncertainties to the private - label securitization market and mortgage - backed securities. while other factors may prevent private capital from returning , finalizing the atr rule may reduce one potential barrier . in response to the final rule and as part of its effort to reduce the gses' role in the housing finance system , the regulator and conservator of the gses , the federal housing finance agency ( fhfa ) , announced that "it is directing fannie mae and freddie mac to limit their future mortgage acquisitions to loans that meet the requirements for a qualified mortgage , including those that meet the special or temporary qualified mortgage definition , and loans that are exempt from the 'ability to repay' requirements. to receive temporary agency / gse qm status , a mortgage must be eligible to be purchased by the gses or insured by the federal government and the mortgage must also satisfy certain product - feature requirements . fhfa's announcement , essentially , aligns the gses' standards with the standards for the temporary agency / gse qm option listed in table 1 , especially for the first three rows . the gses , therefore , will not purchase loans subject to the atr rule if the mortgage is an interest - only loan , is negative amortizing , has points and fees above the caps , or has a term longer than 30 years . the gses will continue to purchase some mortgages that have dti ratios above 43% . similar to the federal reserve's 2011 proposed rule , the cfpb based its definition of "rural" for " balloon mortgages in rural or underserved areas " off of the usda's urban influence codes ( uics ) . uics are a way of classifying counties into 1 of 12 categories "depending on the size of the largest city and town in the county. the federal reserve proposed a relatively restrictive definition of rural that would have included 4 of the 12 uics and resulted in 2.3% of the u.s. population ( based on the 2000 census ) deemed to be in a rural area . the cfpb's final rule uses a broader definition of rural that includes additional uic categories and results in 9.7% of the population included in rural areas .