114-190 are summarized below . despite the fact that the 15 largest u.s. airlines' on - time arrival rate was nearly 80% in calendar year 2015 , flight delays and cancellations continue to be a prevalent passenger complaint to dot . in 2015 , there were about 6,433 such complaints in total , accounting for nearly 32% of all complaints . mishandled baggage , problems with reservations , ticketing , and boarding , customer service , and refunds are also among the most frequent complaints ( see figure 1 ) . while dot continues to receive many complaints about mishandled baggage , improved tracking systems have helped u.s. air carriers reduce the proportion of bags that are lost or sent to the wrong destinations . in 2015 , the u.s. carriers reported 4.04 mishandled bags per 1,000 passengers , which was among the lowest annual rates of mishandled baggage since dot first collected data on the subject in 1987 . airline flight delays and cancellations were addressed in a final rule issued in december 2009 by dot , "enhancing airline passenger protections. the rule expanded on previous regulations to address tarmac delays and chronically delayed flights and to require greater information disclosure to consumers . while language in the faa extension , safety , and security act of 2016 ( p.l . 114-190 ) alters how tarmac delays are measured , the rest of the tarmac delay rule is unaffected by the statutory change . the existing rule requires large u.s. carriers to provide assurance that they will not permit an aircraft to remain on the tarmac for more than three hours without providing passengers an opportunity to deplane . an air carrier's failure to comply subjects the carrier to civil penalties of up to $32,140 per passenger . this final rule contains the following mandates: each air carrier is required to develop and implement a contingency plan for lengthy tarmac delays . each contingency plan must include an assurance that , for domestic flights , the air carrier will not allow a tarmac delay to exceed three hours unless the pilot - in - command determines there is a safety - related or security - related impediment to deplaning passengers , or unless air traffic control has advised the pilot - in - command that deplaning would significantly disrupt airport operations . the plan must include assurance that adequate food and water will be provided within two hours after the aircraft leaves the gate , as well as assurance of operable lavatory facilities and adequate medical attention . for international flights , air carriers must commit to a set number of on - tarmac hours to be determined by air carrier and set forth in its plan . the tarmac delay rule took effect for domestic flights in april 2010 . there has been a significant reduction in lengthy tarmac delays since the rule was published . in 2014 , airlines reported the lowest number of tarmac delays longer than three hours on record — 30 domestic flights with tarmac delays longer than three hours and 9 international flights with tarmac delays longer than four hours at u.s. airports .