what are its current efforts in bangladesh ? what are possible unintended consequences for bangladeshi apparel workers if action leads to a decline in the apparel industry ? leading up to passage of the 2014 national defense authorization act , the house bill contained a provision ( sec . 634 ) that would have required the defense commissary system and the exchange store system to: ( a ) comply with requirements of the bangladesh accord ; and ( b ) in its purchases , give preferences to signatories of the accord . in addition , the department of defense would have been required to notify congress of garments sold in defense commissaries or exchanges that did not comply with these requirements ( i.e. , were manufactured by nonsignatories ) . the final agreement did not include these provisions . the house sponsors of the amendment noted in a joint statement that garments and documents with u.s. marine insignia were found in the rubble in the november 2012 bangladesh tazreen fire . data indicated that the army - air force exchange , a military retailer , imported 124,000 pounds of garments from several factories in bangladesh . the sponsors argued that "as a huge purchaser of garments , the u.s. military should not be complicit" in putting the lives of bangladesh workers at risk . this appendix compares key provisions of the bangladesh accord and the bangladesh alliance . both plans build on bangladesh's "national tripartite action plan on fire safety ( nap ) for the ready - made garment sector in bangladesh," released in july , 2013 . this plan , jointly agreed to by the government of bangladesh , employer organizations , and worker organizations , with help from the international labor organization ( ilo ) , is a consolidation of two earlier tripartite plans . it focuses on legislation and policy , administration , and practical activities to improve safety in apparel factories . are there other steps the u.s. government should take ? how much progress have the accord and the alliance achieved so far in promoting safety workplaces in bangladesh ? will the ilo be monitoring the implementation of changes to bangladeshi labor law ? the accord and the alliance plans are similar in some regards . both plans require health and safety committees in all bangladesh factories that supply companies that are signatories . both plans require inspections and remediation of hazards , and training of management and workers , in accordance with bangladeshi law . they differ , however , in their approach to worker protections . under the accord , signatories are obligated to require suppliers to extend certain rights to workers , including the right to refuse work they justifiably believe to be unsafe , and the right to a continued employment relationship and income , while the factory is undergoing required safety improvements . under the alliance , workers are not given these rights directly . rather , they are "empowered" to report safety hazards ; and 10% of a fund contributed to by the signatories is reserved to support workers temporarily displaced because of factory remediation . because the programs are still in their early stages of implementation , no reports have yet been issued estimating the effects of either plan .