crs legal , policy , and research expert . the legislation passed the senate on september 10 , 1996 . please note , crs has not verified the information in these resources . in researching these cases , those less accustomed with court proceedings may encounter unfamiliar terms . below are definitions , taken from black's law dictionary , ninth edition , for some common words used in litigation . in march 2000 , california citizens passed proposition 22 , adding section 308.5 to the family code , which reads "only marriage between a man and a woman is valid or recognized in california. on may 15 , 2008 , the california supreme court found the statute to be unconstitutional and issued their opinion in re marriage cases , 183 p. 3d 384 ( cal . listed below are existing crs products on the defense of marriage act , litigation , and related policy issues . additional titles are available on the crs.gov website , http: / / www.crs.gov , by searching or browsing the civil rights and discrimination issues in focus page . listed below are useful secondary sources related to same - sex marriage . on november 4 , 2008 , california citizens passed proposition 8 , which added new section 7.5 to article i of the california constitution , and reads "only marriage between a man and a woman is valid or recognized in california. below are links to selected resources from the california secretary of state that offer history and further information on california proposition 22 and proposition 8 . in addition to the cases above , information is provided on five other cases in which a petition for a writ of certiorari has been filed and that contain legal arguments related to the same - sex marriage question . the following are selected links to statutes , laws , and cases that are relevant to the issues before the court . it was signed by the president on september 21 , 1996 , and designated p.l . below are links to selected legislative history documents from the 104 th congress on the defense of marriage act . 3396 was introduced in the house of representatives on may 7 , 1996 . the bill was approved by the judiciary committee on june 12 , 1996 , and the house as a whole on july 12 , 1996 . numerous legal challenges have been made to these laws , including petitions of certiorari that have been granted by the united states supreme court in two cases . this collection of resources is intended to assist in responding to a broad range of research questions and requests for assistance related to the same - sex marriage law , and its consequent litigation before the supreme court . 104-199 , the defense of marriage act ( doma ) .