appendix a . history of and detailed data on itemized deductions a concise history of itemized deductions itemized deductions have existed in some form since the creation of the first , permanent , u.s. income tax code in 1913 . tax filers have been able to itemize their deductions since the revenue act of 1913 ( p.l . 63-16 ) , which created the first permanent federal income tax . deductions for interest paid or unexpected casualty losses were early provisions in the federal income tax code because many businesses were sole proprietorships ( i.e. , pass - through entities ) in which the owner was personally liable for the costs of doing business . tax deductions expanded during the post - world war ii period between 1947 and the end of the 1970s . itemized deductions were created for state and local taxes , certain forms of interest , charitable contributions , extraordinary health expenses , and miscellaneous expenses . as a share of personal income , these deductions grew from approximately 3.7% in 1947 to 10% in 1969 , and then leveled off slightly to 9% in 1979 . some say that the growth of these itemized deductions was dampened , in part , due to increases in the standard deduction amount . the standard deduction , which was formerly based on a share of income instead of a set amount adjusted for inflation , grew from a postwar low of 2.4% of income in 1969 to 6.5% of income by 1979 . this growth in the standard deduction reduced incentives for tax filers to itemize , because the value of the standard deduction exceeded the sum of their itemized deductions . the tax reform act of 1986 ( tra86 ) represented one of the most comprehensive tax code changes since the creation of the modern tax code in 1913 . among its main objectives , tra86 sought to "broaden the base" of the individual income tax system , or expand the tax base without raising statutory tax rates , in a way that would provide an equitable distribution of tax reductions among individuals . with regard to the individual income tax code , tra86 included reductions in marginal tax rates , reductions in the number of tax brackets , increase in the standard deduction , and the elimination or reformation of a variety of itemized deductions . within this policy framework , tra86 eliminated some tax deductions and reformed other deductions that were left in the tax code . deductions for state and local sales taxes were eliminated and numerous other deductions ( eg , employee business expenses , travel , and entertainment , and unreimbursed medical expenses ) were limited either through higher thresholds or partial disallowance . for example , tra86 applied restrictions on the dollar amount of the home mortgage that was eligible for interest deduction ( $1 million for married filing jointly / $500,000 for married filing separately ) , and limited the deduction only to a primary or secondary residence . following tra86 , itemized deductions claims decreased in value by about one - quarter , dropping from 11.4% of personal income in 1985 to 9.2% by 1988 .