in viacom intern . inc. , youtube was considered an rcs provider thus also subjecting posted videos to the subpoena requirement . it remains to be seen whether future courts will apply this distinction between cloud - based and traditional forms of electronic communications . several courts , commentators , and government officials alike have called for an overhaul of ecpa , though disagreement may exist as to how to balance the competing interests of the government , the communications industry , and the individual . senator patrick j. leahy , chairman of the senate judiciary committee , observed at a committee hearing that while ecpa is a useful tool for government officials , it is "hampered by conflicting standards that cause confusion for law enforcement , the business community , and american consumers alike. he further observed that "a single e - mail could be subject to as many as four different levels of privacy protections under ecpa , depending on where it is stored and when it is sent. several observers have also opined on perceived flaws in the sca: "it is more complicated than it needs to be . it has sections that are redundant and merely confusing . the absence of a statutory suppression remedy has created significant uncertainty about how the statute works . the sca also offers surprisingly low privacy protections when the government seeks to compel the contents other than unretrieved communications held pending transmission for 180 days or less. the department of justice has also called for changes to ecpa , but has cautioned against the implementation of a heightened standard for accessing electronic communications: congress may wish to consider that raising the standard for obtaining information under ecpa may substantially slow criminal and national security investigations . in general , it takes longer for law enforcement to prepare a 2703 ( d ) order application than a subpoena , and it takes longer to obtain a search warrant than a 2703 ( d ) order . in a wide range of investigations , including terrorism , violent crimes , and child exploitation , speed is often judged to be essential . legislation has been introduced in the 112 th and 113 th congresses , and various measures have been proposed by other entities , to overhaul ecpa . the supreme court once remarked that when an individual "puts something in his filing cabinet , in his desk drawer , or in his pocket , he has the right to know it will be secure from an unreasonable search or an unreasonable seizure. does this proposition hold true today when people turn to digital desk drawers , digital filing cabinets , and digital pockets ? for the most part , many of the protections that apply to the physical world have been transferred to the digital world . in the physical world the contents of letters , telephone calls , and other forms of communication are generally protected by the fourth amendment's prohibition against unreasonable searches and seizures . the limited number of courts reviewing the question have held that the content of internet communications are similarly protected from government searches under the fourth amendment .