, transmission and distribution ) businesses . however , in rto regions , power generators generally compete to sell electricity from their power plants to retail suppliers ( i.e. , a distribution utility or other load serving entity ( lse ) ) via a wholesale electricity market . rtos are the facilitator in this supply and demand process , coordinating the purchase , sale , and delivery of wholesale electricity from seller to buyer . wholesale electricity can theoretically be bought and sold a number of times before it finally is consumed . given the number of transactions that can occur , liquidity is essential to the efficient functioning of competitive markets . a question congress may want to consider is how to judge the success of forward capacity markets as regards customer benefits , and whether a single , ferc - mandated approach on forward capacity markets ( where elected ) would serve to provide clear price signals and market rules ? should the federal supremacy clause apply to ferc - regulated rto markets , or should states in these regions be allowed to incentivize power plants built to address "long - term" electric power needs ? it appears that the rto electricity markets are gradually becoming more financial in nature . physical and financial transactions are being increasingly linked and apparently converging in order to increase liquidity in the markets . examples of this convergence are ftrs , virtual trading , and the "up to congestion" transaction which was "created as a mechanism to provide some price certainty in the day - ahead energy market . customers can specify how much they are willing to pay for congestion... . rtos also seek to maintain power reserves at levels which allow for some unexpected situations ( such as an unplanned power plant outage ) or unexpectedly high demands for power on the system , and to account for the security constraint of maintaining reliability . some regions have a summertime peak demand for electricity , while demand in other regions peaks in the winter . to accomplish sced , rto administrators compare the costs of various power plants which offer their energy for dispatch . these offers to sell are made in price - for - quantity amounts of energy ( which may be submitted on an offer curve reflecting varying levels of generation during an operating day ) in dollars per megawatt - hour ( $ / mwh ) , which the rto matches against bids from loads to purchase varying amounts of energy . the rto then seeks to serve the entire system demand , matching the lowest cost offers at or below the prices that bidders are willing to pay . running a system involving multiple generators bidding to serve multiple increments of load at various hours of the day or night requires a computer - run model to optimize the system , and arrive at the least - cost model for serving the next day's load . in a competitive market , prices for electricity should essentially reflect the underlying forces of supply and demand .