there is not a shortage . assertions of a broad shortage of scientists and engineers are not supported by the data when considering indicators such as employment growth , wage growth , and unemployment rates . more scientists and engineers are needed regardless of the existence of a shortage . historically , federal policies , programs , and investments have contributed to the development of the united states' scientific and engineering workforce . regardless of whether demand currently exceeds supply , increasing the number of u.s. scientists and engineers will increase u.s. innovation , economic performance , and job creation . even if there is not a shortage of scientists and engineers , jobs in many occupations require a higher level of stem knowledge than ever before . students who earn s&e degrees gain thinking skills , problem - solving skills , and stem knowledge that will enable them to be successful not only in s&e occupations , but also in s&e - related careers and in non - s&e fields where they can apply their s&e knowledge and skills . government interventions in the s&e labor market to address perceived shortages may introduce inefficienc i es . federal government efforts to increase the number of scientists and engineers by incentivizing the pursuit of degrees in s&e disciplines and / or increasing immigration quotas may result in less efficient operation of the s&e labor market . for example , too many students may be educated in s&e for the number of jobs available and graduates who find s&e jobs may receive lower salaries . workforce projections are unreliable for predicting shortages . long - term projections for s&e occupations are unreliable . relying on such projections may result in the preparation of too many or too few students with s&e degrees or in mismatches between the students' education and market needs . among the difficulties in making long - term projections are unexpected changes in the mix of industrial output or employment due to technological or market changes , factor substitution ( eg , substitution of capital for labor ) due to changes in prices , changes in retirement behavior , the availability of foreign labor , labor market demographics , and government policies . there may be shortages in certain indu stries , occupations , or fields . shortages may exist in some s&e occupations or for certain employers , for example in new and emerging s&e fields ( eg , nanotechnology ) ; cyclical industries ( eg , aerospace ) ; in fields where foreign scientists and engineers may not be employed due to export control laws ; and for employers otherwise limited , in general or for specific purposes , to using only u.s. citizens . the labor market will resolve such needs . if markets are allowed to operate freely ( i.e. , without government interventions ) , any short - term "shortages" will be resolved as wages equilibrate demand and supply , as the labor supply increases ( eg , as more students earn s&e degrees ) in response to market signals , or through substitution of alternative inputs . the potential adverse consequences of even discrete shortages require government interventions .