the house agreed to h.con.res . 25 on march 21 , 2013 , by a vote of 221 to 207 . the house budget resolution sets general budgetary parameters . among other things , it expresses the desired levels of spending for government health programs over 10 years ( fy2014-fy2023 ) , creates four health care - related reserve funds , and presents a policy statement regarding assumptions about future medicare reforms . the budget resolution includes instructions for reconciliation to eight committees , which are each instructed to develop and report legislation that would achieve a certain dollar amount of deficit reduction . a budget resolution is not intended to establish details of spending or revenue policy and does not provide levels of spending for specific agencies or programs ; it is not a law and is not signed by the president . rather , a budget resolution provides the framework for the consideration of other legislation . while the house budget resolution suggests and assumes certain health care - related policy changes , separate legislation would need to be developed by the committees of jurisdiction , passed by congress , and signed by the president in order for such changes to be made to these federally funded health care programs . in general , the budget proposal , as outlined in chairman ryan's path to prosperity report and in the committee report , suggests a change in the structure of the medicare and medicaid programs ; the repeal of many of the provisions in the patient protection and affordable care act as amended by the health care and education reconciliation act of 2010 ( aca , p.l . 111-152 ) , including those that establish insurance exchanges ; and changes to tort law governing medical malpractice . this crs report provides a synopsis of the health care related changes in chairman ryan's fy2014 budget proposal . this summary is based on the text of the concurrent resolution , the committee report , and the fy2014 path to prosperity report . the collective details are referred to in this report as the "budget proposal" or chairman ryan's proposal . crs provided similar summaries of the health care changes suggested in the fy2013 and fy2012 house budget proposals . medicare is the nation's federal insurance program that pays for covered health services for most persons 65 years old and older and for most permanently disabled individuals under the age of 65 . in fy2013 , the program will cover an estimated 52 million persons at an estimated total cost of $598 billion . cbo estimates that federal medicare spending ( after deduction of beneficiary premiums and other offsetting receipts ) will be about $508 billion in fy2013 , accounting for about 14% of total federal spending and 3% of gdp . medicare is an entitlement program , which means that it is required to pay for covered services provided to eligible persons so long as specific criteria are met . spending under the program ( except for a portion of the administrative costs ) is considered mandatory spending and is not subject to the appropriations process . the medicare program has four parts , each responsible for paying for different benefits , subject to different eligibility criteria and financing mechanisms .