however , they would not necessarily do so . similarly , language prohibiting an agency from terminating a "program , project or activity" ( ppa ) would generally not be construed to bar the agency from terminating contracts for that ppa . the questions and answers in this section provide background information on termination for convenience , including ( 1 ) the legal basis for the government's right to terminate contracts for convenience ; and ( 2 ) the circumstances in which the government may so terminate . the questions and answers in this section discuss the differences between the various types of terminations , and between termination for convenience and other actions that the government could take . in certain cases , though , courts and boards of contract appeals have found breach when the government exercises its right to terminate for convenience . such cases generally involve situations where ( 1 ) the government entered the contract with the intent to terminate it , or ( 2 ) the government purported to terminate the contract for convenience after the contract expired in order to avoid liability under the contract . these findings impliedly or expressly reflect fundamental principles of the common law of contracts . for example , in finding breach when the government entered the contract with the intent to terminate it , courts and boards have described the government's undisclosed intent to terminate as making a "mockery" of its purported assent to the contract . mutual agreement by the parties is fundamental to any contract . similarly , in finding that "retroactive terminations" constitute breach , courts and boards have emphasized that the government "may not use the standard termination for convenience clause to dishonor , with impunity , its contractual obligations. in other words , the government's express or implied contractual right to terminate contracts for convenience expires with the contract , and cannot thereafter be asserted to avoid liability for the government's failure to perform as required during the term of the contract . the anti - deficiency act is a federal statute which generally prohibits the obligation of federal funds in excess of amounts actually appropriated under law . as a result , when a federal agency enters into a contract , the agency must generally have sufficient funds to cover the cost of the contract , plus any liability that may arise if the agency chooses to terminate the contract before it expires . in the case of a typical single - year fixed - price contract , the total recovery by the contractor generally may not exceed the contract price . therefore , it is generally not necessary for an agency to set aside funds for termination liability for such contracts , as the government's liability would be within the amount required to pay for full performance under the contract . however , where the contract gives the agency an option to renew , the contractor may have initial outlays that would not be recouped if the government chooses not to renew beyond the base period of the contract . in order to provide some security for the contractor in these situations , renewable ( i.e.