of these categories , only the fourth is primarily concerned with mental health issues . the sections below provide a more detailed discussion of the scope of this category's two sub - components: adjudication as a mental defective and commitment to a mental institution . if disqualifying information surfaces during the background check , the transfer is not completed . questions about the scope and efficacy of the background checks required during certain firearm purchases have gained prominence following recent mass shootings . these background checks are intended to identify whether potential purchasers are prohibited from purchasing or possessing firearms due to one or more "prohibiting factors," such as a prior felony conviction or a prior involuntary commitment for mental health reasons . operationally , such background checks primarily use information contained within the national instant criminal background check system ( nics ) , maintained by the federal bureau of investigation ( fbi ) , and a particular focus of the debate in congress has been whether the health insurance portability and accountability act ( hipaa ) privacy rule or state privacy laws are an obstacle to the population of nics with prohibiting mental health records . on january 7 , 2014 , the department of justice ( doj ) issued a proposed rule that would clarify the existing regulations related to those who would qualify as "adjudicated as a mental defective" and who have been "committed to a mental institution" for purposes of the gun control act of 1968 . at the same time , the department of health and human services ( hhs ) issued a proposed rule that would clarify when entities that are regulated under hipaa may share certain information with nics . this report provides an overview of prohibiting mental health records under current federal law , and distinguishes those records from other types of mental health information that would not disqualify an individual from purchasing a firearm . this report also provides an overview of nics and discusses potential issues arising from state and federal medical privacy laws that may impede states' efforts to submit prohibiting mental health records to nics . under the gun control act of 1968 ( gca ) , as amended , certain categories of persons are prohibited from possessing , shipping , transporting , and receiving firearms and ammunition . these nine categories of persons who are prohibited include 1. persons convicted of a crime punishable by a term of imprisonment exceeding one year ; 2. fugitives from justice ; 3. individuals who are unlawful users or addicts of any controlled substance ; 4. persons adjudicated to be mentally defective , or who have been committed to a mental institution ; 5. aliens illegally or unlawfully in the united states , as well as those who have been admitted pursuant to a nonimmigrant visa ; 6. individuals who have been discharged dishonorably from the armed forces ; 7. persons who have renounced united states citizenship ; 8. individuals subject to a pertinent court order ; and 9. persons who have been convicted of a misdemeanor domestic violence offense .