the state then must implement the tmdls . as noted above , the cwa also regulates discharges of dredged or fill materials into navigable waters , requiring a federal permit for most discharges . although a wide range of dredge - or - fill discharges are restricted under the cwa , some discharges do not require a permit , for example , materials discharged because of "normal farming , silviculture , and ranching activities. like the npdes permit process , qualified states may administer their own permit programs for discharges in some cases . to do so , the state must submit a description of its proposed program and the legal authority under which it would be administered , that is , state law or interstate compact . epa established the chesapeake bay tmdl in 2010 , which "identifies the necessary pollution reductions from major sources of nitrogen , phosphorus and sediment across delaware , maryland , new york , pennsylvania , virginia , west virginia , and the district of columbia and sets pollution limits necessary to meet applicable water quality standards in the bay and its tidal rivers.... " the tmdl goal is to have implementation plans in place by 2025 , with more than half of the planned actions in place by 2017 . the chesapeake bay tmdl is a compilation of smaller tmdls for 92 individual segments of the chesapeake bay and its tributaries . under the tmdl , epa requires a 25% reduction in nitrogen , a 24% reduction in phosphorus , and a 20% reduction in sediment in the chesapeake bay watershed . the reductions are divided among the jurisdictions and major river basins within the watershed . epa has stated that "beginning in 2012 , jurisdictions ( including the federal government ) are expected to follow two - year milestones to track progress toward reaching tmdl goals. epa will review such progress , and , if it determines a jurisdiction's actions have been insufficient , epa has indicated it will use its authority to "take appropriate contingency actions to ensure pollution reductions. such actions could include increased federal oversight of state programs , requiring additional reductions , increasing federal enforcement measures , redirecting federal grants , or revising water quality standards . further legal challenges have followed epa's issuance of the tmdl in december 2010 . like the previous agreements , chesapeake 2000 identified a variety of goals for the various resources in the bay and a number of specific actions and deadlines to meet those goals through 2010 . chesapeake 2000 acknowledged that despite efforts to reduce pollution , portions of the bay had been listed as impaired under the cwa because applicable water quality standards have not been attained . the parties agreed to implement a process that would integrate the bay programs and improve water quality before further regulatory actions , that is , a tmdl , would be required by the cwa . despite several decades of activity by federal and state governments , the private sector , and the general public , efforts to improve the chesapeake bay watershed have been insufficient to meet agreed - upon restoration goals .