under agreement , h.r . 1765 under suspension of the rules . 1765 , being identical in content to s. 853 , was presented to the president on april 30 , 2013 , and was enacted on may 1 , 2013 , becoming p.l . faa halted furlough actions even before the bill was signed by president obama . this report provides a brief overview of faa's implementation of the sequester in april 2013 , as it relates to air traffic control operations and staff furloughs . it then considers the congressional response , including the potential impact of the funds transfers authorized under p.l . 113-9 on faa's airport improvement program ( aip ) . sequestration under the american taxpayer relief act of 2012 did not affect all federal aviation administration ( faa ) functions . faa's grants for airport improvements , which are subject to obligation limitations , are statutorily exempt from the sequester cuts . faa's other functions faced significant spending reductions . faa interpreted the law as requiring it to reduce spending proportionately in all accounts other than airport grants . in response , faa implemented agency - wide furloughs of employees , including air traffic controllers , beginning april 21 , 2013 . faa employees were told they would be required to take 11 furlough days through the remainder of fy2013 . faa employs about 45,000 people in a variety of functions . different faa components implemented various approaches to designating furlough days . faa's air traffic organization , which includes both air traffic controllers and the technicians and engineers who maintain the air traffic control system , implemented rolling furloughs among its 33,000 employees to minimize staffing impacts to flight operations . following negotiations with the union representing controllers , faa agreed that all air traffic controllers nationwide would be required to take one unpaid furlough day in each two - week pay period , irrespective of the workload or potential impact of reduced staffing at a particular facility . faa implemented various air traffic management initiatives to mitigate impacts of the reduced staffing due to furloughs , including increased aircraft spacing , which reduces the number of flights an airport can handle in a given period . these measures led to delays during the first week of reduced staffing , most noticeably in the new york city area and at dallas - fort worth , las vegas , chicago , and tampa airports . in total , delays related to staffing reductions appear to have affected about 3% - 4% of flights , with some acute delay impacts occurring in congested airspace , particularly in the new york city area . airlines warned that prolonged furloughs and associated delays could impact revenues , but this could be offset somewhat by lower fuel prices . also , in response to the furlough delays , airline advocacy groups sought exemption from the department of transportation's tarmac delay rules , which generally require airlines to allow passengers to disembark from aircraft delayed more than three hours and carry fines for airlines that fail to comply .