bank shareholders may benefit from this . deregistration involves a reduction in the amount of public information that is available about a corporation's operations . because of this , such entities run the risk of being perceived as having "something to hide. potential reduction in available capital from stock buybacks . one bank deregistration strategy may entail reducing the number of an entity's shareholders by purchasing their stock . certain transactions and securities are exempted from the registration requirements . exempted transactions include private placements , intrastate offerings , and small offerings . the sec may , by rules and regulations , exempt any class of securities if it finds that such an exemption is in the public interest and the issue of securities does not exceed $5 million . among other exempted securities are government securities and short - term commercial paper , securities for which it is believed that other , adequate means of government regulation exist . the securities exchange act of 1934 ( the 1934 act ) addresses many different areas , one of which is the ongoing process of disclosure to the investing public through the filing of periodic and updated reports with the sec . any issuer that has a class of securities traded on a national securities exchange or has total assets exceeding $1 million and a class of equity securities with at least 500 or 750 shareholders , depending upon certain factors , must register with the sec . every issuer required to register under the 1934 act must file periodic and other reports with the sec . greater potential of bank fraud that could harm shareholders . investor advocates such as officials from the council of institutional investors , an association of large investors , say that unregistered entities are legally able to avoid the provision of material disclosures about themselves to the public through the sec . they have concerns that this more opaque disclosure environment can lead to a greater likelihood of bank fraud , which may ultimately harm bank shareholders . such concerns may take on added currency given reports that in the context of depository institutions in general , small banking and savings and loan institutions are reportedly experiencing a disproportionate amount of financial stress . others , such as the independent community bankers of america , argue that financial prudential regulators such as the federal deposit insurance corporation and the federal reserve already regulate and oversee many banks to ensure safety and soundness and that sec registration is essentially unnecessary . considerable research exists on the importance of required sec financial disclosures by sec registered entities for the investment decisions of institutional investors , professional investors , and retail investors . a caveat is that this research has generally not involved entities that were also subject to other extensive and publicly available reporting requirements such as the disclosures to financial regulators required of bhcs and slhcs . some experts outside of the banking industry have also argued that from an investor information standpoint , there is redundancy between the disclosures required of sec - registered entities and the financial regulatory disclosures required of depository institutions . shareholder perception problems .