, the concurrent resolution ( h.con.res . , and the simple resolution ( h.res . bills and resolutions falling into this category that saw floor action in the 112 th congress include the following: order of business resolutions: procedural resolutions reported by the house committee on rules affecting the "rules , joint rules , and the order of business of the house" are , themselves , privileged for consideration under clause 5 of house rule xiii . order of business resolutions are commonly known as "special rules," and are discussed below in more detail . committee assignment resolutions: under clause 5 of house rule x and the precedents of the house , a resolution assigning members to standing committees is privileged if offered by direction of the party caucus or conference involved . correcting enrollments: under clause 5 of house rule xiii , resolutions reported by the committee on house administration correcting errors in the enrollment of a bill are privileged . providing for adjournment: under article i , section 5 , clause 4 , of the constitution , neither house can adjourn for more than three days without the consent of the other . eighty - five percent of measures brought up by suspension of the rules originated in the house . the most common type of measure brought up in the house as "privileged business" during the 112 th congress was special orders of business ( special rules ) reported by the rules committee , followed by resolutions assigning representatives to committee . when only lawmaking forms of legislation are considered , 72% of measures receiving house floor action in the 112 th congress were sponsored by republicans , 27% by democrats , and .004% by political independents . the ratio of majority to minority party sponsorship of measures receiving initial house floor action in the 112 th congress varied widely based on the parliamentary procedure used to raise the legislation on the house floor . special rules enable the house to consider a specified measure and establish the terms for its consideration . for example , how long the legislation will be debated , what , if any amendments may be offered to it , and whether points of order against the measure or any amendments to it are waived . under clause 1 ( m ) of house rule x , the committee on rules has jurisdiction over the "order of business" of the house , and it reports such procedural resolutions to the chamber for consideration . in current practice , although a relatively small percentage of legislation comes before the house via special rule , most measures that might be characterized as significant , complicated , or controversial are brought up in this way . in the 112 th congress , 137 measures , or 15% of all legislation receiving house floor action , were initially brought before the chamber under the terms of a special rule reported by the rules committee and agreed to by the house . of these , 124 ( 91% ) were bills or joint resolutions and 13 ( 9% ) were simple or concurrent resolutions .