a related measure , h.r . 1295 , which includes agoa reauthorization among other tariff reforms , passed the house and senate in different forms requiring the two chambers to resolve the differences in the bill before it can be sent to the president and become law ( see " proposed renewal legislation " section for details ) . among the products that qualify for this duty - free treatment , apparel products have particular economic significance for several countries , in part due to special provisions granted to least - developed agoa countries ( " third - country fabric provision " ) . since 2001 , $5 billion has been allocated to tcb funding in agoa countries by various u.s. government agencies , particularly usaid and mcc . a range of ideas have been proposed to modify agoa's eligibility criteria . for example , some argue that the existing criteria increase investor uncertainty , putting firms and workers at risk of shutdowns due to government actions beyond their control . others see these as an effective tool and some support additional criteria in areas ranging from the business environment to worker rights . excluding energy products , u.s. preferential imports from south africa totaled $3.1 billion in 2014 , accounting for 70% of all such u.s. imports from ssa . other top non - energy exporters under agoa / gsp in 2014 were the major apparel producers: kenya ( $423 million ) , lesotho ( $289 million ) , mauritius ( $227 million ) , and swaziland ( $77 million ) , as well as cote d`ivoire ( $70 million ) and malawi ( $60 million ) , who exported primarily cocoa products and tobacco under the preference programs , respectively . aside from these top countries , however , the preferences were not heavily utilized . u.s. preferential imports were less than $1 million for over half of the 40 agoa beneficiary countries in 2014 . through agoa congress set out to improve the economic development of ssa and increase u.s. trade ties with the region . a handful of countries have made strong use of the preference program and have increased employment in economic sectors that benefited from duty - free treatment under agoa . for example , the government of lesotho , one of the major apparel exporters under agoa , estimates that employment in manufacturing rose from 19,000 in 1999 to 45,700 in june 2011 . u.s. imports from ssa under agoa and gsp are heavily concentrated in a few countries . one related goal included in the original agoa legislation mandates that the administration seek out possible fta partners among ssa nations . subsequent negotiations with south africa and its regional partners in sacu began in 2003 , but were ultimately unsuccessful and postponed indefinitely in 2006 . the european union ( eu ) , however , successfully concluded an economic partnership agreement ( epa ) with south africa and other countries in the region , providing reciprocal preferential tariff treatment to eu exports , though these agreements exclude a range of products .