appendix b . composition of the thud funding bill budget concepts relevant for thud the numbers cited in discussions of the thud appropriations bills can be confusing . the report ( s.rept . 113-45 ) accompanying the senate appropriations committee - passed bill , s. 1243 , included language that rejects the administration's proposal . table 7 presents appropriations levels for the various related agencies funded within the transportation , hud , and related agencies appropriations bill . the neighborhood reinvestment corporation , commonly known as neighborworks america , is a government - chartered non - profit corporation that supports a national network of local organizations that engage in a variety of community revitalization and affordable housing activities by providing those local organizations with grants , training , and technical assistance . most of the programs and activities in the thud bill are funded through regular annual appropriations , also referred to as discretionary appropriations . this is the amount of new funding allocated each year by the appropriations committees . appropriations are drawn from the general fund of the treasury . for some accounts , the appropriations committees provide advance appropriations , or regular appropriations that are not available until the next fiscal year . in some years , congress will also provide emergency appropriations , usually in response to disasters . these funds are sometimes provided outside of the regular appropriations acts — often in emergency supplemental spending bills — and are generally provided in addition to regular annual appropriations . although emergency appropriations typically come from the general fund , they may not be included in the discretionary appropriation total reported for an agency . most of the department of transportation's budget is derived from contract authority . contract authority is a form of budget authority based on federal trust fund resources , in contrast to "regular" ( or discretionary ) budget authority , which is based on the resources of the general fund of the treasury . contract authority for dot is generally derived from the highway trust fund and the airport and airways trust fund . congressional appropriators are generally subject to limits on the amount of new non - emergency discretionary funding they can provide in a year . one way to stay within these limits is to appropriate no more than the allocated amount of discretionary funding in the regular annual appropriation act . another way is to find ways to offset a higher level of discretionary funding . a portion of the cost of providing regular annual appropriations for the thud bill is generally offset in two ways . the first is through rescissions , or cancellations of unobligated or recaptured balances from previous years' funding . the second is through offsetting receipts and collections , generally derived from fees collected by federal agencies . when the appropriations committee subcommittees are given their "302 ( b ) allocations" — that is , when the total amount that the appropriations committee has to spend for a fiscal year is divided among the subcommittees — that figure includes only net discretionary budget authority ( non - emergency appropriations , less any offsets and rescissions ) ; contract authority from trust funds is not included .