reform tva . since its creation in the 1930s during the great depression , the federally owned and operated tennessee valley authority ( tva ) has been producing low - cost electricity and managing natural resources for a large portion of the southeastern united states . tva's power service territory includes most of tennessee and parts of alabama , georgia , kentucky , mississippi , north carolina , and virginia , covering 80,000 square miles and serving more than nine million people . tva is a self - financing government corporation , funding operations through electricity sales and bond financing . the tva act would likely have to be revised to allow other or competing entities to supply power in tva's service territory to make up for lost tva generation . tva's electric power mission requires that "power shall be sold at rates as low as are feasible. largely because of this directive , tva's electric rates have been among the lower rates for electricity . however , given tva's projected capital requirements identified by the irp process , and tva's statutory limit on indebtedness , congress may want to consider: whether to amend the tva act , allowing tva to sell ( either in whole or in part ) its wholesale power at market - based rates . such an option may modify the mission to provide power at costs as low as possible , but may reduce the need for tva to finance some portion of its future power plant construction needs , and thus may reduce tva indebtedness . the administration has stated its belief that tva has achieved its original objectives , and these original objectives no longer require federal participation . however , keeping tva as a federal government corporation appears to be the preference of most tva stakeholders . in looking at the issue , congress may want to: allow tva to continue as it does , funding its needs from operating revenues , power program financing , and creative approaches to financing new power plant construction . no change to the current mission of tva would be made . however , given the ongoing strategic review , some type of administrative determination may be required at some point to ensure that tva has the means to capably address its projected future cost obligations . redefine tva's status and designation as a government corporation . since tva debt securities are not obligations of the u.s. government and do not carry a government guarantee , tva's current indebtedness has arguably little or no real impact on the federal budget . since no single definition of "government corporation" currently exists , a potential definition of a new "self - sustaining" entity may be designed to remove tva's indebtedness from the balance sheets of the federal government . new legislation would likely be required . among other implications , such an approach is likely to increase tva's financing costs , since any perceived backing of tva's debt by the federal government would be removed . consider modifying tva's missions .