what would be an acceptable cost ? the basic premise of the campaign is to build up competent afghan forces ( ansf ) , while reducing the scale of the insurgent threat to proportions that those afghan forces can manage in the future with very limited support from the international community . by most afghan and coalition accounts , the basic logic of the campaign has proven to be sound — based on the overall improvement of afghan forces , degradation of the insurgency , and adaptation by coalition forces . indeed , many observers contend that if the campaign were not working , it should be discontinued immediately — not gradually — given its high cost in terms of lives and resources . in 2013 , most isaf and afghan commanders envisaged a further trajectory for the campaign in which coalition forces would continue to play supporting roles beyond the end of the nato isaf mission , but those roles would be ever more tailored in scope and smaller in scale . at the same time , debates continued among the afghan government , the u.s. government , and nato , about possible parameters for a u.s. "enduring presence" after 2014 , and a follow - on , post - 2014 nato resolute support effort that would succeed nato's isaf mission . while both the internal debates and the broader public discussions about them tended to fixate on a single number of troops , more fundamentally at stake is the purpose of any post - 2014 presence , including missions , authorities , and duration . in a word , what more would need to be done ? two broad roles — enabling and advising — are frequently mentioned as components of any post - 2014 coalition engagement . most observers agree that while campaign progress may deliver security gains , the longer - term sustainability of those gains will depend on key facets of the broader strategic landscape , including governance , economics , pakistan and the region , and whether and how the war is brought to a close . at issue is what it would take in each of these areas , at a minimum , to protect security gains and make them sustainable . looking ahead , some suggest that it is much easier , and in many ways more reassuring , to picture afghanistan two years out than to try to visualize it five years out . two years out , it is not hard to imagine an afghanistan — though still beset with great challenges — that enjoys an ever more competent ansf , ever more reliant on its own enablers ; better security in population centers and along commerce routes ; and a new political leadership enjoying some sort of a honeymoon period . how consonant are the ways and means currently being employed with those declared goals and objectives ? to what extent if any might longer - term u.s. and international commitments balance the risks associated with near - term disengagement ? given the full panoply of u.s. national security interests and broader concerns , what should be the relative priority of afghanistan and its region , between now and 2014 , and after 2014 , for the u.s. government ?