none of these bills were enacted . in the 113 th congress , the house judiciary committee and the full senate have acted on separate bills that address foreign agricultural workers . both bills , among other provisions , would establish new temporary agricultural worker visas . the house judiciary committee ordered reported the agricultural guest worker act , or the ag act ( h.r . 1773 ) , which would create a new h - 2c nonimmigrant agricultural worker visa , and the senate passed a comprehensive immigration reform bill , the border security , economic opportunity , and immigration modernization act ( s. 744 ) , which would establish new w - 3 and w - 4 nonimmigrant visas for agricultural workers . while the new agricultural worker visas proposed in the house and the senate measures are different from one another , they share some similarities that distinguish them from both the existing h - 2a visa and the reforms to the h - 2a visa proposed in agjobs legislation considered in past congresses . both the house and the senate bills would sunset the h - 2a visa program . among the new features of the house - proposed and the senate - proposed replacement agricultural worker visa programs , these visas , unlike the h - 2a visa , would not be limited to temporary or seasonal agricultural work and would not require prospective employers to apply to the department of labor for labor certification or to meet all existing certification requirements . both programs also would provide for at - will employment by agricultural workers . in addition , both the house and the senate agricultural worker proposals include provisions to enable certain unauthorized aliens to obtain legal temporary or permanent immigration status . 1773 , as ordered reported by the house judiciary committee , would establish a new h - 2c agricultural worker visa . an employer seeking to employ h - 2c workers would be required to recruit u.s. workers by submitting the job opportunity to the local state workforce agency for posting on the agency website for 30 days . the employer would have to offer the job to any qualified u.s. worker who applies before the first day that an h - 2c worker begins work for the employer . to import an h - 2c worker , the employer would file a petition with the u.s. department of agriculture ( usda ) containing specified attestations concerning u.s. worker recruitment , worker benefits and wages , and other issues . among these attestations , the employer would have to assure that he or she will provide the same minimum benefits , wages , and working conditions to all workers employed in jobs for which the employer is seeking to hire h - 2c workers and to other temporary workers in the same occupation at the place of employment . with respect to wages , an employer petitioning for h - 2c workers would have to pay the greater of the prevailing wage rate or the applicable federal , state , or local minimum wage . a petitioning employer also would have to guarantee to offer workers employment for at least 50% of the anticipated employment period .