cost . consideration of cost is often a part of decisions regarding scope , implementation dates , reporting requirements , and other elements of a supply chain security system . issues raised include who bears the cost ( eg , manufacturer , patient , government , distributors , dispensers ) ; what the cost would be given current technology and systems ; and what it might be if new products are developed in response to new requirements . federal and state jurisdiction . there seems to be general agreement that a uniform set of national standards has advantages over a patchwork of varying state requirements . however , the requirements in federal legislation might preempt state law and regulation . those who favor the more extensive requirements that some states ( such as california ) have enacted would prefer that federal requirements be a floor upon which states could choose to build . as drug production has shifted to a global supply chain of manufacturers , processers , packagers , importers , and distributors , fda leadership , among others , has suggested that the agency's current statutory authority does not match its responsibilities to ensure that the nation's drug supply is secure . in april 2013 , fda's dr. woodcock testified , a robust track - and - trace system , in which each drug produced would be tracked as it passes through the distribution system and allows purchasers to verify its distribution history , would improve the ability to identify and detect potentially harmful products if they enter the supply chain . another potential benefit would be to improve the efficiency of product recalls . imagine a system that enables the distributor or pharmacist to readily determine if they have sold or now have in stock a drug that had been identified as a counterfeit or subject to a recall . they could quickly remove that product from the supply chain , keeping the patient out of harm's way . the only way this can be done effectively is if all supply chain stakeholders participate in the system and if all legitimate products have a way to be identified and tracked as they are distributed from the point of manufacture . many members of the current congress have been trying , as had their predecessors , to craft legislation that could help ( 1 ) keep counterfeit , mishandled , and substandard drugs away from patients ; ( 2 ) maintain clear lines of accountability ; ( 3 ) use appropriate levels of technology and data management ; and ( 4 ) avoid unintentional adverse effects on patients , industry , communication systems , and relationships of all with each other and the states and fda . current congressional attention is on h.r . 3204 , the drug quality and security act , the text of which was released as an agreement by majority and majority leadership of the senate committee on health , education , labor , and pensions and the house committee on energy and commerce on september 25 , 2013 . title ii is the proposed drug supply chain security act . the house passed h.r . definitions . different industries , professions , and statutes use similar terms differently .