2687 note ) . the procedures have the same force and effect as standing house and senate rules and exempt the joint resolution of disapproval from many of the time - consuming steps and obstacles that apply to most measures congress considers . for example , the procedure dictates when a joint resolution may be introduced , specifies its text , limits committee and floor consideration of the measure , prohibits amendments and other motions , and establishes an automatic "hook - up" of joint resolutions passed by both chambers . this report outlines the "fast track" parliamentary procedures that have governed congressional consideration of the recommendations of the brac commission in prior rounds and have been included in the dod's recent requests for authority to conduct a brac round . this section describes the parliamentary procedures that have governed congressional consideration of recent brac commission reports and were included in a legislative proposal dod recently submitted to congress requesting authority for a brac commission round in 2015 . the fact that an expedited legislative procedure is contained in statute does not mean that another law must be enacted to alter it . article i , section 5 , of the constitution gives each chamber of congress the power to determine the rules of its proceedings ; as a result , statutory expedited procedures such as those governing brac can ( like all rules of the house or senate ) be set aside , altered , or amended by either chamber at any time . as several house parliamentarians have observed , a chamber may "change or waive the rules governing its proceedings . this is so even with respect to rules enacted by statute. these changes can be accomplished , for example , by the adoption of a special rule from the house committee on rules , by suspension of the rules , or by unanimous consent agreement . instances of this ability to "rewrite" expedited procedure statutes have occurred during consideration of base closure joint resolutions of disapproval . for example , in the 101 st congress , representative george e. brown jr. introduced h.j.res . 165 , a joint resolution disapproving the recommendations of the 1988 commission on base realignment and closure . under the terms of the 1988 brac statute , the house committee on armed services had to report a joint disapproval resolution prior to march 15 , 1989 , or see it be automatically discharged of its further consideration . the statute further permitted any member , at any time three days after this report or discharge , to make a motion to proceed to the immediate consideration of the resolution . the house , however , "rewrote" these statutory terms as they related to the consideration of h.j.res . on march 21 , 1989 , representative les aspin asked unanimous consent that , notwithstanding the provisions of the brac law , it not be in order to move to proceed to the consideration of h.j.res . 165 prior to april 18 , 1989 . still later , on april 11 , 1989 , a second unanimous consent request laid aside not only the terms of the brac expedited procedure statute but those of representative aspin's march 21 unanimous consent request as well .