additional information about sam is provided below . web - based systems increasingly have become embedded in the federal government's acquisition process , providing the means for collecting , storing , searching , or disseminating a variety of data and other information to the acquisition workforce and other interested parties . this report does not include any agency - specific websites or databases . additionally , it does not include all of the governmentwide online systems associated with government procurement , such as the small business administration's subcontracting opportunities directory and sub - net , or the rfp - ez pilot program . generally , only executive branch agencies are subject to the applicable statutes , regulations , policies , or guidelines that govern the use of the procurement systems covered in this report . many of the systems were designed to facilitate the acquisition process ; some of them also promote transparency . recognizing the potential benefits of integrating certain online procurement systems ( and the catalog for federal domestic assistance ) , gsa has undertaken an effort to consolidate nine systems into the system for award management . it remains to be seen whether efforts to disclose additional procurement information ( such as posting contracts online ) , or to present procurement data in a new portal , or format ( such as proposed in the data act ) , come to fruition . no matter the source of information or data , though , some would argue that access does not necessarily confer comprehension , which may require some knowledge of government procurement . although individual legislative branch or judicial branch agencies might be permitted to use these systems , they are not necessarily required to do so . three websites — central contractor registration ( ccr , which includes federal agency registration ( fedreg ) ) , excluded parties list system ( epls ) , and online representations and certifications application ( orca ) — migrated to sam in july 2012 . none of the three is listed separately in table 1 . each of the five remaining procurement systems slated to migrate to sam at later dates has its own entry in the table . these websites are the electronic subcontracting reporting system ( esrs ) , fedbizopps , fpds - ng , ppirs , and wage determinations online ( wdol ) . the past two decades have seen the federal government take "increasing advantage of technology to improve the efficiency and effectiveness of the acquisition lifecycle , from performing market research to recording contractor performance information. initially , most online acquisition systems were established for the purpose of facilitating and improving the procurement process . contracting officers , and other members of the government's acquisition workforce , post solicitations ( and other documents , such as sources sought notices ) on the federal business opportunities ( fedbizopps ) website . in turn , fedbizopps is a resource for would - be government contractors seeking opportunities to sell their goods or services to the government .