agriculture. ( "standard of identity" broadly refers to establishing definitions and standards for commodities such as honey. ) the 2008 farm bill also contained provisions that generally support honey production . these include , for example , provisions pertaining to the national honey board ( p.l . 110-246 , §§10401-10402 ) ; provisions covering rates for marketing assistance loans for certain commodities , including honey ( p.l . 110-246 , §1202 ) ; and provisions covering certain nutrition title provisions ( such as p.l . additional legislative proposals regarding honey bees and other pollinators have been offered outside of the farm bill debate . in the 113 th congress , representative alcee hastings introduced h.r . 4790 , highways bettering the economy and environment act ( or highways bee act ) . the bill would promote conservation practices on 17 million acres of highway "rights - of - ways" ( managed by state departments of transportation or state dots ) , and would promote native plantings that provide improved habitat , forage , and migratory corridors for pollinators , ground nesting birds , and other small wildlife , as well as encourage reduced mowing and overall maintenance costs to state dots . roadsides are also recognized as a potential habitat for native wildlife , including pollinating insects . the proposed bill language was not included as part of broader transportation legislation considered during the 112 th congress . the bill was also introduced in the 112 th congress as h.r . 2381 , and has been actively promoted by pollinator partnership / north american pollinator protection campaign ( nappc ) . in the 113 th congress , representatives earl blumenauer and john conyers , jr. introduced h.r . 2692 , saving america's pollinators act of 2013 . the bill would suspend registrations of neonicotinoids and ban new registrations of any pesticide for use on "bee attractive plants , trees , and cereals" until the epa determines that the insecticide will not cause "unreasonable adverse effects" on pollinators , including native bees , honey bees , and other beneficial insects , as well as birds and bats . the bill also would require the department of the interior to coordinate with epa in monitoring the health and populations of native bees , and annually report to congress on their health and population status . this bill is in part a response to reports that 50,000 bees were found dead in a suburban shopping - center parking lot in oregon in june 2013 , reportedly due to exposure to pesticides used on trees near the parking lot to control aphids . also in the 113 th congress , representative austin scott introduced h.r . 5447 , which would amend u.s. pesticide laws to provide for expedited registration of pesticides that "improve managed pollinator bee health , including managing resistance to parasitic pests," and for expedited application for a pesticide registration that is "reasonably expected to improve the health of managed pollinator bees , including managing resistance to parasitic pests of managed pollinator bees.