in terms of program administration , p.l . 114-125 allows the associate administrator ( aa ) for international trade to give priority to step proposals from states that have a relatively small share of small businesses that export or would assist rural , women - owned , and socially and economically disadvantaged small businesses and small business concerns . the secretary of commerce chairs the tpcc . sba identifies small businesses interested in export promotion through a combination of informational and financial programs . technically speaking , all of the sba's loan programs can be used by small businesses looking to begin exporting or expand their current exporting operations . indeed , many of sba's loan programs contribute to this mission ( discussed in the " data analysis of performance " section of this report ) . sba has three loan programs that specifically focus on export promotion: export express loan program , which provides working capital or fixed asset financing for small businesses that will begin or expand exporting ; export working capital loan program , which provides financing to support export orders or the export transaction cycle , from purchase order to final payment ; and international trade loan program , which provides long - term financing to support small businesses that are expanding because of growing export sales or have been adversely affected by imports and need to modernize to meet foreign competition . table 2 summarizes the key features of sba's three export promotion - focused loan programs . to encourage the demand for smaller loans , the sba waived the up - front loan guaranty fee and ongoing servicing fee for 7 ( a ) loans ( including export - focused programs ) of $150,000 or less in fy2014-fy2016 ; waived the up - front loan guaranty fee for 7 ( a ) loans of $150,000 or less in fy2017 ; waived 50% of the up - front loan guaranty fee on all non - sba express ( including export express ) 7 ( a ) loans of $150,001 up to and including $5 million in fy2015 and fy2016 ; and waived 50% of the up - front loan guaranty fee on all non - sba express ( including export express ) 7 ( a ) loans of $150,001 up to and including $500,000 in fy2017 . in addition , the veterans entrepreneurship act of 2015 ( p.l . 114-38 ) authorized and made permanent the sba's practice of waiving the sbaexpress loan program's one time , up - front guaranty fee for veterans ( and their spouse ) beginning on or after october 1 , 2015 , except during any upcoming fiscal year for which the president's budget , submitted to congress , includes a subsidy cost for the 7 ( a ) program , in its entirety , that is above zero . in addition to these export promotion - focused programs , sba also supports small business exports through its other business loan programs . these programs include the 504 certified development company ( 504 / cdc ) program , standard 7 ( a ) program , and specialized 7 ( a ) programs ( see the appendix for a brief summary of these loan programs ) .