for example , while h.r . 5 would no longer retain many of the current esea programs , h.r . it is arranged thematically , focusing on key issues that have arisen during the reauthorization process . the themes are as follows: overall structural and funding issues ; accountability ; title i - a ; other issues related to special populations / areas ; teachers , principals , and school leadership ; science , technology , engineering , and mathematics ( stem ) education ; flexibility and choice ; other program areas addressed by current law ; programs currently authorized outside of the esea and proposed for inclusion in the esea ; general provisions ; and key changes included in esea reauthorization bills to non - esea programs / acts . 5 would include a block grant program under which funds could potentially be used for similar activities as were permitted or required under some programs that would not be retained . the uses of funds under the proposed block grant program are discussed in this report . similarly , if an existing program or activity is not specifically mentioned as allowable under a new program , it should not be assumed that funds could not be used to support such programs or activities . 5 as passed by the house . 5 would take different approaches to reauthorizing the esea , most notably in three key areas: ( 1 ) accountability for student achievement , ( 2 ) teacher quality versus teacher effectiveness , and ( 3 ) targeted support for elementary and secondary education versus the use of a block grant . in addition , both s. 1094 and h.r . 5 would eliminate existing programs , while creating new programs . the amended version of h.r . 5 with respect to current law . the report begins by discussing the approach that each bill takes toward reshaping the esea in key areas . next , the report provides a structured orientation by esea title and part of how the esea would be reconfigured under each bill . then it more thoroughly summarizes the major proposals in the bills , focusing on those aspects of the bills that would fundamentally change a portion of current law . the report does not aim to provide a comprehensive summary of these bills or of technical changes that would be made by each measure . the report concludes with an appendix that examines the proposed program authorizations included in each bill . 5 was passed on july 19 , 2013 , by a vote of 221-207 . 5 , the same amount is authorized for each fiscal year from fy2014 through fy2019 . that is , the authorization level is the same for fy2014 as it is for fy2019 . it should be noted that the bills do not authorize programs for the same period of time . given that most of the authorizations in current law and all of the authorizations in s. 1094 are for "such sums as may be necessary," it is not possible to calculate the total amount authorized across current law and s. 1094 . with that said , the total authorized level in h.r . 5 for the esea is $22.8 billion .