this report reviews family - based immigration policy . it outlines a brief history of u.s. family - based immigration policies , discusses current law governing family - based immigration , and summarizes recommendations made by previous congressionally mandated commissions charged with evaluating immigration policy . while the 1952 act largely retained the national origins quota system established in the immigration act of 1924 , it also established a hierarchy of family - based preferences that continues to govern contemporary u.s. immigration policy , including prioritizing spouses and minor children over other relatives , as well as relatives of u.s. citizens over those of lprs . the immigration and nationality act amendments of 1965 ( p.l . 89-236 ) , enacted during a period of broad social reform , eliminated the national origins quota system , which was widely viewed as discriminatory . it gave priority to immigrants with relatives living permanently in the united states . options at this level can generally be characterized as expanding , contracting , or revising family - based immigration . such options revolve around classifying family categories as numerically limited or unlimited , decreasing or increasing current numerical limits , expanding or reducing the number of family preference categories , revising priorities among the different family - based categories , and using different selection procedures and criteria for admitting lawful permanent residents . examples of recent legislative proposals that focus on altering the level of permanent immigration include s. 744 , the border security , economic opportunity , and immigration modernization act introduced in the 113 th congress and s. 1720 , the reforming american immigration for a strong economy ( raise ) act introduced in the 115 th congress . s. 744 , which passed the senate in the 113 th congress , would have , among other things , reclassified spouses and minor unmarried children of lprs as immediate relatives , thus exempting them from family preference numerical limits . it would have reallocated family preference visas and eliminated the 4 th family preference category for adult siblings of u.s. citizens . the bill would have also provided additional visas to allow pending immigrants in the immigrant visa queue to all receive lpr status within seven years . in contrast , the raise act would reduce the number of immediate relative and family preference category immigrants within family - sponsored immigration and eliminate the immigrant visa queue by invalidating most pending immigrant petitions . these two proposals are not the only approaches being considered to address levels of permanent immigration but they illustrate alternative perspectives on the goals of u.s. immigration policy from which these proposals arise . provisions of the 1990 act are described later in this report in the section titled " current laws on family - based immigration . current u.s. immigration policy retains key elements of its landmark 1952 and 1965 reformulations . given that continuity in immigration policy , earlier recommendations for revising family - based immigration policy to address certain perennial issues — in particular , the large "visa queue" of prospective family - based immigrants awaiting a numerically limited visa , and the high proportion of immigrants who enter based upon family ties — still have relevance .