most states have chosen to do so . also significant was rcra's prohibition on waste management practices that constitute open dumping of solid or hazardous waste , under subtitle d. in contrast to its authorities under subtitle c , epa has no authority to directly enforce any regulations it may establish for the management of solid waste under subtitle d. instead , states have primary authority to regulate solid waste . since epa determined that regulation under subtitle c was not warranted , various stakeholders representing environmental , public health , and industry groups have disagreed over whether the exclusion results in risks to human health and the environment . those stakeholders , as well as epa and state regulatory agencies , have disagreed on a wide range of issues , including the level of risk posed by the waste ; whether or not existing state or other federal requirements are adequate to address risks associated with the waste ; the degree to which there are gaps in local or state regulation of the waste ; and whether regulation under subtitle c is an appropriate mechanism to manage the waste . in recent years , issues common to that debate have been raised with regard to two exclusions from subtitle c — the bentsen exclusion for waste generated from natural gas exploration and production ( e&p waste ) , and the bevill exclusion for ccw . with regard to e&p waste , the recent increase in the use of hydraulic fracturing to extract natural gas from shale formations has resulted in a dramatic increase in the generation of associated wastewater . neither the volume nor the nature of wastewater produced during shale gas extraction was considered by epa in its 1988 regulatory determination for e&p waste . that is not to suggest that subtitle c requirements necessarily provide the most appropriate mechanism to regulate such wastewater , but rather details specific to the waste as it is currently being produced were not considered when evaluating whether existing state or other federal requirements were adequate to protect human health and the environment from risks associated with managing the waste . the current approach to managing ccw has also drawn national attention in recent years . in 2008 , a breach in a surface impoundment pond at the tennessee valley authority's ( tva's ) kingston , tn , plant released 1.1 billion gallons of coal fly ash slurry . the release covered more than 300 acres and damaged or destroyed homes and property . four years later , the spill is still being cleaned up , at an estimated cost of $1.2 billion . according to epa , however , a more common risk associated with the improper management of ccw is from the leaching of toxic constituents in the material ( primarily heavy metals such as arsenic , selenium , and lead ) .