unearned aid must be returned to ed . up to the 60% point of a payment or enrollment period , unearned funds must be returned on a pro rata schedule . this is known as the 90 / 10 rule . examples of non - title iv funds include private education loans and some military and veterans' benefits , such as benefits provided under the post - 9 / 11 gi bill program . unearned funds must be returned to their respective programs in a specified order , with loans being returned first , followed by pell grants , and then other title iv aid . in some instances , a student may have earned more aid than has been disbursed , and the difference is disbursed to the student after the student withdraws . generally , distance education and correspondence education refers to educational instruction with a separation in time , place , or both between the student and instructor . it is a way in which institutions can increase student access to postsecondary education by offering alternatives to traditional on - campus instruction . recently , due to the greater availability of new technologies , there has been substantial growth in the amount and types of courses institutions offer . section 103 ( 7 ) ( a ) and ( b ) of the hea and the accompanying regulations define distance education as instruction that uses " ( 1 ) the internet ; ( 2 ) one - way and two - way transmissions through open broadcast , closed circuit , cable , microwave , broadband lines , fiber optics , satellite , or wireless communications devices ; [or] ... ( 3 ) audio conferencing" to deliver instruction to students separated from the instructor . a course taught through a video cassette , dvd , or cd - rom is considered a distance education course if one of the above - mentioned technologies is used to support student - instructor interaction . regardless of the technology used , "regular and substantive interaction between the students and the instructor" must be ensured . correspondence courses are expressly excluded from the definition of distance education . a correspondence course is one for which an institution provides instructional materials and exams for students who do not physically attend classes at the ihe , but does not include those courses that are delivered with "regular and substantive interaction between the students and the instructor" via one of the above - described technologies . in 1992 , partially in response to cases of some correspondence institutions' fraudulent and abusive practices used to attract unqualified students to enroll in programs of poor or questionable quality , congress incorporated provisions referred to as the "50% rules" into the hea . the rules affected both the eligibility of institutions offering correspondence courses and their students' eligibility for title iv aid . in general , under the rules , an institution is ineligible for title iv aid if more than 50% of its courses are offered by correspondence , or if 50% or more of its students are enrolled in correspondence courses .