appx . ยง2074 , section 104 of the dpa that prohibits both the imposition of wage or price controls without prior congressional authorization and the mandatory compliance of any private person to assist in the production of chemical or biological warfare capabilities ; 50 u.s.c . appx . ยง2157 , section 707 of the dpa that grants persons limited immunity from liability for complying with dpa - authorized regulations ; 50 u.s.c . appx . ยง2158 , section 708 of the dpa that provides for the establishment of voluntary agreements ; and 50 u.s.c . appx . ยง2170 , section 721 of the dpa , the so - called exon - florio amendment , that gives the president and cfius review authority over certain corporate acquisition activities . in addition , section 717 ( c ) provides that any termination of sections of the dpa "shall not affect the disbursement of funds under , or the carrying out of , any contract , guarantee , commitment or other obligation entered into pursuant to this act" prior to its termination . this means , for instance , that prioritized contracts or section 303 projects created with dpa authorities prior to september 30 , 2014 , would still be executed until completion even if the dpa is not reauthorized . similarly , the statute specifies that the authority to investigate , subpoena , and otherwise collect information necessary to administer the provisions of the act , as provided by section 705 of the dpa , will not expire until two years after the termination of the dpa . if the dpa were to expire , there are other permanently authorized authorities that may serve as a partial substitute for the title i priorities and allocations authority . most prominently , section 18 of the selective service act of 1948 allows the president to place orders with any person for "articles and materials" and require that person to "give precedence" to that order above all others in the interest of national security . however , as has been discussed in congressional testimony by executive branch officials , this selective service act authority is more limited than the dpa's priorities and allocations authority in that it only applies to orders of materials intended for the armed forces or atomic energy programs ( instead of the broad national defense definition of the dpa ) , and that it does not offer liability protection for recipients of the prioritized orders ( as is offered by section 707 of the dpa ) . additionally , through two more statutes , the president is authorized only in a time of war or when war is "imminent" to place priority orders for supplies necessary for the armed forces , or even assume full or partial control of factories producing such items , so long as persons are justly compensated for their loss . frequently , congress has elected to reauthorize the dpa by extending the termination date provided in section 717 for a limited period , such as a year , without making significant amendments to the overall statute . in other circumstances , congress has reauthorized the law by extending the section 717 date for several years while also amending the other provisions of the law .