health and human serv . , the plaintiffs , three separate associations whose membership included some head start agencies required to compete for new five - year head start grants because of one or more deficiency findings , argued that the single deficiency trigger was invalid on several grounds: ( 1 ) it was impermissibly retroactive because it applied to groups that had already received funding ; ( 2 ) it deprived grantees of their protected property and liberty interests in grant renewals without due process ; and ( 3 ) it was arbitrary and capricious under the administrative procedure act . the federal district court dismissed the challenges on summary judgment , concluding that the head start associations failed on all claims . the court first noted that the drs applies to future grants , not current grants , so it is not retroactive . as to due process , the court ruled that the plaintiffs did not identify a protected property or liberty interest that needed to be protected , and even if they had , the agency provides sufficient constitutional due process . finally , under the administrative challenge , the court held that the rule was not arbitrary or capricious because , while the secretary had to provide a reasonable explanation for why the agency decided not to follow the recommendation of the hhs secretary's advisory committee regarding deficiencies ( i.e. , to re - compete programs with deficiencies equal to or exceeding two standard deviations from the mean ) , it was not foreclosed from going with a single deficiency trigger instead . following this decision , the plaintiffs filed for an injunction to stop hhs from implementing the drs pending appeal . the district court denied the injunction on the grounds that the plaintiffs failed to show any likelihood of success on the merits . the court also held that the plaintiffs could not show that they would suffer irreparable harm if they were not granted the injunction . in addition , the delay would require hhs to expend significant additional resources , and would require a new round of applications and reviews . the plaintiffs appealed the ruling of the district court , and on may 21 , 2013 , a three judge panel of the district of columbia court of appeals affirmed the lower court's ruling without an opinion . hhs has undertaken ( via contract ) an evaluation of the drs to explore how and whether it is meeting goals of "transparency , validity , reliability," and "overall program quality improvement. the evaluation will examine the effectiveness of the drs in differentiating between higher and lower performing grantees and in improving the overall quality of head start programs by the introduction of competition . hhs awarded the evaluation contract in 2012 . the evaluation is slated to run through 2015 . this report provides an overview of the major milestones leading up to the early implementation of the drs . table 1 outlines a chronology of these milestones and serves as a preview to the remainder of the report , which discusses these events and activities in greater detail .