epa uses consent agreements currently . under s. 1009 , epa would be required to justify its use of orders . the proposed legislation would direct epa to develop and use a framework for decision making that incorporates most of the analytic , data quality control , publication , and notice and comment requirements of rulemaking and the information quality act ( section 515 of p.l . under s. 1009 , epa would still be obligated to follow procedures laid out in the administrative procedure act when promulgating a rule but tsca requirements beyond those in the apa would be eliminated . 2601 et seq. ) that would be affected if either bill became law . these provisions are summarized in tables 1 through 6 of this report . neither s. 1009 nor s. 696 would affect titles ii through vi of tsca ( except that s. 696 would change the definition of "asbestos" in title ii ) , nor would they change the basic organization of tsca title i . for example , provisions related to testing would remain in section 4 , requirements for notifying epa when a new chemical or new use is proposed would remain in section 5 , and regulatory authorities would remain in section 6 . also unaffected would be changes to tsca title i that were enacted during the 110 th congress , such as a provision that bans exports of elemental mercury . however , s. 696 would amend or delete most of the original title i provisions and would make substantial additions to the current statute . s. 1009 also would amend tsca title i provisions significantly but without adding most of the new provisions in s. 696 . some key differences between the current statute and the bills are summarized in the following sections . s. 696 , as introduced , would direct the epa administrator to establish , by rule , various "minimum information sets" that would be required for different chemical substances or categories of substances . the bill would direct epa to include in each minimum information set any information that the epa deems necessary for the conduct of a screening - level risk assessment , "sufficient for the administrator to administer this act" with regard to categorization of new and existing chemical substances , assignment of priority classes , and safety standard determinations and redeterminations . s. 696 would require submission to epa of a minimum information set by each manufacturer and processor of a new chemical substance or , as specified by the administrator , of an existing chemical . the bill would authorize epa to require , by rule or order , testing and submission by a specified date of additional results of tests not included in any applicable minimum information set "as necessary for making any determination or carrying out any provision" of tsca . s. 696 would authorize epa , by order , to take regulatory action if a manufacturer or processor failed to submit required information .