persons. the legislation , if enacted , thus would likely supersede the proposed cftc and sec rules on cross - border swaps . instead , the cftc and sec would be required to jointly introduce a new proposed rule on cross border swaps . also , h.r . the cftc issued a proposed rule on august 16 , 2012 , exempting certain inter - affiliate swaps from the requirements of title vii of the dodd - frank act , and a final rule on april 1 , 2013 . the cftc argued in its final rule that it "is not persuaded by comments suggesting that inter - affiliate swaps pose no risk to the financial system. this is because entities that are affiliated with each other remain separate legal entities notwithstanding that affiliation , and as such , are not legally responsible for one another's debts or losses , the cftc stated . the cftc further warned that while aig's collapse was not caused by swaps traded within its affiliates , the events surrounding aig's near - collapse demonstrated how the risks of uncleared swaps at one affiliate could have important ramifications for the entire affiliated business group . ( for more on aig's swaps activities and the financial crisis , see the appendix . ) to address such risks , the cftc's final rule limits the inter - affiliate exemption to cases in which the affiliates are majority owned and their financial statements are consolidated . in addition , the affiliates must be subject to a centralized risk management program . further , the swaps and the trading relationship between the affiliates must be documented , and any outward - facing swaps ( i.e. , with parties not affiliated ) , must be cleared or else qualify for an exemption from the clearing requirement . 677 would create a statutory exemption from the dodd - frank requirements for certain swaps between affiliates , provided that neither affiliate is also a "swap dealer that is an insured depository institution" — among other restrictions . 677 was marked up and ordered to be reported out of the house agriculture committee on march 20 , 2013 , and then marked up and ordered to be reported out of the house financial services committee on may 7 , 2013 . proponents of h.r . 677 have argued that regulatory requirements on swaps between affiliates within an umbrella organization can be burdensome , and that such swaps pose little risk to external parties . critics of h.r . by contrast , collateral arrangements usually require the counterparty to perfect a lien against the collateral . the range of assets allowable under a collateral agreement is usually wider than what is allowed under margining arrangements . settlement of collateral shortfalls tends to be less frequent than under margining arrangements . because there is no universal , mandatory system of margin , large uncollateralized losses could and did build up in the otc market . the best - known example in the crisis was aig , which wrote about $1.8 trillion worth of credit default swaps guaranteeing payment if certain mortgage - backed securities defaulted or experienced other "credit events.