authorization for appropriations under p.l . 108-360 expired in 2009 ; however , congress continued to appropriate funds for nehrp activities during the intervening nine years until enactment of p.l . in 1977 , congress passed the earthquake hazards reduction act ( p.l . 95-124 ) , establishing nehrp as a long - term earthquake hazard reduction program for the united states . the program , led by usgs and nsf , initially focused on research toward understanding and ultimately predicting earthquakes . however , earthquake prediction has proved insoluble over time , and nehrp shifted its focus in 1990 to minimizing losses from earthquakes . prior to passage of p.l . 115-307 , congress last made changes to nehrp under the national earthquake hazards reduction program reauthorization act of 2004 ( p.l . the 2018 nehrp reauthorization act largely leaves the overall program structure in place , but modifies some of the intents and purposes of the original legislation , such as removing references to the goal of earthquake prediction , and substituting instead the goal of issuing early warnings and earthquake alerts . the new law also authorizes appropriations for nehrp activities for each of the four nehrp agencies through fy2023 . agency leadership of nehrp has also changed since the program's inception . fema was created in 1979 under president carter and designated as the lead agency for nehrp . in 1980 , congress passed amendments to the earthquake hazards reduction act ( p.l . 96-472 ) , which defined fema as the lead agency for nehrp . the amendments also authorized additional funding for earthquake hazard preparedness and mitigation for fema and the national bureau of standards ( now nist ) . the 2018 nehrp reauthorization act largely leaves the current four - agency nehrp program intact , while providing some new areas of emphasis and specific authorization of appropriations levels for the member agencies . section 4 of p.l . 115-307 appears to address that question by requiring the comptroller general of the united states to review the activities of the program and produce a report for congress that addresses the earthquake risks and hazards in the nation . the review and report are to examine how federal activities are addressing those risks and hazards , including how states , tribes , and local governments are using nehrp - generated information and implementing measures to reduce their earthquake risk . it is the product of two nearly identical bills: s. 1768 , introduced by senator feinstein on september 6 , 2017 , with seven original cosponsors ; and h.r . 6650 , introduced by representative rohrabacher on august 3 , 2018 , with three original cosponsors . upon introduction , s. 1768 was referred to the senate committee on commerce , science , and transportation , which held a markup on december 13 , 2017 . an amendment in the nature of a substitute , introduced by senator gardner , was accepted by the committee , the bill was reported favorably out of committee , and the senate passed the bill by unanimous consent on september 27 , 2018 . upon introduction , h.r .