the families tend to have young children . 112-34 ) added similar language to facilitate data sharing between child welfare and other programs . in addition , a may 2013 government accountability office ( gao ) report said congress could opt to require states to include in tanf state plans how they will coordinate services between tanf and child welfare programs . questions remain about whether and what policies within tanf should apply to "child - only" families . a 2012 report on "child - only" families from chapin hall at the university of chicago , funded by hhs , raised concerns about each major group: whether tanf assistance to relative caregivers might be an inadequate replacement for foster care , and whether low rates of tanf receipt among potentially eligible families headed by ssi parents or ineligible immigrant parents might not be assuring a minimal standard of living for children in these families . the report did recommend that "explicit attention" be given to each component of the tanf caseload , including separate attention to each of the three major groups of "child - only" families . the may 2013 gao report said a potential option to better understand tanf's role in helping its "child - only" families would be to require states to provide additional information to the federal government about the status and needs of "child - only" families . this information could be provided , for example , in tanf state plans . examining the racial / ethnic makeup of children , hispanic children became the largest group of recipient children by fy2013 . in fy2013 , the share of child recipients who were hispanic was 36.3% , compared with 29.9% who were african american , and 25.8% who were non - hispanic white . the share of the child caseload that is hispanic has grown over time . this reflects their growth as a share of all children in the general population and of all poor children . the incidence of tanf cash assistance receipt among hispanic children and poor hispanic children — like that of children in other racial and ethnic groups — has actually declined over time ( see table a - 3 ) . the vast majority of adult recipients are women . in fy2013 , 85.7% of adult recipients were women . as discussed , family cash assistance has historically been provided to families with children headed by a single mother . the fy2013 percentage is lower than in previous years examined in the table . men slowly increased as a share of the caseload over time , but still remain a relatively small share of the total adult caseload . in fy2013 , 56.6% of all families had a child under the age of six , with 12.0% of all families having an infant . the majority of the caseload is racial or ethnic minorities . this was the case for all years shown in the table . tanf was created in the 1996 welfare reform law ( p.l . 104-193 ) , the culmination of decades of debate over the roles of low - income , single mothers in the home and in the workforce .