appendix . 42 the appendix volume includes detailed budget estimates and financial information for each appropriations account and for selected programs , listed by appropriations account . this includes the proposed text of appropriations language , and explanations of the work that will be performed by the funds provided . the appendix volume also includes recommended language for the general provisions applicable to the appropriations of entire agencies or groups of agencies , such as proposed restrictions on the use of funds and proposed authorities to transfer funds from one account to another . supplemental materials . 44 additionally , presidents' budget submissions have often included supplemental materials , such as legislative proposals for budget process reform , a brief guide to the budget that is intended for members of the public , or a summary of proposed spending reductions or program consolidations . finally , unforeseen circumstances may require the president to modify the recommendations or other information contained in the president's budget submission to congress . under title 31 of the u.s. code , the president may revise the budget recommendations or submit supplemental budget requests to congress at any time during the year . when the president makes new budget recommendations for the current fiscal year , the changes are referred to as "supplementals. changes to the president's proposals for the upcoming fiscal year , however , are referred to as "amendments. under the budget and accounting act of 1921 , the deadline for submission was originally set as "the first day of each regular session" of congress . the deadline was subsequently changed by statute in 1950 , 1985 , and 1990 . the budget and accounting procedures act of 1950 changed the deadline to the 15 th day of each regular session of congress . the balanced budget and emergency deficit control act of 1985 included two changes to the deadline for submission . the first established a deadline of february 5 , 1986 , for fy1987 . the second changed the deadline to the first monday after january 3 beginning with fy1988 . finally , the budget enforcement act of 1990 extended the deadline to the first monday in february of each year . the 1990 change to the deadline for submission , which first applied to fy1992 , made it possible for an outgoing president , whose term ends on january 20 , to leave the annual budget submission to his or her successor . the three outgoing presidents since the fy1992 change — george h. w. bush , william j. clinton , and george w. bush — exercised this option . accordingly , the budget was submitted in 1993 , 2001 , and 2009 by the three incoming presidents ( william j. clinton for fy1994 , george w. bush for fy2002 , and barack obama for fy2010 ) . in each of these three cases , the first budget submission of the incoming president was submitted after the statutory deadline . under current law , the president is required to submit the annual budget on or after the first monday in january , but no later than the first monday in february .