, a period in which no sros were present ) . each of these questions is addressed in this section of the report . why have schools and law enforcement agencies started sro programs ? sro programs have been encouraged by the federal government through grants provided to local jurisdictions . two federal grant programs provided funding for the hiring and placement of law enforcement officers in schools across the country: the cops in schools ( cis ) program and the state formula grants program through the safe and drug free schools and communities act . funding for these programs ended , respectively , in fy2005 and fy2009 . there are some limitations to this study , namely ( 1 ) the reported number of crimes might be influenced by the presence of an sro ; ( 2 ) the sample of schools included in the study is not representative of all schools in the united states ( it over - represents secondary schools , large schools , and non - rural schools ) ; and ( 3 ) the effects of adding sros may be confounded with the installation of other security devices ( eg , metal detectors ) or other security - related policies . the body of research on the effectiveness of sro programs is noticeably limited , both in terms of the number of studies published and the methodological rigor of the studies conducted . the research that is available draws conflicting conclusions about whether sro programs are effective at reducing school violence . in addition , the research does not address whether sro programs deter school shootings , one of the key reasons for renewed congressional interest in these programs . there are logical reasons to believe that sros might help prevent school shootings ; to wit , that someone might not attack a school if he or she knows that there is an officer on - site , or sros developing a relationship with the student body might facilitate reporting of threats made by other students . in addition , placing an officer in a school might facilitate a quicker response time by law enforcement if a school shooting occurs . however , none of the research on the effectiveness of sro programs addresses this issue . the administration requested $150 million in funding for a comprehensive schools safety program as a part of its fy2014 budget request for the cops program . congress appropriated $75 million for a comprehensive school safety initiative under the state and local law enforcement assistance account in the continuing appropriations act , 2014 ( division b , p.l . congress tasked the national institute of justice ( nij ) with developing and implementing the initiative . congress required the nij to collaborate with key partners from law enforcement , mental health , and education disciplines to develop and publish a comprehensive strategy and model for school safety . within the amount provided , $50 million is for pilot programs to improve school safety consistent with the school safety model published by the nij .