eb benefits were not available in any state in fy2014 . in states with a waiting week requirement , an individual's furlough days would need to be spread out across more than one week of unemployment . that is , an individual would need to meet the state's definition of unemployment — including partial unemployment — in more than one week ( i.e. any reduction of ui payments made because of the sequester would have been paid back retroactively . the u.s. dol announced that euc08 benefit payments were to be reduced by 7.2% for benefits paid for weeks of unemployment beginning on october 6 , 2013 , and ending december 28 , 2013 . after december 31 , 2013 , the federal share of eb benefit costs returned to 50% ( and states finance 50% of eb benefits ) . states generally would have been responsible for paying the amount of the eb benefit subject to sequester ( i.e. , making up the 7.2% reduction ) . the office of personnel management ( opm ) states: an administrative furlough is a planned event by an agency which is designed to absorb reductions necessitated by downsizing , reduced funding , lack of work , or any budget situation other than a lapse in appropriations . furloughs that would potentially result from sequestration would generally be considered administrative furloughs . in the event of a furlough , federal employees may become eligible for ui benefits through the unemployment compensation for federal employees ( ucfe ) program . under federal law , ucfe provides income support for laid - off or furloughed federal employees in the same way as under the uc program for other types of workers . eligibility — as well as benefit levels and the waiting period for benefits — under ucfe are determined according to the state laws of the uc program in the state where the federal employee's official duty station was located . as with uc , separated federal employees , including furloughed employees , must have earned a certain amount of wages or have worked for a certain period of time ( or both ) within the previous 12-18 months to be monetarily eligible to receive any ui benefits ( although methods that states use to determine this eligibility vary greatly ) . thus , whether or not a furloughed federal employee may be eligible for ucfe will depend on relevant state uc laws . in particular , two key state law issues factor into this type of ucfe eligibility decision: ( 1 ) the state definition of "partial unemployment" and ( 2 ) whether or not there is a "waiting week" required under state law . under state laws , an individual is generally considered to be partially unemployed in any week with less than full - time work and with earnings of less than the weekly benefit amount , or the weekly benefit amount plus an allowance . for instance , in the district of columbia , an individual is considered partially unemployed if he or she has earnings that are less than the individual's weekly benefit amount plus $20 . furloughed individuals must meet the state definition of partial unemployment in order to be potentially eligible for uc or ucfe benefits .