in some eu countries ( i.e . spain and italy ) the national government has ownership and / or control rights of electricity markets and transmission infrastructure . additionally , eu national governments may also control electricity rates charged to consumers . in the united states , there are multiple regional electricity / transmission markets with different operating models and pricing structures . further , some u.s. electricity markets are based on competitive market dynamics and some are based on cost - of - service models . also in the united states , consumer electricity price levels are influenced by state - level commissions that regulate and monitor electric power utilities . these fundamental u.s. and eu market structure and regulation differences may result in difficulties — technical and political — associated with applying eu member - country incentive policies to the united states at a national level . arguably , eu countries and electricity consumers paid for a large part of the development and scale - up of the global solar pv industry . as a result , significant equipment and system cost declines have been realized since 2008 . energy imports continue to decline . import situations in the united states and eu are , therefore , quite different . energy supply motivations may be relatively more compelling in the european union . additionally , energy resource endowments , ownership , and regulatory structures in the united states and eu are also very different . these factors can influence energy markets , resource development , and policy decisions . finally , some fuels used for power generation are priced differently in the united states and eu . for example , natural gas , which typically sets the value of electricity during peak demand periods , is much more expensive in the eu than in the united states . in 2012 , the average price of natural gas paid by u.s. electric power generators was $3.52 per million british thermal units ( mmbtu ) . however , eu industrial natural gas consumers were paying , on average , more than $12.00 per mmbtu in 2012 . the combination of the above factors may provide the eu with more economic motivation to stimulate renewable electricity generation deployment when compared to other countries . electricity markets in the united states and eu countries are also different . while the united states does not have a single national market — rather , multiple regional markets with different operating models and pricing structures — many eu member countries do have national electricity markets . germany , spain , and italy set incentives at high enough levels to support adequate investment returns based on solar equipment and installation costs using a baseline set of assumptions . incentives in some countries were generous enough to support high investment returns , which created opportunities for manufacturers to offer value - based pricing in order to capture substantial profit margins from the sale of pv equipment . these margin opportunities caused the manufacturing base to expand rapidly as more companies , many of them located in asia , entered the market .