japan . more than any other country , japan has invested heavily in bmd . the japan maritime self - defense force ( jmsdf ) has four destroyers equipped with aegis tracking software and sm - 3 block ia interceptors , and the ministry of defense plans to add four more bmd - capable aegis destroyers . japan fields 17 pac - 3 units , protecting key locations in tokyo and throughout the archipelago , and will procure more . all these bmd assets are linked with japan's advanced fps - 3 and fps - 5 radar . japanese defense officials say that a space - based early warning system is under consideration to be deployed before the end of this decade . japan reportedly is planning to build two new aegis destroyers beginning in 2015 , in part to expand its sea - based missile - defense capabilities , and to build two more bmd - capable destroyers by 2020 . in early july 2014 , japan's government announced plans to ease the country's long - standing ban on participating in collective self - defense activities , a move that will allow japanese aegis - equipped ships to be more fully integrated into missile defense systems with the united states . reports in september 2014 indicated that japan may also be interested in acquiring aegis ashore capabilities . south korea . south korea has only recently begun to acquire advanced bmd capabilities . in the decade prior to the election of president lee myung - bak in 2008 , south korean leaders prioritized harmonious relations with north korea over acquisition of missile defense technologies that could provoke pyongyang . the south korean navy now has three kdx - iii sejon - daewon class cruisers equipped with aegis tracking software — but no interceptors . however , seoul has announced plans to implement an indigenous korean air and missile defense ( kamd ) system to counter aircraft , cruise missiles and ballistic missiles launched by north korea . as part of its ongoing effort to upgrade its missile defense system , south korea's arms procurement agency in april 2014 approved a $1.3 billion plan to upgrade the rok's pac - 2 air defense system and buy pac - 3 missiles by 2020 . the commander of u.s . forces korea in june 2014 recommended that the united states deploy a thaad system in south korea ; this potential deployment and south korea's plans for its own kamd system became a subject of controversy in 2014 ( see section below for further discussion ) . australia . australia has long maintained several early warning radar sites in cooperation with the united states , but currently has no bmd intercept capability . the australian navy plans to procure two aegis - equipped vessels , which could be fitted with bmd capabilities against srbms and mrbms in the future . such capabilities would be useful primarily to australia for defending others in a force projection capacity . due to the great distance from northeast asia , canberra is faced with a unique threat profile: australia is only at risk from icbms but has no plans to counter such missiles with bmd .