such competitions can take an internal form . the nss is due to congress on the same day . in theory , the qdr report and defense strategy could draw on the previous year's nss , required "150 days" after an administration takes office , and on the concurrent development process for the second - year nss . the nms , in turn , is required to be submitted to congress by february 15 of even - numbered years — that is , just several days after the submission of the nss , and either several days , or two years and several days , after the submission of the qdr report with its accompanying nds . by these timelines , development of the nms could draw on the defense strategy from two or four years earlier , as well as on the concurrent nds / qdr process . in practice , review and reporting timelines have been less coherent . in the defense arena of national security , for example , the 2001 qdr report ( with its embedded nds ) was issued in september 2001 , before the george w. bush administration issued its first nss ( september 2002 ) from which the nds might naturally take guidance . the nms followed , but not until 2004 , arguably a significant gap after the preceding nds ; and its publication almost immediately preceded the publication of the next nds ( march 2005 ) , which arguably trumped the 2004 nms . at the national level , for example , a call to strengthen international partnerships could be met through military exercises led by dod , development assistance programs led by the u.s. agency for international development , or participation in multi - lateral organizations led by the department of state , among other options . if systemic - level priorities are named , but roles and responsibilities are not assigned , subordinate agencies or components may assume that the systemic - level priorities apply to each of them equally and that they should each apply their own respective tool kits against those priorities . clear assignment of roles and responsibilities could help agencies , or agency components , far more effectively plan and resource ; could help prevent unnecessary duplication of effort ; and could help ensure that there are no major gaps in responsibility for strategy implementation . generally speaking , most recent strategic efforts — reviews and reports — have not prioritized the objectives or missions they prescribe , or assigned roles and responsibilities for implementing various facets of the strategy . for example , the 2012 defense strategic guidance ( dsg ) named ten "priority missions" but did not prioritize among those missions , and did not assign responsibility for those missions to specific actors . those strategic reviews and reports that have statutory mandates are , as a rule , not required by law either to prioritize or to assign roles and missions . some observers trace the failure to include sufficiently specific guidance in strategy documents to the fact that explicit prioritization may not always be appropriate for unclassified discussions and publications .