appendix a . selected green infrastructure practices the images below illustrate some green infrastructure practices and techniques being utilized by cities . appendix b . selected green infrastructure bibliography the following references are a representative selection of the growing literature on green infrastructure . many include case studies . david c. rouse and ignacio f. bunster - ossa , green infrastructure: a landscape approach , american planning association , report number 571 , january 2013 , 160 p. american rivers , water environment federation , american society of landscape architects , and econorthwest , banking on green: a look at how green infrastructure can save municipalities money and provide economic benefits community - wide , april 2012 , 41 p. the nature conservancy , greening vacant lots: planning and implementation strategies , december 2012 , 129 p. christopher kloss and crystal calarusse , rooftops to rivers , green strategies for controlling stormwater and combined sewer overflows , natural resources defense council , june 2006 , 54 p. noah garrison and karen hobbs , rooftops to rivers ii , green strategies for controlling stormwater and combined sewer overflows , natural resources defense council , 2011 , 134 p. alisa valderrama , lawrence levine , eron bloomgarden , ricardo bayon , kelly wachowicz , and charlotte kaiser , creating clean water cash flows , developing private markets for green stormwater infrastructure in philadelphia , natural resources defense council , eko asset management partners , and the nature conservancy , report r:13-01-a , january 2013 , 87 p. jeffrey odefey , permitting green infrastructure: a guide to improving municipal stormwater permits and protecting water quality , report of american rivers , january 2013 , 40 p. noah garrison , robert c. wilkinson , and richard horner , a clear blue future , how greening california cities can address water resources and climate challenges in the 21 st century , natural resources defense council , nrdc technical report , august 2009 , 53 p. clean water america alliance , barriers and gateways to green infrastructure , september 2011 , 38 p. center for neighborhood technology and american rivers , the value of green infrastructure: a guide to recognizing its economic , environment and social benefits , 2010 , 80 p. charles t. driscoll , caitlin g. eger , david g. chandler , et al , green infrastructure: lessons from science and practice , a publication of the science policy exchange , june 2015 , 32 p. environmental finance center network , green infrastructure resource directory , june 2012 , 11 p. nell green nylen and michael kiparsky , accelerating cost - effective green stormwater infrastructure: learning from local implementation , uc - berkeley school of law center for law , energy & the environment , february 2015 , 51 p. u.s. environmental protection agency , low impact development ( lid ) "barrier busters" fact sheet series , a seven - part series of fact sheets for state and local decisionmakers , http: / / water.epa.gov / polwaste / green / bbfs.cfm .