the act itself has seldom been amended . however , numerous statutory requirements like those of the buy american act have been enacted . see generally crs report r43354 , domestic content restrictions: the buy american act and complementary provisions of federal law , by [author name scrubbed] et al . this report supersedes crs report 97-765 , the buy american act: requiring government procurements to come from domestic sources , by [author name scrubbed] . on its face , the buy american act appears to prohibit the acquisition of foreign goods by federal agencies by providing that [o]nly unmanufactured articles , materials , and supplies that have been mined or produced in the united states , and only manufactured articles , materials , and supplies that have been manufactured in the united states substantially all from articles , materials , or supplies mined , produced , or manufactured in the united states , shall be purchased for public use . as implemented , however , the act is better understood as generally establishing a price preference for domestic end products and construction materials . specifically , the provisions of the federal acquisition regulation ( far ) implementing the buy american act require that , when a domestic offer ( i.e. , an offer of a domestic end product ) is not the low offer , the procuring agency must add a certain percentage of the low offer's price ( inclusive of duty ) to that offer before determining which offer is the lowest priced or "best value" for the government . this percentage typically ranges from 6% , in cases where the lowest domestic offer is from a large business ; to 12% , when the lowest domestic offer is from a small business ; to 50% , for department of defense procurements , although agencies may adopt higher percentages by regulation . if the domestic offer is the lowest , or tied for lowest , after the application of this price preference , the agency must award the contract to the domestic offeror . however , if the foreign offer still has the lowest price , the agency generally awards the contract to the foreign offeror pursuant to provisions of the buy american act permitting the purchase of foreign end products ( and the use of foreign construction materials ) when the costs of domestic ones are "unreasonable. determining the act's applicability to specific procurements — and , particularly , determining whether the act's requirements were violated in particular cases — can raise complicated legal and factual questions . much depends upon how particular terms ( eg , end product , component ) are defined and construed for purposes of the buy american act . however , the details of manufacturing processes are often also relevant . acquisitions of services are generally not subject to the buy american act . nor does the act restrict purchases from foreign persons so long as their products are mined , produced , or manufactured in the united states , as required by the act . the procuring agency , however , has various contractual and administrative remedies for any noncompliance after contract award .