it will be updated as events require . in addition to establishing a comprehensive set of rules governing the admission , continued presence , and departure of foreign nationals , the immigration and nationality act ( ina ) currently provides for an enforcement regime to deter violations of these rules . some violations may be subject to criminal fines and imprisonment ; others are subject to civil monetary penalties ; and still others , if committed by an alien , may be grounds for denying the alien admission into the country or removing the alien from the united states . the safe act seeks to bolster this enforcement regime in various ways . it would expand the scope of many immigration - related criminal statutes , including by making unlawful presence a criminal offense . other generally applicable requirements for naturalization ( some of which may be subject to limited waiver ) include continuous residence for at least five years as an lpr ; literacy in english ; and knowledge of the history , principles , and government of the united states . although the ina does not affirmatively define "good moral character," it lists certain activities as barring an alien from being found to possess good moral character if committed during the period for which good moral character is required to be established . the commission of other specified conduct , including subversive activity , may also make an alien ineligible for naturalization . moreover , the ina authorizes the government to revoke u.s. citizenship for a limited category of naturalized persons , typically on the grounds that the person acquired citizenship through fraud , concealment , or willful misrepresentation of material facts . there are an estimated 11.1 million unauthorized aliens in the united states . in 2012 , ice estimated that there were 1.9 million removable criminal aliens in the united states . according to ice , they have the capacity to remove 400,000 aliens a year , and accordingly , dhs has developed a system to prioritize certain aliens for removal . as a result , there has been ongoing debate about the amount of resources that should be allotted to removal activities , and how ice should prioritize the removal of removable aliens . dhs would also be required to accommodate requesting jurisdictions regarding the types of immigration enforcement functions that will be carried out pursuant to a 287 ( g ) agreement . dhs would be prohibited from substituting a program or technology "directed broadly" at identifying removable aliens — apparently a references to the secure communities program — in lieu of entering or maintaining a 287 ( g ) agreement . dhs would also be barred from terminating 287 ( g ) agreements without compelling reason and without complying with certain procedures ( eg , providing written notice at least 180 days in advance ) . states and localities that believe their agreements have been improperly terminated would be entitled to administrative and judicial review . currently , such agreements may be terminated "at any time ; " the termination is effective "immediately upon receipt ; " and states and localities appear to have no legal recourse .