these issues and the elections are discussed below . in late june 2013 , president obama traveled to south africa after visiting senegal , prior to a visit to tanzania . his trip to the african continent highlighted u.s. - african cooperation and policies in the areas of trade and investment , development , democracy , and peace and security , which the president addressed in a "framing speech" at south africa's university of cape town . the president also announced plans to host a u.s. - africa heads of state summit in the united states in 2014 , now slated to be held in early august , and the roll - out of power africa , "a new initiative that will double access to [electrical] power in sub - saharan africa. while in south africa , the president held a meeting and a joint press conference with president jacob zuma of south africa , which he described as a "critical partner" of the united states . their meeting focused on u.s. - south african bilateral relations , which president obama said are "extraordinarily strong," and a wide range of regional and global political , security , economic , and development issues . among other activities in south africa , the president also held a town hall meeting as part of his young african leaders initiative , initiated in 2010 ; met with the african union commission chair on continental issues and regional organization capacities ; and visited the desmond tutu hiv foundation youth center . the center visit was intended to highlight community - based solutions to healthcare challenges and the administration's global health agenda , in particular efforts to help improve public health systems in south africa and elsewhere in africa . the state department characterizes south africa as a u.s. "strategic partner," and president obama's trip to the country underlined that bilateral ties remain close , as they have been since 1994 , despite periodic differences on some foreign policy issues . socioeconomic development is a key focus of bilateral cooperation ; since 1992 , south africa has been a leading african recipient of u.s. aid , the bulk of which supports hiv / aids and related health programs . u.s. - south african trade ties are also important . total trade ( exports and imports ) more than doubled over the past decade , reaching a record of $16.7 billion in 2011 before declining slightly to $16.2 billion in 2012 and $15.8 billion in 2013 . south africa has enjoyed a significant but declining trade surplus with the united states and is a major export and investment destination for u.s. businesses in africa . security cooperation is another key area of engagement . in 2010 , the two countries established a strategic dialogue centering on cooperation related to health , education , food security , law enforcement , trade , investment , energy , and nonproliferation . south africa hosted two visits by former secretary of state hillary clinton , as well as by other top u.s. officials . john kerry had not made a visit to south africa as secretary of state as of early may 2014 .