most states have chosen to do so . under rcra subtitle d , state and local governments were established as the primary planning , regulating , and implementing entities responsible for managing non - hazardous solid waste , including waste explicitly exempt from regulation under subtitle c. epa's primary role under subtitle d is to provide state and local agencies with information , guidance , and policy . the comprehensive environmental response , compensation , and liability act ( cercla ) , often referred to as superfund , provides broad authority for the federal government to respond to releases or threatened releases of hazardous substances into the environment , in order to protect public health or welfare , or the environment . federal resources to carry out response actions under cercla are subject to the availability of appropriations . additionally , s. 785 would authorize states to seek primary enforcement authority for hydraulic fracturing operations , regardless of whether the state had obtained primacy for other types of uic wells , including class ii wells . the safe hydration is an american right in energy development act of 2015 ( h.r . 1515 ) also would amend the sdwa to create a new prohibition on fracking unless the party conducting the fracking operations agrees to comply with new testing and data reporting requirements . 109-58 ) that addressed this issue . section 322 of epact 2005 amended the definition of "underground injection" in the sdwa as follows: the term "underground injection" — ( a ) means the subsurface emplacement of fluids by well injection ; and ( b ) excludes — ( i ) the underground injection of natural gas for purposes of storage ; and ( ii ) the underground injection of fluids or propping agents ( other than diesel fuels ) pursuant to hydraulic fracturing operations related to oil , gas , or geothermal production activities . this amendment clarified that the uic requirements found in the sdwa do not apply to hydraulic fracturing , although the exclusion does not extend to the use of diesel fuel in hydraulic fracturing operations . this amended language is the definition of "underground injection" found in the sdwa as of the date of this report . hydraulic fracturing is a water - intensive practice . after a well is hydraulically fractured , a substantial portion of the injected fluid returns to the surface as "flowback. this flowback typically contains proppant ( sand ) and chemical residues from the frac fluid , as well as salts , metals , and potentially significant amounts of naturally occurring radioactive materials ( norm ) that may be present in the water produced from the geologic formations . additionally , oil and gas wells generally continue to produce formation water throughout their production lives . flowback water and production brine that are not reused will require proper disposal , either through underground injection or treatment and surface discharge . often this flowback is injected into wells for disposal . however , if underground injection is not feasible or not employed for other reasons , drilling companies may opt to transfer the wastewater to publicly owned treatment works ( potw ) that discharge into navigable waters in compliance with the clean water act ( cwa ) .