the statute is unambiguous . since the court's massachusetts decision , epa has addressed ghg emissions in a number of steps , among them: in december 2009 , the agency laid the groundwork for regulations by finding that emissions of greenhouse gases may reasonably be anticipated to endanger public health and welfare , and that ghgs from new motor vehicles cause or contribute to that endangerment . in may 2010 , the agency promulgated ghg emission standards for model year 2012-2016 cars and light trucks . in january 2011 , the agency began requiring permits and the imposition of best available control technology on new stationary sources ( and major modifications of existing sources ) that emit more than a threshold amount of ghgs . in september 2011 , epa promulgated ghg emission standards for model year 2014-2018 medium - and heavy - duty trucks . in october 2012 , the agency promulgated a second phase of ghg emission standards for cars and light trucks , covering model years 2017-2025 . as extensive as these actions may seem , they have had relatively minor impacts on ghg emissions to date . the rules are prospective , and in most cases have not yet taken effect . the auto and truck manufacturing industries have been the major focus of the ghg regulations ; in both cases , they are eager to improve fuel economy ( coincidentally reducing ghg emissions ) , because the high cost of fuel has affected consumer purchasing decisions over the last five years . the stationary source permitting requirement has yet to affect most sources . as of early september 2013 , epa and the states have issued only 110 ghg permits to stationary sources since the requirement was implemented in january 2011 . ( for comparison , epa estimates that there are more than 6 million stationary sources. ) epa set the emission threshold for requiring permits at a high level , exempting most new sources of ghgs ; and few new facilities have been constructed in the recession's aftermath . ultimately , if epa is to reduce the nation's ghg emissions , as the president has committed to do , it will have to issue emission standards for broad categories of existing stationary sources . epa took the first step toward setting such standards on april 13 , 2012 , with the proposal of standards for new electric generating units ( egus ) . in a june 25 , 2013 , memorandum to the epa administrator , the president directed the agency to re - propose those standards by september 20 , 2013 , finalize them "in a timely fashion after considering all public comments," and propose guidelines for existing egus by june 1 , 2014 . the re - proposed standards for new sources were announced on september 20 , 2013 . as shown in table 1 , egus — principally , coal - fired power plants — are the most significant u.s. source of greenhouse gases , accounting for about one - third of the nation's total emissions . with the principal mobile source categories already subject to ghg regulations , epa will have addressed the sources of more than half of all u.s. emissions once it promulgates regulations for existing egus .