106-386 ; see below ) . the challenges facing drc are stark . the country is rich in minerals , forest resources , freshwater , and agricultural potential , but most congolese live in poverty . prior to the 2016-2018 impasse over the elections delay and kabila's political future , international attention toward drc was overwhelmingly focused on addressing long - running conflicts in the east and supporting the extension of state authority . the current electoral cycle is scheduled to be completed with local elections due in september 2019 , which would be the first multiparty local - level polls since independence . local elections have repeatedly been scheduled over the past decade , only to be canceled or indefinitely delayed . uncertainty over the election process and kabila's succession dominated national politics and preoccupied donors between 2014 and 2018 , as it became clear that kabila would seek to remain in office past the end of his term in 2016 and that this would provoke significant popular opposition and unrest . local civil society groups , youth activists , cenco , and regional powers ( notably angola ) played a key role in pressuring the government to hold elections in which kabila was not a candidate . large street protests first erupted in 2015 in opposition to a ruling party proposal to delay elections pending a time - consuming national census . local activists , opposition parties , and catholic lay organizations organized periodic protests through 2018 despite violent repression by state security forces , which fired on civilians , arrested activists , shuttered media outlets , expelled international researchers , and besieged churches where marchers gathered . after the 2018 election results were announced , a few areas saw violent clashes , but much of the country appeared calm or celebratory . overall , the election process was characterized by flaws and irregularities , and polls showed that voters held a dim view of the ceni . in addition to evidence of high - level ceni corruption , observers noted state restrictions on opposition activism and critical media , a problematic voter registry , a last - minute decision to cancel the presidential vote in four pro - opposition districts , and the fact that two prominent exiled opposition figures ( former governor moïse katumbi and former rebel leader jean - pierre bemba ) were barred from running . several of these factors , along with repeated election delays , violated a political agreement brokered by cenco in december 2016 ( known as the st. sylvestre accord ) that aimed to encourage relatively fair and timely elections . the drc government also rejected u.n. logistical support for moving electoral materials around the vast , infrastructure - poor country , which could have averted some disenfranchisement and delays . despite welcoming tshisekedi's presidency , the u.s. government has assailed corruption and political repression tied to the electoral process that brought him to office and designated election officials for sanctions ( see " u.s. policy " below ) . uncertainty over drc's political future coincided with a surge in conflicts throughout the country between 2016 and 2018 .