appendix a . data source and information clearance process in compiling and analyzing information for this report , the main data source used was the office of information and regulatory affairs' ( oira's ) inventory of currently approved information collections ( inventory ) . the inventory includes the omb control number , the principal office requesting the information collection , an abstract , the expiration date for each information collection , burden hours , the number of annual responses , data collection forms , and a supporting statement submitted by the federal agency to omb . the inventory also has an "omb control number history" for each information collection . the history contains information on each version of the package for which the federal agency has made an information collection request ( icr ) ( eg , new collection , revision , extension , no substantial change ) for omb approval . the information clearance process generally begins when an agency publishes a federal register notice about the information collection and ends when oira takes action regarding the icr . after the agency develops an information collection that it wishes to implement , it publishes a federal register notice about the proposed information collection and provides the public with 60 days to provide comment on the proposed collection . the agency then considers the public's comments , makes changes as appropriate to address concerns raised by the public , submits the icr to omb for review , and publishes a second federal register notice announcing the start of omb's review . the second notice provides the public with an additional 30 days to provide comments . after reviewing the icr and considering public comments , oira concludes its review by approving the collection or taking other actions . the designations that oira can assign to a collection are approval , improperly submitted , withdrawn , and disapproval . once an information collection is approved , oira assigns it an omb control number . using the omb control number , one can locate and examine information collection packages in oira's inventory of currently approved collections . it should be noted that for each information collection package , there is a summary page titled "view icr - oira conclusion" that describes the actions taken by omb , the current number of burden hours associated with an information collection package , and the previously approved number of burden hours . in some cases when an agency requests a change in the number of burden hours , the agency does not also submit updated supporting documentation ( eg , supporting statement ) that details how the change in burden hours would result in changes in cost , if applicable . thus , in discussing the 16 information collection packages included in this report , the analysis primarily relies on the data included in the supporting statements that accompany an information collection package , even if the "view icr - oira conclusion" web page indicates that the approved number of burden hours for a given information collection has been changed . otherwise , it would not be possible to analyze the respondents to a given information collection package or the associated cost burden .