59 with an amendment . subsequent actions to resolve differences between the house and senate , which included the consideration of various house amendments to that senate amendment , were unsuccessful prior to the beginning of the fiscal year . because none of the 12 regular appropriations bills for fy2014 was enacted prior to the beginning of the fiscal year , a funding gap ensued on october 1 , 2013 . congressional action on fy2014 appropriations between october 2 and october 15 was generally limited to a number of narrow crs to provide funding for certain programs or classes of individuals , none of which would have provided funding for the legislative branch . since the antideficiency act generally bars the obligation of funds in the absence of appropriations , and pursuant to opinions issued in 1980 and early 1981 by then - attorney general benjamin civiletti further clarifying the need for the federal government to begin terminating regular activities upon the occurrence of a funding gap , a partial shutdown began on october 1 , 2013 . these levels do not include offsetting collections . in addition to a provision related to deposits for the employees' compensation fund ( provided in p.l . 113-6 ) , gao requested language related to the collection of fees for filing protests and changing certain reports required under the american recovery and reinvestment act from bimonthly to annual . the fy2014 house report ( h.rept . 113-173 ) states: the fiscal year 2012 conference agreement ( house report 112 – 331 ) directed that future budget requests from the john c. stennis center be accompanied by an appropriately detailed budget justification as requested in house report 112 – 148 . previously , an anomaly in the fy2013 cr provided $4.0 million ( not including the sequestration reductions or the rescission ) , $500,000 was provided in fy2012 , the fy2011 act provided $1.66 million , and the fy2010 act provided $12.8 million for the revolving fund . the congressional printing and binding account pays for expenses of printing and binding required for congressional use , and for statutorily authorized printing , binding , and distribution of government publications for specified recipients at no charge . included within these publications are the congressional record ; congressional directory ; senate and house journals ; memorial addresses of members ; nominations ; u.s. code and supplements ; serial sets ; publications printed without a document or report number , for example , laws and treaties ; envelopes provided to members of congress for the mailing of documents ; house and senate business and committee calendars ; bills , resolutions , and amendments ; committee reports and prints ; committee hearings ; and other documents . the office of superintendent of documents account funds the mailing of government documents for members of congress and federal agencies , as statutorily authorized ; the compilation of catalogs and indexes of government publications ; and the cataloging , indexing , and distribution of government publications to the federal depository and international exchange libraries , and to other individuals and entities , as authorized by law . the house subcommittee met on february 26 , 2013 , to discuss gpo's fy2014 budget request .