111-148 , and the health care provisions of p.l . as a general rule , cbo evaluates legislation being considered in the house or senate relative to the agency's baseline projections . new information about the implementation of legislation―such as an agency issuing a final rule or making an official announcement clearly defining an intended administration action like the department of the treasury's announcement on july 2 , 2013―is incorporated in cbo's next regular baseline update . however , following long - standing procedures , cbo also immediately takes that information into account when analyzing legislation being considered by congress . on july 17 , 2013 , the house passed h.r . 2667 : authority for mandate delay act . the bill would delay for one year certain reporting requirements as well as penalties for certain large employers that do not offer "affordable" health insurance coverage to their employees ( as affordability is defined in the affordable care act , p.l . these provisions are effective in 2014 according to the aca statute . on july 2 , 2013 , the obama administration announced that it is going to delay , until 2015 , enforcement and associated reporting requirements relating to potential employer penalties under aca . on july 11 , 2013 , the irs released notice 2013-45 , which provided more detailed information on this decision . this delay may have implications for the individual mandate and eligibility for tax assistance provided through the exchanges . it also may have some impact with respect to federal spending and revenues . this report summarizes some of these issues ; however , it does not attempt to identify all possible implications of this delay . this report does not address whether the obama administration has legal authority to delay implementation of aca reporting requirements and enforcement of the employer penalty . aca includes a number of provisions intended to expand and / or facilitate the purchase of health insurance coverage . these include new federal tax credits for certain low - income individuals to purchase insurance through the newly established exchanges . prior to the reporting requirements and employer penalty delay , cbo projected that premium credits would increase federal spending by $28 billion in fy2014 and by $55 billion in fy2015 . in addition , aca includes potential tax penalties for large employers ( those with 50 or more full - time equivalent employees ) who do not share responsibility in the provision of health insurance coverage . specifically , in certain circumstances , large employers who do not provide adequate or affordable coverage may potentially pay a penalty if at least one of their full - time workers enrolls in an exchange and receives a premium credit . prior to the delay , cbo projected that the employer penalties would increase federal revenue between $5 billion and $10 billion in 2014 . finally , most individuals will be required to maintain minimum essential coverage ( mec ) , which includes eligible employer coverage , individual coverage , and federal programs such as medicare and medicaid , among others . individuals who do not maintain mec for themselves and their dependents , and who are not exempt from the individual mandate , will be required to pay a penalty for noncompliance .