appropriations are complex . comparisons generally are at the agency level . for example , the budget requests for some agencies are large , numbering several hundred pages and containing numerous funding , programmatic , and legislative changes for congressional consideration . further , appropriations laws provide funds for numerous accounts , activities , and subactivities , and the accompanying explanatory statements provide additional directives and other important information . the bill typically contains three primary titles . title i provides funding for most department of the interior ( doi ) agencies , many of which manage land and other natural resource or regulatory programs . title ii contains appropriations for the environmental protection agency ( epa ) . title iii funds agencies in other departments , such as the forest service in the department of agriculture and the indian health service in the department of health and human services ; arts and cultural agencies , such as the smithsonian institution ; and various other entities . for epa , funded by title ii of the bill , the appropriation was $8.20 billion , or 27.2% of the total . for about 20 agencies and other entities typically funded in title iii of the bill , the appropriation was $11.44 billion , or 38.0% of the total . appropriations enacted for agencies vary widely for a number of reasons , relating to the number , breadth , and complexity of agency responsibilities ; alternative sources of funding ( eg , mandatory appropriations ) ; and administration and congressional priorities , among other factors . thus while the fy2014 appropriations covered approximately 30 agencies , funding for a small subset accounted for most of the total . for example , the appropriations for three agencies — epa , forest service , and indian health service — were about three - fifths ( 60.1% ) of the total enacted . further , more than three - quarters ( 77.0% ) of the total appropriation was for these three agencies and two others — national park service and bureau of indian affairs . for doi agencies , the fy2014 appropriations ranged from $69.0 million for the bureau of ocean energy management to $2.56 billion for the national park service . the individual appropriations for 5 of the 10 agencies exceeded $1 billion . nearly half ( 48.6% ) of the $10.47 billion for doi agencies was for two agencies — the national park service and bureau of indian affairs . for related agencies in title iii , the appropriations showed even more variation . they ranged from $1.0 million for the dwight d. eisenhower memorial commission to $5.48 billion for the forest service . in addition to the forest service , the indian health service received more than $4 billion . by contrast , fourteen agencies received less than $80 million each , including eight with appropriations of less than $10 million each . figure 1 , below , identifies the share of the fy2014 appropriation for each of the three titles of the interior bill . it also depicts the portion of funding enacted for particular agencies . table 1 contains the amounts enacted for fy2014 for each agency within the interior bill .