part 340 . while a plant remains under aphis regulatory control ( i.e. , it remains a "regulated article" ) , aphis imposes conditions on field testing , harvesting , and transporting ge materials . aphis could also impose penalties up to $1 million for violations under the ppa . should tests show the presence of an unapproved ge trait in shipments of grains or in commercial seed , aphis would determine whether remedial action was necessary to protect plant health or the environment under the authority of the ppa . given that fda concluded that there were no health or safety concerns from consuming food or feed derived from the ge wheat ( see below ) , aphis stated at the time that it would not take steps to remove low - level presence ( llp ) of this variety from the food supply . low - level presence is the commingling of genes and gene products from unintended plant sources , whether conventionally bred plants or those derived from biotechnology . aphis's llp policy was clarified in march 2007 and considers six safety - related criteria when determining a ge plant material's potential to pose a risk to plant health or to the environment . while the glyphosate - tolerant ge wheat was never deregulated by aphis , monsanto had submitted materials to fda on the biological characteristics of the ge variety for a determination of the variety's safety . fda completed a voluntary consultation on the safety of food and feed derived from the glyphosate - tolerant ge wheat in 2004 , and agreed with monsanto that the ge wheat was not "materially different in composition , safety , or any other relevant parameter from wheat now grown , marketed , and consumed. in other words , fda concluded that food and feed derived from ge wheat was as safe as and nutritionally equivalent to food and feed derived from non - ge wheat . once a determination is made by fda on the substantial equivalence of a ge variety compared to a non - ge variety , fda's role in the regulatory process typically ends . although the united states produces only about 10% of the world's wheat , it is consistently the world's largest wheat exporter . the united states exports about 50% of its wheat crop , and oregon exports nearly 90% of its wheat crop . in its march 2013 national agricultural statistical service ( nass ) prospective plantings report , usda projected u.s. winter wheat seedings in fall 2012 for harvest in 2013 of 56.44 million acres , up 1.3% ( or 704,000 acres ) from 55.74 million acres in 2012 , and also up from 54.409 million acres in 2011 . aphis stated in june 2013 that there was no evidence that ge wheat had entered commerce . initial tests of wheat imported by japan , korea , and the european union found no evidence of the unapproved ge trait . aphis's final report on its investigation confirmed these early findings . many countries have zero - tolerance policies regarding imports of unapproved ge varieties .