so , too , the revised elg is very technical and complex . epa and many other analysts maintain that this will not be the case . much of the criticism addressed to epa's actions has concerned clean air act rules , but clean water act ( cwa ) rules also have been part of the discussion , such as a 2014 rule to regulate cooling water intake structures at power plants and some industrial sources . the most recent major rule affecting power plants that epa has promulgated concerns limits on discharges of wastewater , and it is the subject of this report . it is the last of a suite of obama administration utility sector rules that also includes greenhouse gas standards for utilities and a rule for disposal of coal combustion residuals from power plants . the cwa power plant rule is a complex regulation , involving limits on six pollutant wastestreams . finalized in november 2015 , it updates standards that were issued more than 30 years ago , which did not reflect today's power plant technology . the 1972 cwa established a comprehensive program to "restore and maintain the chemical , physical and biological integrity of the nation's waters. to implement the act , epa was directed to issue effluent limitation guidelines and standards , or technology - based regulations , for industrial dischargers . the effluent limitation guidelines ( elg ) are to reflect pollutant reductions that can be achieved by categories or subcategories of industrial point sources using technologies that represent appropriate levels of control . since 1972 , epa has promulgated effluent limitation guidelines for 57 industrial categories , including for the steam electric power industry . metals in fgd wastewater are present both in particulate form , which can be substantially removed by settling ( eg , arsenic ) , and in soluble ( i.e. , dissolved ) form ( metals such as selenium , boron , and magnesium ) that is not effectively and reliably removed by surface impoundments . more advanced technologies are available that are effective at removing both soluble and dissolved forms of metals , as well as nitrogen and total dissolved solids ( tds ) . the technology basis for the final rule is chemical precipitation / coprecipitation used in combination with anoxic / anaerobic biological treatment to optimize removal of selenium . epa determined that 45% of all steam electric power plants with wet scrubbers have equipment or processes in place able to meet the final bat / pses effluent limitations and standards in the 2015 rule . many of these plants use fgd wastewater management approaches that eliminate the discharge of fgd wastewater . epa rejected technology based on chemical precipitation alone for fgd wastewater because , while chemical treatment systems are capable of achieving removals of various metals , the technology is not effective at removing selenium , nitrogen compounds , and certain metals that contribute to high concentrations of tds in fgd wastewater . fly ash transport water fly ash is the combustion residual of fine ash particles entrained in flue gases . depending on the boiler design , as much as 70% to 80% of the ash from a pulverized coal furnace consists of fly ash .