cambodia is one of the poorest countries in asia . the kingdom has experienced steady economic growth during the past decade and a half , largely driven by expansions in agriculture , construction , the garment sector , and tourism . gdp growth was estimated to be 6.4% in 2012 and is forecast to be 6.9% in 2013 . however , income inequality , which remains high , has been increasing . as a member of asean since 1999 , the kingdom is committed to participating in the asean free trade area ( afta ) in 2015 . cambodia is also a party to the regional comprehensive economic partnership ( rcep ) , a proposed free trade area including the 10 nations of asean and 6 other asia - pacific countries , which is under negotiation . principal foreign investors in cambodia include china , malaysia , south korea , thailand , the united states , and vietnam . according to one report , china has become cambodia's largest investor with approximately $9 billion in cumulative investment ( $1.19 billion in 2011 ) . u.s. cumulative investment reportedly totals $1.3 billion . the united states invested $144 million in the country in 2011 , triple the amount of 2010 . tourism accounts for 350,000 cambodian jobs and 12% of gross domestic product , according to the tourism minister . cambodians hope that offshore oil production will eventually provide a boon to government revenues and the economy . a number of multinational and national companies , including chevron , are working in the gulf of thailand to develop oil reserves , estimated at 500 million barrels . however , the estimated start date of oil production has been delayed from 2013 to 2017 . in addition to low labor costs , many cambodian garment factories have developed a reputation for good labor practices , largely because of a u.s. - cambodia agreement , enacted in 1999 , that rewarded progress in labor conditions with increased access to the u.s. market . as part of the agreement , in 2001 , the international labor organization ( ilo ) was brought in to monitor and promote good labor practices in the kingdom . it continues to do so under the program better factories cambodia with funding from the royal government of cambodia , the garment manufacturers' association in cambodia , the u.s. department of labor , the world bank , the australian agency for international development , and international buyers . labor relations have shown some signs of strain in recent years . cambodian workers are free to form their own unions and have the right to strike , although a majority of unions are affiliated with the cpp , and independent labor leaders and strike organizers sometimes have been harassed by employers . in february 2013 , an estimated 20,000 workers across a number of foreign - owned textile factories in an industrial area in southeastern cambodia went on strike for better working conditions and higher wages . the prime minister has silenced political opponents through defamation and other lawsuits .