action. beyond the three requirements of article iii standing , the court has also endorsed the so - called prudential standing doctrine , which embodies "judicially self - imposed limits on the exercise of federal jurisdiction. among the principles that encompass the prudential standing doctrine are the prohibition on one litigant raising another person's legal rights , the rule barring adjudication of generalized grievances , and the requirement that a plaintiff's complaint fall within the zone of interests protected by the law invoked . while the doctrine of prudential standing does not derive from the text of article iii — the court has described the prudential dimensions of standing as non - jurisdictional and a matter of "judicial self - governance" — the two doctrines are "closely related" and overlap . collectively , by insisting on these requirements for standing , article iii and prudential standing doctrines ensure that legal injuries that are shared in equal measure by all or a large class of citizens are properly a subject for the elected branches and not the judiciary . as a consequence , the standing doctrine is part and parcel of the doctrine of separation of powers , as requiring a litigant to have standing to pursue a federal lawsuit allows the judiciary to avoid unnecessarily intruding on the powers vested in the executive and legislative branch . moreover , the doctrine of standing , by requiring litigants to have suffered an injury , is intended to allow legal questions to be presented to a federal court only in a concrete factual context by individuals who have a serious stake in the litigation . the clapper case was a constitutional challenge to section 702 of the fisa , a 2008 amendment that generally provides the federal government with the authority to engage in eavesdropping to gather foreign intelligence information from foreign nations and non - state actors while they are abroad , so long as there is no intentional targeting of u.s. persons . specifically , section 702 provides that the attorney general and the director of national intelligence may authorize jointly , for a period of up to one year , the "targeting of persons reasonably believed to be located outside of the united states to acquire foreign intelligence information. the statute provides , however , that in acquiring such foreign intelligence the government may not intentionally ( 1 ) target any person known to be or reasonably believed to be in the united states ; ( 2 ) target a u.s. person ; or ( 3 ) acquire any communication where the sender and all recipients are known to be located in the united states . moreover , the statute requires that the attorney general and the director of national intelligence conduct such acquisitions pursuant to targeting and minimization procedures that have been approved by the foreign intelligence surveillance court ( fisc ) , a non - adversarial court authorized under fisa . after the 2008 law went into effect , a wide range of litigants challenged section 702 of fisa on first and fourth amendment grounds in federal court , seeking an order enjoining enforcement of the law .