division f of p.l . 113-76 included $1,037 million in title i , 16.3% below the requested level . table 5 lists the pre - sequester enacted amounts for the individual components of title i for fy2013 , the administration's request for these components for fy2014 , and the house - passed appropriations for the same . the heavy lines in this table and in similar ones later in the report serve as a reminder that direct comparisons between the pre - sequester fy2013 funding and fy2014 proposals are not comparisons of current levels of actual spending and proposals for the coming fiscal year , as one would normally see in this type of report . the house - passed bill would have provided $34 million for dhs's data center consolidation effort through a general provision , while the senate - reported bill would have provided $54 million in the same fashion , as well as $43 million for dhs headquarters consolidation at st. elizabeths . these are cross - cutting initiatives which have been funded in the past in the general provisions of the legislation . the senate - reported bill also included legislative language to allow dhs to use fee revenues collected as a result of lifting a fee exemption , which adds $110 million to the overall cost of the legislation . title ii of the dhs appropriations bill , which includes over three - quarters of the budget authority provided in the legislation , contains the appropriations for u.s. customs and border protection ( cbp ) , u.s. immigration and customs enforcement ( ice ) , the transportation security administration ( tsa ) , the u.s. coast guard ( uscg ) , and the u.s. secret service ( usss ) . the administration requested $30,283 million for these accounts in fy2014 . 2217 as reported to the house had 65 general provisions . the house added 19 general provisions to the bill during floor action , bringing the total number of general provisions in its version of h.r . eighteen of these newly added general provisions prohibit the use of funds provided in the bill for specific activities . the senate appropriations committee chose to drop a provision that the house retained , kept four proposed for removal that the house did not , and added several other provisions . it added two provisions requested by the administration — one authorizing the use of reimbursable fee agreements to fund cbp services , and a modified provision allowing dhs to receive donations to construct , alter , operate , or maintain land ports of entry . the house - passed bill would have provided $30,768 million under title ii , an increase of 1.60% from the requested level . the senate - reported bill would have included $30,289 million in title ii , an increase of less than 0.1% from the requested level . 113-76 included 77 general provisions in all . seven provisions of the 74 general provisions carried in the fy2013 homeland security appropriations act were dropped , and ten were added . section 559 of the act included a modified version of the administration's requested authority to enter into reimburseable fee agreements and to receive donations .