the role of excise taxes has changed over time . excise taxes narrowly imposed on the consumption of certain products , such as alcohol and tobacco , formed the basis for much of federal tax revenue until the modern income tax was enacted in the early 20 th century . although excise taxes have played a diminishing role in the mix of federal revenue sources over time , there has been persistent interest in the possible use of excise taxes to raise revenue or provide disincentives to behavior that is believed by some to have negative effects on society ( eg , a tax on carbon emissions ) . a rising budget deficit helped to bring about the excise tax increases in the omnibus budget reconciliation act of 1990 ( obra90 ; p.l . obra90 increased tax rates on distilled spirits ( last increased in 1985 ) , beer and wine ( last increased in 1951 ) , tobacco ( last increased in 1982 ) , and gasoline ( last increased in 1982 ) . since 2000 , excise taxes have played a diminishing role in the mix of federal revenue sources even as new provisions have been introduced . as discussed later in the " revenue " section of this report , excise tax collections have increased in nominal amounts , but have decreased in inflation - adjusted ( real ) values and as a share of overall federal revenue . the rates on major excise taxes have remained unadjusted for inflation for years , such as the excise taxes on gasoline ( since 1997 ) and alcohol ( 1991 ) . the excise tax on tobacco was last increased with the children's health insurance program reauthorization act of 2009 ( p.l . 111-3 ) , but revenue from the tobacco tax has declined over time in part due to decreased demand for tobacco products . after the end of the war most of these emergency excise taxes were repealed . excise taxes were utilized to fund war - time spending during the early 20 th century . temporary excise tax provisions were imposed in the revenue act of 1918 , passed during world war i , to help fund war - time spending , including the first excise tax on firearms , shells , and cartridges . as a result , excise tax collections quadrupled from 1914 to 1919 . excise tax revenues declined significantly after the beginning of prohibition ( falling to less than half of the pre - prohibition revenue levels by 1930 ) but rebounded above the pre - prohibition levels after the consumption of alcohol was made legal again after 1933 . existing excise tax rates were increased again virtually across - the - board around the time of world war ii , and new taxes on luxury goods ( such as toiletries and furs ) were introduced . additionally , congress rejected adopting a general sales tax twice during this era ( 1932 and 1942 ) , despite critiques that the costs of administering excises to a growing list of products was high and the revenue gained from many excises was small . excise taxes underwent a time of dynamic reform during the latter half of the 20 th century .