many secondary considerations may also impact an assessment . these include assumptions regarding global crude oil markets , refinery inputs and outputs , transport options , economics , policy considerations , and the end - use consumption of petroleum products . and our national interest will be served only if this project does not significantly exacerbate the problem of carbon pollution . the net effects of the pipeline's impact on our climate will be absolutely critical to determining whether this project is allowed to go forward . both supporters and opponents of the proposed keystone xl pipeline reacted positively to the president's comments , signaling that an assessment of the net effects of the pipeline's impact on the climate — as well as the significance of those effects — is still under intense debate . the effects of the proposed keystone xl pipeline on climate change could be analyzed , in part , by an assessment of the ghg emissions attributable to the project . as the deis will be a primary component for the national interest determination , this report focuses on the state department's analysis and comments on its methodology and conclusions . where applicable , the report supplements the deis analysis with relevant additional information . as the state department's assessment is based on the findings of several published studies of oil sands crudes , this report also comments on their respective methodologies and conclusions . for a more extensive investigation of the ghg emissions assessments of oil sands crudes and their comparison to other global crude oils ( "reference crudes" ) , see crs report r42537 , canadian oil sands: life - cycle assessments of greenhouse gas emissions , by [author name scrubbed] . president obama has stated that an evaluation of the "net effects of the pipeline's impact on our climate" in order to determine if the project would "significantly exacerbate the problem of carbon pollution" would factor into the state department's national interest determination for the proposed keystone xl pipeline . such an analysis could encompass a variety of activities and implications relative to the pipeline , including the ghg emissions associated with the proposed pipeline's construction and operation , as well as the ghg emissions attributable to the crude oils that would be transported through the pipeline . proponents of the proposed pipeline support a market analysis which concludes that the approval or denial of the proposed pipeline is unlikely to have a substantial impact on the rate of development in the oil sands , or on the amount of heavy crude oil refined in the gulf coast area . they argue that as long as there is strong global demand for petroleum products ( whether from the united states , china , india , or the developing world ) , resources such as the canadian oil sands will be produced and shipped to markets using whatever route is available . they see future investment affected only in scenarios where the global price of oil falls below the breakeven cost of production for an extended period of time . they see current production affected only in scenarios that assume all pipeline transport capacity is frozen and no other transport capacity ( such as rail or tanker ) is available .