historically , natural gas prices in the united states have been volatile . from 1995 to 1999 , the spot price of natural gas averaged $2.23 per million british thermal units ( mbtu , sometimes noted as mmbtu ) but increased to an average price of $4.68 per mbtu , in nominal dollars , during the 2000-2004 period , an almost 110% rise . many observers , including u.s. government officials , have only recently recognized the tremendous resource size and the benefits that will accrue from developing the resources . even though shale gas development is still considered very new and tight oil production is even newer , the industry has continued to improve its efficiency in extracting the resources , particularly of natural gas . as more industry resources are shifted to tight oil plays , the natural gas sector has had to produce more with less . some in industry point out that at the beginning of shale gas development about 5% of the resource was able to be extracted ; now it is closer to 20% but will likely increase over time . advances in directional well drilling and reservoir stimulation have dramatically changed this perspective . the prospect that by the end of the decade the united states could become a significant exporter of natural gas and the world's leading oil producer is a phenomenal change of circumstances from just a few years ago . the technological advances that drove the changes in the united states have also reversed the global perspective of dwindling oil and natural gas resources and increased the concern about greenhouse gas emissions . these concerns have drawn scrutiny of regulatory regimes governing this industry and have led to calls for greater federal oversight of oil and gas development . a growing concern is that the deep - well disposal of oil and gas production wastewater may be responsible for increasing rates of seismic activity in certain areas . although primary regulatory authority over oil and natural gas exploration and production on state and private lands generally rests with the states , provisions of several federal environmental laws currently apply to certain activities associated with oil and natural gas exploration and production . moreover , epa has been reviewing other statutory authorities and pursuing new regulatory initiatives , and blm is planning further revisions to its oil and gas rules to address venting and flaring of natural gas on federal and indian lands . a broader concern among some is that the low price of natural gas is having negative consequences for the development and growth in energy efficiency , renewable energy sources , and nuclear power , potentially resulting in another generation of greenhouse - gas - producing energy sources . other countries seek to emulate the u.s. production success but have yet to do so . the u.s. oil and gas situation continues to be extremely dynamic , and many questions remain about how the united states will develop its resources . by comparison , the extraction rate for conventional gas is between 30% and 60% of the resource . development of these resources has generated concern and debate over potential environmental and human health risks .