this section provides a broad overview of u.s. policy in the region . it focuses largely on u.s. initiatives to encourage post - transition political and economic development in the mena countries and highlights similarities and differences with european efforts to provide a basis for comparison when considering prospects for future u.s. - european cooperation . u.s. programs and policies described in this section should be considered illustrative , rather than exhaustive . the united states and its european partners share similar interests in ensuring that the changes underway in the middle east and north africa result in a more stable , secure , and prosperous region . common u.s. and european concerns in the region include countering terrorism , weapons proliferation , and transnational crime ; curtailing islamist extremism ; ensuring a reliable flow of energy exports and commercial transit ; and ensuring israel's security and advancing peace negotiations with the palestinians . europe's geographic proximity to the mena region also makes controlling migration a key priority for individual european countries and for the eu as a whole , while preserving military cooperation with mena countries remains critical for the united states , especially given long - standing u.s. interests in israel and the persian gulf . many analysts suggest that to date , u.s. and eu policies have been closely aligned on most issues regarding the changes underway in the mena region . as noted previously , numerous experts also argue that greater u.s. - european cooperation may be essential to providing robust and effective western support to the region . this section describes the current status of u.s. - european efforts to coordinate political and economic policies toward the mena region , presents an array of potential areas and options for future consideration , and discusses possible challenges and pitfalls to closer u.s. - european cooperation . crs report rl33487 , armed conflict in syria: u.s. and international response , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] . such events also encouraged some citizens in morocco and jordan to press the existing monarchies for further political and constitutional reforms . and in syria , demonstrations challenging the ruling asad regime triggered a brutal government response that has since escalated into a civil war , in which tens of thousands have been killed . almost immediately after the onset of the "arab spring," analysts on both sides of the atlantic began calling for robust u.s. - european cooperation to help promote a more peaceful and prosperous mena region . those of this view noted that the united states and europe share a multitude of common concerns in the region ( from countering terrorism to guaranteeing a reliable flow of energy exports ) , and similar interests in ensuring that the transitions underway result in more open and democratically accountable governments , greater economic opportunities , and long - term stability and security .