some have been reintroduced , and additional proposals are expected . congress has long supported biomedical research and development . some of the biomedical research and development issues that the 113 th congress may face include the budget and oversight of the national institutes of health and the relationship of federal r&d to the cost and availability of prescription drugs . this section focuses on policy issues relating to federal efforts supporting research and development in the physical and material sciences . some of the policy issues in this area that the 113 th congress may address include funding and oversight of the national science foundation and the multiagency initiative supporting the research and development in the emerging field of nanotechnology . issues relating to the department of energy office of science and arpa - e , both of which support science and technology in physical and material sciences , are discussed in the "energy" section of this report . science and technology play an important role in national defense . the department of defense relies on a robust research and development effort to develop new military systems and improve existing systems . issues that may come before the 113 th congress regarding the department of defense's science and technology include budgetary concerns and the effectiveness of programs to transition s&t findings into fielded products . congress has historically had a strong interest in space policy issues . two space topics that may come before the 113 th congress include the reauthorization of the national aeronautics and space administration ( nasa ) and issues related to earth observing satellites . science and technology play an increasingly large role in environmental issues . science - and technology - related environmental issues that may come before the 113 th congress include climate change science , carbon sequestration , and national ocean policy . the science and technology related - energy issues that may come before the 113 th congress include the funding and role of the advanced research projects agency - energy and the department of energy office of science , reprocessing of spent nuclear fuel , and the development of biofuels and of ocean energy technology . the federal government spends billions of dollars supporting research and development to protect the homeland . some of the issues that the 113 th congress may consider include how the department of homeland security performs research and development and issues regarding its programs to detect smuggled nuclear material and biological terrorism . this section also includes issues regarding the development of medical countermeasures against chemical , biological , radiological , and nuclear agents ; oversight of who is permitted to perform research on certain dangerous biological pathogens ; and how to communicate scientific results that may pose a security risk . the rapid pace of advancements in information technology presents several issues for congressional policymakers , including cybersecurity , potential changes to how the internet is governed , issues related to broadband access , and issues related to the allocation of spectrum to support wireless services . this report is designed to serve as a brief introduction to many of these issues . each issue section provides some background information and outlines the policy issues that may be considered .