account . "relevancy" is also not defined by fisa , but is generally understood to be a less stringent standard than probable cause requiring only that the information sought would tend to prove or disprove a fact at issue . in august 2013 , the obama administration released a whitepaper providing a legal analysis of the bulk collection of telephony metadata under section 215 . included in this whitepaper was an examination of the term "relevancy" as used in section 215 . the whitepaper first noted previous characterizations of relevancy by the supreme court described relevance as encompassing "any matter that bears on , or that reasonably could lead to other matter that could bear on , any issue that is or may be in the case. account was justified when a police officer received a tip from an individual that he had received what appeared to be child pornography from that yahoo ! the whitepaper also noted that courts have upheld requests for "entire repositories of records , even when any particular record is unlikely to directly bear on the matter being investigated , because searching the entire repository is the only feasible means to locate the critical documents. on the other hand , the cases cited in the whitepaper do not appear to involve document requests which are on the same scale as the nsa's collection of domestic telephone records . nevertheless , in approving the order authorizing the nsa's collection of these records , the fisc must necessarily have agreed that section 215's relevancy requirement had been satisfied . an "authorized investigation" must be conducted under guidelines approved by the attorney general under executive order 12333 and may not be conducted of a united states person solely upon the basis of activities protected by the first amendment . the attorney general's guidelines for fbi domestic operations authorize three levels of investigations: assessments , preliminary investigations , and full investigations . preliminary investigations require an "allegation or information indicative of possible criminal or national security - threatening activity" before being initiated . similarly , full investigations require "an articulable factual basis for the investigation that reasonably indicates" the existence of some activity constituting a federal crime , a threat to national security , or foreign intelligence . in contrast , assessments do not require any factual predicate . as section 215 explicitly requires an authorized investigation "other than a threat assessment," it is likely that section 215 orders may only be used in conjunction with preliminary or full investigations . following the disclosure of the fisc order compelling verizon to produce large amounts of telephony metadata , some commentators have expressed skepticism regarding how there could be "reasonable grounds to believe" that such a broad amount of data could be said to be "relevant to an authorized investigation," as required by the statute . although the order has been leaked to various media outlets , other pieces of information that would significantly help inform any understanding of how the legal standard in section 215 is being applied have not yet been disclosed . specifically , it is not known what was included in the statement of facts that is required to be submitted as part of the application for a section 215 order .