this concern is not new . for example , when the bush administration announced the vision for space exploration in 2004 , it proposed little new funding to implement it . a widely discussed "sand chart" showed modest funding increases in fy2005 and fy2006 , but otherwise projected a nasa budget out to fy2020 that increased only at about the rate of inflation . because of the vision's strong emphasis on human spaceflight , supporters of other nasa programs , especially science and aeronautics , feared that the vision's funding needs would put the rest of the agency under great budget pressure . in early 2006 , a former nasa associate administrator for space science testified: two years ago , the president released his vision for space exploration and provided a budget that would support it . this is shown in figure 2 . the apollo and post - challenger peaks are again evident . in these terms , the past 20 years have been a steady decline , except for a brief plateau in the early 2000s , an uptick in fy2009 , and a smaller uptick in fy2014 . as a share of gdp , the fy2013 , fy2014 , and fy2015 appropriations are lower than any other year since fy1960 . while advocates of more funding for nasa generally consider these trends persuasive , others may not . one counterargument is that federal funding should be allocated based on the merit and importance of current programs , without regard to the funding those programs have received in the past . another is that federal programs in general should represent a lower share of gdp , in order to address the federal deficit and debt or to reduce the tax burden on the economy . analysts also often compare actual appropriations for nasa with the amounts authorized in nasa authorization acts , the amounts requested by current and former administrations , the amounts projected for future years by the office of management and budget ( omb ) , and the "notional" amounts given for future years in nasa's congressional budget justifications . as shown in figure 3 , actual appropriations rarely match the amounts authorized and may not even trend in the same direction . the authorized increase from fy2007 to fy2009 corresponded to an actual increase , but the authorized increase from fy2011 to fy2013 corresponded to an actual decrease . a frequent concern is that nasa is being asked to do more than it can afford . in the intervening two years , the administration has reduced this budget to the point where the plan is insupportable . last year , aeronautics and technology suffered . this year , the agency's science program is to be cannibalized , even though the nasa administrator had promised not to transfer "one thin dime" from scientific exploration into human space flight . by 2009 , the augustine report concluded that executing nasa's plans would require an additional $3 billion per year , even with some schedule delays . the augustine report's conclusions were a major impetus behind the passage of the 2010 nasa authorization act , but despite the changes in direction made by that act , concerns remain .