it also has expanded geographically . it began as a program focused on dismantling the vast biological weapons complex that russia inherited from the soviet union , but has now become a tool that the united states uses to promote "best practices" in physical security and safety at biological laboratories with dangerous pathogens , and to develop disease surveillance systems on several continents , particularly southeast asia and sub - saharan africa . the name has also changed , from biological threat reduction ( btr ) to cooperative biological engagement ( cbe ) , to reflect the sensitivity of new partner countries to being termed a "threat. congress has been concerned about measuring the effectiveness of these programs in reducing threats . section 1303 of the fy2012 ndaa set a limitation on funds for the cooperative biological engagement ( cbe ) program — "not more than 80 percent may be obligated or expended" — until certifications by the secretary of defense are sent to congress regarding the effectiveness of the cbe program . the shift in ctr's biological weapons programs mirrors a similar shift in focus for ctr programs overall , from a focus on threat reduction in the former soviet union to the prevention of wmd terrorism from any source world - wide . the obama administration has stated that the goal of the cbe program is to counter the "threat of state and non - state actors acquiring biological materials and expertise that could be used to develop or deploy a biological weapon. the program does this by destroying or securing biological agents ( "select agents" ) at their source and building the capacity to detect , diagnose , and report a disease outbreak . the 2009 national strategy for combating biological threats emphasized the need for global health security and best practices . as a result , dod's ctr program works with several federal agencies , other donor countries , international organizations , and the private sector to implement this approach . the department of state also funds bio - security programs , managing those that address scientist training , biosafety and biosecurity best practices , and industry partnerships under the global threat reduction's biosecurity engagement program ( see " securing knowledge and expertise " section , below ) . the state department program is primarily designed to prevent terrorist access to dangerous pathogens ( or chemicals or nuclear material ) , and programs are concentrated in countries with the highest current risk . in the fy16 budget request , the state department said that the program would focus its work on pakistan , turkey and iraq , "to guard against any outflow of wmd - applicable technology from neighboring syria. since ctr's inception , congress and the executive branch have sought to address the challenges posed by the potential proliferation of biological weapons and materials from russia . this was a particular concern because the soviet union reportedly developed the world's largest biological weapons program , employing , at its peak , an estimated 60,000 people at more than 50 sites . this weapons complex developed a broad range of biological pathogens for use against plants , animals , and humans .