most recently , s. 323 and h.r . 1428 were introduced in the 113 th congress to provide medicare part b as a secondary payer of only immunosuppressive drugs for kidney transplant recipients who are no longer eligible for medicare coverage and are enrolled in a group health plan ( i.e. the 12 months of post - transplant medicare eligibility was extended to 36 months with the passage of p.l . for beneficiaries who are eligible for medicare due to esrd , medicare may provide coverage on the first month of eligibility if the beneficiary is admitted to a medicare - approved hospital to undergo a kidney transplant procedure or elects to receive dialysis treatment at home . for beneficiaries who do not elect to receive dialysis at home , medicare coverage begins on the fourth month of receiving dialysis treatment . with few exceptions , medicare is a secondary payer for the first 30 months of eligibility for beneficiaries who become entitled to medicare due to esrd and are insured under a union or employer - sponsored health plan . as of december 31 , 2010 , according to usrds , roughly 489,000 individuals were estimated to be diagnosed with esrd and were eligible for some form of medicare coverage . for beneficiaries who qualify for medicare due to esrd , medicare eligibility is limited to 36 months following a successful kidney transplant . of the individuals under the age of 65 that have received a successful kidney transplant at a prior date and no longer required dialysis treatment in 2010 ( 142,923 patients ) , roughly 41% were not eligible for medicare coverage ( 58,728 patients ) ; see figure 1 . roughly 25% of patients under the age of 65 were covered under original medicare , and an additional 15% were covered under both medicare and medicaid . an additional 15% of individuals under the age of 65 who received a kidney transplant had medicare as a secondary payer and 4% were enrolled in an ma plan . individuals with a functioning kidney transplant usually require immunosuppressive drugs for life to minimize the risk of their immune system rejecting the "foreign" donor kidney . for the most part , the standard of care for immunosuppressant therapy in kidney transplant recipients is a combination of a calcineurin inhibitor and an antimetabolite ( with or without a corticosteroid ) . the most commonly prescribed calcineurin inhibitor is a daily dose of tacrolimus , and the more commonly prescribed antimetabolite is a daily dose of mycophenolate mofetil ( mmf ) . with the passage of the social security amendments of 1972 ( p.l . 92-603 ) , medicare provides coverage for certain individuals who are diagnosed with esrd . specifically , an individual medically determined to have esrd can be eligible to enroll in medicare if he or she , or his or her spouse , parent , or guardian , has earned at least six social security credits over the past three years . originally , for esrd beneficiaries , medicare eligibility was limited to 12 months following a successful kidney transplant ( if the individual no longer required dialysis ) . the first generic of tacrolimus was approved in 2009 , and generics for mmf were approved in 2008 .