these priorities are to guide u.s . attorneys and federal law enforcement to focus their resources and efforts on those who interfere with any of these priorities , regardless of state law . in an interview with abc news , president obama noted that "[it] would not make sense from a prioritization point of view for us to focus on recreational drug users in a state that has already said that under state law that's legal. of note , under the supremacy clause of the u.s. constitution , state laws that conflict with federal law are generally preempted and therefore are void ; however , courts have generally not viewed the relationship between state and federal marijuana laws in such a manner . further , congress did not intend that the csa should displace all state laws associated with controlled substances . it is unclear whether or how the department of justice is tracking activity to ensure that standards are being met in states that have legalized marijuana . at minimum , it appears that the dea discusses trafficking issues with state and local law enforcement . according to dea administrator michele leonhart , there has been increased marijuana trafficking in states surrounding colorado since colorado legalized for recreational use . a number of criminal networks rely on profits generated from the sale of illegal drugs — including marijuana — in the united states . mexican drug trafficking organizations control more of the wholesale distribution of marijuana than other major drug trafficking organizations in the united states . one estimate has placed the proportion of u.s. - consumed marijuana that was imported from mexico at somewhere between 40% and 67% . while the mexican criminal networks control the wholesale marijuana distribution of illicit drugs in the united states , they "are not generally directly involved in retail distribution of illicit drugs. in order to facilitate the distribution and sale of drugs in the united states , mexican drug traffickers have formed relationships with u.s. street gangs , prison gangs , and outlaw motorcycle gangs . although these gangs have historically been involved with retail - level drug distribution , their ties to the mexican criminal networks have allowed them to become increasingly involved at the wholesale level as well . these gangs facilitate the movement of illicit drugs to urban , suburban , and rural areas of the united states . not only do these domestic gangs distribute and sell the drugs , but they also "provide warehousing , security , and / or transportation services as well. barrio azteca is a prominent u.s. prison gang with ties to mexican drug trafficking organizations . barrio azteca primarily generates money from smuggling marijuana , heroin , and cocaine across the southwest border for the drug trafficking organizations — namely , the juárez cartel — but they are also involved in other crimes , such as extortion , kidnapping , and alien smuggling . a number of organizations have assessed the potential profits generated from illicit drug sales , both worldwide and in the united states , but "[e]stimates of marijuana ... revenues suffer particularly high rates of uncertainty. in a follow - up memorandum to u.s .