( see text box below. ) oil spill liability , cleanup , and compensation issues are addressed by the oil pollution act of 1990 . the oil spill liability trust fund ( osltf ) provides an immediate source of federal funding to respond to oil spills in a timely manner . the national pollution funds center ( npfc ) , an office within the coast guard , manages the trust fund . the monies from the osltf can be used to respond to a wide variety of oil types , including oil - sands - derived crude oils . the osltf is financed primarily by a per - barrel tax on domestic crude oil and imported crude oil and petroleum products . in 2017 , the tax increased from 8 cents to 9 cents per barrel . based on language in a 1980 house committee report , the internal revenue service ( irs ) concluded in 2011 that oil - sands - derived crude oils are not subject to this excise tax . this issue received attention in recent congresses and from the prior administration . these terms generally refer to a mixture of sand , clay and other minerals , water , and bitumen . the bitumen component of this mixture is a form of crude oil that has undergone degradation over millions of years . after oil producers separate the bitumen from the mixture , it is very dense and highly viscous ( i.e. , resistant to flow ) , having the consistency of molasses at room temperature . this property lends itself well to making asphalt: bitumen deposits have been mined since antiquity for use as sealants and paving materials . in recent decades , the natural bitumen in oil sands — particularly deposits in alberta , canada — has been extracted to generate substantial quantities of crude oil and related substances . the alberta deposits are estimated to be one of the largest accumulations of oil in the world , contributing to canada's third - place ranking for estimated proven oil reserves ( behind venezuela and saudi arabia ) . canadian production of oil - sands - derived crude oil has increased dramatically in recent years . if approved and constructed , the keystone xl pipeline would add to existing cross - border pipelines in transporting oil - sands - derived crude oils from alberta into the united states . companies developing alberta's oil sands resources process or dilute the natural bitumen in order to transport it via pipeline . this processed / diluted bitumen falls into three general categories: 1 . upgraded bitumen , or synthetic crude oil ( sco ) is produced from bitumen at a refinery that turns the very heavy hydrocarbons into a lighter material . diluted b itumen ( dilb it ) is bitumen that is blended with lighter hydrocarbons — typically natural gas condensates — to create a lighter , less viscous , and more easily transportable material . dilbit may be blended as 25% to 30% condensate and 70% to 75% bitumen . synthetic bitumen ( synbit ) is typically a combination of bitumen and sco . blending the lighter sco with the heavier bitumen results in a product that more closely resembles conventional crude oil .