these issues are examined below . differences in fair lending requirements congress enacted the community reinvestment act of 1977 ( cra ; p.l . 95-128 ) in reaction to perceptions that banks were not sufficiently addressing the credit needs of low - and moderate - income ( lmi ) neighborhoods . the cra requires that federal banking regulatory agencies evaluate how regulated institutions meet the credit needs of their entire communities . no statutorily set rules are imposed ; banking institutions , however , typically receive cra credits after providing lmi loans ( subject to existing federal prudential regulations for safety and soundness ) or other financial retail services in their communities . cra credits become important when a bank seeks permission from its regulator to move offices or to merge with another financial institution . credit unions are not subject to the cra . given that banks may accept deposits from all individuals in a community , cra provides them with a reciprocal obligation to meet credit needs , as much as possible , of their communities at large . cra credits are useful to banks when they apply for charters , branches , mergers , acquisitions , and other applications that require approval from their regulators . by contrast , credit unions are not awarded credits that would allow them to expand beyond the common bonds defined in their membership charters . instead , a credit union may add an underserved area in its field of membership and provide financial services in that designated area . if , however , the cra did apply to credit unions , some of them may enjoy a competitive advantage in terms of achieving its policy goals , particularly if their membership consists predominately of minority groups and the credit unions' financial services can be tailored to these groups . not - for - profit institutions generally may enjoy a cost advantage providing higher risk , unsecured loans at lower rates and fees relative to for - profit banks . in other words , credit unions seek to make enough money to continue operating their organizations , but they are not necessarily incentivized to make a return for equity investors . for example , a credit union affiliated with a faith - based organization that specializes in small - dollar lending may find it less costly ( relative to banks or larger credit unions ) to devote resources to monitor the repayment patterns of a small group of borrowers that might otherwise remain unbanked or underbanked . low - cost payday lending to individuals and micro - business lending , which is the granting of small loans between $500 and $35,000 to small businesses with 5 or fewer employees , have been viable businesses for some credit unions . thus , smaller financial institutions generally may enjoy cost advantages to provide services to riskier consumer markets , and such advantages may be even greater for small not - for - profit credit unions . as of 2012 , there were 180 banking institutions with minority ownership ; 150 of them would be considered community banks with assets less than $1 billion . in contrast , there were 809 credit unions with over 50% minority membership as of 2012 .