these include changes to both operations and personnel . in 2013 , the postal service implemented a realignment of its operations to further reduce costs and strengthen its finances . these operational realignments included reductions in the number of mail processing operations , realignment of retail office hours to match demand , reductions in the number of delivery routes and consolidations of delivery offices . the financial figures have not been adjusted to reflect inflation . congress designed the usps to be financially self - supporting . the agency's ability to remain financially self - sustaining over the long term is questionable . in fy2013 , the usps's revenues began to rise after falling for four consecutive years ( figure 3 ) . however , expenses have not fallen quickly enough to allow the postal service to meet its statutory prefunding commitments to the rhbf and place the agency on a more sustainable financial course ( figure 5 ) . despite the revenue growth in fy2013 and fy2014 , the usps's annual revenue remained lower than its revenue 10 years earlier . additionally , the revenue trend depicted in figure 3 may indicate a long - term weakening of the demand for the usps's current products and services . the weak cash position of the usps has led the agency to take a number of actions to address their financial position . in june 2014 , the postal service announced that a second phase of mail processing realignments would begin in january 2015 , culminating in a consolidation impacting up to 82 more processing operations . additionally , the postal service continues to leverage employee attrition , voluntary early retirement ( ver ) and utilization of non - career employees to the maximum extent permitted by its labor contracts . in july 2014 , the postal service offered a ver to approximately 3,000 postmasters who were impacted by reductions in retail hours at certain postal facilities which was accepted by 1,380 postmasters . despite these organizational actions and the increase in revenue for the usps in fy2013 , the postal service projects that legislative change will be necessary to improve liquidity moving forward . a variety of approaches may be used to consider the financial condition of a firm . here , the usps's financial condition is examined by the metrics of profitability , revenues , expenses , and debt and liquidity . the usps issues both quarterly ( 10-qs ) and annual financial statements ( 10-ks and annual reports ) . the data below were drawn exclusively from these usps sources . with no further borrowing authority the usps could find itself with insufficient funds to continue operations , leading to a need for payment prioritization and the continued deferral of capital and infrastructure expenditures . it goes beyond the scope of this report to assess which operational or policy changes could improve the usps's financial condition sufficiently to enable it to continue as a self - funding government agency .