used in electric power generation . metallurgical coal: also known as coking coal , this type of coal is used to make steel . appalachia: primarily the east coast of the united states , and includes the north , central , and southern appalachia basins . interior: mainly in the midwest part of the united states and includes the illinois basin . western: mostly the rocky mountain region of the united states and includes the powder river and uinta basins . the highest grades are used in metallurgy . environmental groups and various consumer groups have been most vocal against exports . coal exports have attracted greater attention from both sides of the question as fast as new projects have been proposed . in addition to areas where new port capacity is being proposed , some communities along potential and existing rail routes , and mining sites , have voiced their opposition . crs report r42950 , prospects for coal in electric power and industry , by [author name scrubbed] , [author name scrubbed] , and [author name scrubbed] . crs report r43011 , u.s. and world coal production , federal taxes , and incentives , coordinated by [author name scrubbed] . u.s. coal exports: national and state economic contributions , prepared for the national mining association , by ernst and young , may 2013 . our pain , thei r gain: mountains destroyed for coal shipped overseas , by u.s. house committee on natural resources — democrats , july 19 , 2012 . appendix a. map of coal deposits and infrastructure appendix b. characteristics of different coals coal — a dense carbonaceous fossil fuel — is formed from decayed organic matter that has been subjected to various temperatures and pressures without the presence of oxygen . this burnable rock also contains quantities of hydrogen , sulfur , and nitrogen , and other elements and various amounts of mineral matter . coal seams are formed along with other sedimentary rocks , primarily sandstone and shale . there are four basic types of coal with varying characteristics throughout the united states . the characteristics of a particular coal will determine how it is used , mainly for heat or electric power generation , or in steel production . coal quality is measured by its energy value ( eg , british thermal units or btus per pound ) , moisture and sulfur levels , and ash content . lignite: a brownish - black coal with high moisture and ash content and relatively low heating value , between 4,000 british thermal units ( btu ) to 8,300 btu per pound . it contains the lowest carbon content of the four types of coal , and is usually consumed in electricity generation . lignite is mainly mined in texas , north dakota , louisiana , and montana . sub - bituminous: this type of coal was the most produced coal in 2011 , accounting for 47% of u.s. production . it is a dull black coal with higher heating value than lignite and used for generating electricity and space heat . its btu content ranges from 8,300 btu to 13,000 btu per pound . resources are primarily found in montana , wyoming , colorado , new mexico , washington , and alaska .