the section below discusses these issues . despite ongoing debates about the utility or appropriate levels of foreign assistance , global health programs have , in general , continued to receive bipartisan support , possibly indicating that global health remains a congressional priority . while the international community has achieved significant gains in curbing preventable deaths , some experts are concerned about looming health challenges . in a growing number of countries , deaths and illness from noncommunicable diseases ( like diabetes , cancer , and heart disease ) are outnumbering fatalities and ailments from communicable diseases ( like malaria and hiv / aids ) . many middle - income countries like south africa face dual epidemics of diseases associated with growing prosperity ( diabetes ) and persistent poverty ( vaccine - preventable child deaths ) . in the absence of higher spending levels , bolstering health systems will likely gain greater importance in u.s. global health programs . it remains to be seen whether legislative and executive priorities will align under the trump administration . while congressional support for global health remained steadfast throughout the obama administration , the great recession that began in 2008 slowed overall federal spending , and appropriations for global health programs became relatively stagnant . on average , congress appropriated roughly $9 billion annually for global health throughout the obama administration . u.s. support for global health has been motivated in large part by concern about emergent and reemerging infectious diseases . through pepfar , the united states contributes to multilateral efforts to combat hiv / aids , tb , and malaria ( hatm ) , including the global fund and the joint united nations program on hiv / aids ( unaids ) . following outbreaks of diseases like severe acute respiratory syndrome ( sars ) , hiv / aids , and pandemic influenza , several presidents highlighted the threats such diseases pose to economic development , stability , and security and launched a variety of health initiatives to address them . congress demonstrated support for each initiative by meeting requested levels , and in some instances exceeded budget proposals . in 1996 , for example , president bill clinton issued a presidential decision directive that called infectious diseases a threat to domestic and international security , called for u.s. global health efforts to be coordinated with those aimed at counterterrorism , and established a health advisor on the national security council ( nsc ) for the first time . president clinton later requested $100 million for the leadership and investment in fighting an epidemic ( life ) initiative in 1999 to expand u.s. global hiv / aids efforts . president george w. bush recognized the impact of infectious diseases on domestic and global security in his 2002 and 2006 national security strategy papers and created a number of initiatives to address them , including the president's emergency plan for aids relief ( pepfar ) in 2003 , the president's malaria initiative ( pmi ) in 2005 , and the neglected tropical diseases ( ntd ) program in 2006 . president barack obama also recognized the risk of infectious diseases and made several statements about how their spread across developing countries might affect u.s. security .