in thomas jefferson univ . v. shalala , the court stated , "[w]e must give substantial deference to an agency's interpretations of its own regulations . our task is not to decide which among several competing interpretations best serves the regulatory purpose. the court reiterated that the agency's interpretation should be followed unless it is plainly erroneous or clearly inconsistent with the agency's "intent at the time of the regulation's promulgation. the court has clearly stated that "the power authoritatively to interpret its own regulations is a component of the agency's delegated lawmaking powers. even more recently , in 2008 , the court again stated , "[j]ust as we defer to an agency's reasonable interpretations of the statute when it issues regulations in the first instance , the agency is entitled to further deference when it adopts a reasonable interpretation of regulations it has put in force. however , what happens if an agency's regulation is ambiguous ? the supreme court's decision from bowles v. seminole rock & sand co. addresses when an agency's regulation , as opposed to its organic statute , is ambiguous . it is important to understand the implication this deference has on the behavior and functioning of administrative agencies . seminole rock provides a significant amount of flexibility to agencies in the implementation of their regulatory programs . there are costs and benefits associated with permitting an agency to promulgate broad rules and then allowing the agency to refine them through interpretations accorded with judicial deference . while the supreme court has not acted to change the deferential standard provided to agencies in these circumstances , justice roberts recently announced that "the bar is now aware that there is some interest in reconsidering" seminole rock deference . if the court decides to take a case to reconsider this judicial deference , it would be considering a question that goes "to the heart of administrative law" because "[q]uestions of seminole rock ... deference arise as a matter of course on a regular basis. seminole rock deference — which provides an agency judicial deference when an agency interprets its own regulations — arguably has become an equally important , if slightly less recognizable , canon of administrative law as the chevron test . just as statutes enacted by congress occasionally lack clarity , sometimes regulations enacted by administrative agencies can be unclear . the supreme court ruled in seminole rock that a court must accept an agency's interpretation of its own regulations unless it is "plainly erroneous. legal scholars have noted that this deference has benefits and drawbacks . by enabling agencies to interpret their own regulations , agencies are provided with flexibility to enact broad rules and refine them as specific circumstances arise . this process may help agencies administer complex regulatory schemes with greater efficiency . furthermore , courts often note that the agency — as opposed to a reviewing court — has a better understanding of what the regulation is intended to accomplish . on the other hand , it may be troubling that the author of these legally binding rules also possesses the power to interpret the meaning of those regulations when the text is not clear .