appendix a . background on scope and terms usda activities and relationships to appropriations bills the u.s. department of agriculture ( usda ) carries out widely varied responsibilities through about 30 separate internal agencies and offices staffed by about 100,000 employees . usda spending is not synonymous with farm program spending , nor are agriculture appropriations completely correlated with usda spending . usda divides its activities into "mission areas. food and nutrition programs , with more than three - fourths of usda's budget , comprise the largest mission area , supporting the supplemental nutrition assistance program ( snap , formerly food stamps ) ; the women , infants , and children ( wic ) program ; and child nutrition programs . the second - largest usda mission area , with about one - eighth of usda's budget , is farm and foreign agricultural services . this broad area includes the farm commodity price and income support programs , crop insurance , certain mandatory conservation and trade programs , farm loans , and foreign food aid programs . five other mission areas share one - eighth of usda's budget , including natural resources , rural development , research and education , marketing and regulatory programs , and food safety . comparing usda's organization and budget data to the agriculture appropriations bill in congress is not always easy . usda's "mission areas" do not always correspond to the titles or categories in the agriculture appropriations bill . foreign agricultural assistance is a separate title in the appropriations bill ( title v ) , but is joined with domestic farm support in usda's "farm and foreign agriculture" mission area . title i in the appropriations bill covers four of usda's mission areas: agricultural research , marketing and regulatory programs , food safety , and the farm support portion of farm and foreign agriculture . the forest service is about half of the natural resources mission area but is funded in the interior appropriations bill . it also accounts for about one - third of usda's personnel , with about 34,000 staff years in fy2011 . the type of funding ( mandatory vs. discretionary ) also is an important difference between how the appropriations bill and usda's mission areas are organized . for example , the snap and child nutrition programs are funded by an annual appropriation based on projected spending needs . in fact , snap is referred to as an "appropriated entitlement," and requires an annual appropriation . in contrast , the commodity credit corporation operates on a line of credit with the treasury , but receives an annual appropriation to reimburse the treasury and to maintain its line of credit . budget authority , obligations , outlays , and program levels in addition to the difference between mandatory and discretionary spending , four other terms are important to understanding differences in discussions about federal spending: budget authority , obligations , outlays , and program levels . budget authority = how much money congress allows a federal agency to commit to spend . it represents a limit on funding and is generally what congress focuses on in making most budgetary decisions . it is the legal basis to incur obligations . most of the amounts mentioned in this report are budget authority .