2375 was introduced . the bill would delay for at least six months the implementation of round 1 recompete and round 2 of the competitive bidding program and national mail order program for diabetic supplies . on june 27 , 2013 , s. 1265 was introduced . the bill would delay implementation of round 2 in tennessee . the secretary would be required to terminate contracts for round 2 winning suppliers in tennessee and to rebid those contracts . the bill would also impose penalties on the implementation contractor for specified errors including awarding a contract to a dmepos supplier in tennessee that did not meet state licensing requirements . the congressional budget office ( cbo ) , responsible for preparing cost estimates of legislation pursuant to the congressional budget act of 1974 , has not yet issued cost estimates for the bills . the following is a legislative history of the dmepos competitive bidding program , with descriptions of selected evaluations and congressional hearings for context . the balanced budget act of 1997 ( bba97 , p.l . 105-33 ) competitive bidding for dmepos was introduced in the bba97 , which required the secretary to establish five three - year competitive bidding demonstration projects . suppliers competed for contracts to furnish medicare beneficiaries with selected items and services . the bba97 required the secretary to select areas for the demonstrations based on the availability and accessibility of suppliers , and on the likelihood that savings could be realized by competitive bidding . the secretary was permitted to limit the number of winning suppliers . if the demonstrations decreased medicare spending , the secretary could expand the projects to other areas . demonstrations in texas and florida three demonstrations were conducted in two different sites . the first demonstration site was polk county , fl . the centers for medicare & medicaid services ( cms ) reviewed bids from 30 different suppliers for both quality and value . based on these bids , medicare established new payment rates for five categories of products: oxygen supplies and equipment , hospital beds and accessories , surgical dressings , enteral nutrition equipment and supplies , and urological supplies . to ensure beneficiary access and a choice of suppliers , between 4 and 13 suppliers were selected for each category ( with 16 winning suppliers in total ) . new rates took effect on october 1 , 1999 . this phase of the demonstration , which ended in september 2001 , saved the medicare program and beneficiaries an estimated 16% - 17% on covered items . a second round of bidding took place in polk county in early 2001 . the bidding was conducted on the same product categories minus enteral nutrition . again , 16 winners were chosen to participate , of whom half had participated in the previous round . the prices went into effect on october 1 , 2001 . the polk county demonstration ended september 30 , 2002 . this second round of the demonstration resulted in estimated savings of approximately 20% . a second demonstration site in a three - county area around san antonio , tx , began on february 1 , 2001 .