, the legislative prayer exemption . legislative prayers generally are permissible provided that such prayers do not indicate a government preference for one religion over another . in 1985 , the u.s. court of appeals for the second circuit decided the only direct constitutional challenge to the military chaplaincy , katcoff v. marsh . although later cases have challenged how the chaplaincy is administered , katcoff considered whether the mere existence of the military chaplaincy violated the establishment clause . the court held that the military chaplaincy was a constitutional means of accommodating servicemembers' religious exercise rights under the free exercise clause . because members of the military have been removed from their religious communities , the court explained that the government had interfered with their ability to exercise their religious beliefs . accordingly , the military chaplaincy , although unconstitutional if examined solely under the establishment clause , alleviated the burden imposed by the military on servicemembers' religious exercise . the court reinforced this balance favoring the accommodation of servicemembers' religious exercise by noting the importance of the war powers clause of the u.s. constitution , which requires the court to give significant deference to congress in military affairs . the court explained that "when a matter provided for by congress in the exercise of its war power and implemented by the army appears reasonably relevant and necessary to furtherance of our national defense it should be treated as presumptively valid and any doubt as to its constitutionality should be resolved ... in favor of deference to the military's exercise of discretion. thus , the court determined that because the chaplaincy serves as an accommodation to alleviate a burden on religion imposed by the government and because the military is entitled to deference in a reasonable policy to ensure that servicemembers are treated adequately to maintain military order , the chaplaincy is a permissive accommodation of religion by the government . the court has often recognized the role of religion in the nation's history , noting a number of occasions on which government officials invoke religion during official acts . the court has specifically stated that "[w]e are a religious people whose institutions presuppose a supreme being. with that understanding , the court often has justified examples of religious references during public ceremonies: "so help me god" as part of the oath of office ; opening prayers during legislative sessions ; "god save the united states and this honorable court" in the opening statement of the supreme court's sessions ; presidential proclamations , including the thanksgiving holiday ; etc . such references have been labeled as "ceremonial deisms" — practices that may not violate the establishment clause "because they have lost through rote repetition any significant religious content. the court has justified references to religion , particularly with regard to displays of religious symbols , as long as the context of the reference does not promote religious beliefs , but only acknowledges a religious history of the nation . the court also has explained that "however history may affect the constitutionality of nonsectarian references to religion by the government , history cannot legitimate practices that demonstrate the government's allegiance to a particular sect or creed.