llcs are relatively recent creations . wyoming was the first state to allow llcs in 1977 , followed by florida in 1982 . by the mid - 1990s , llc laws had been enacted in all states . for many years , the irs had held that any organization would be taxed as a corporation if it had the major characteristics of a corporation . llcs were designed to lack enough corporate characteristics to avoid such a classification . in most cases , this was accomplished in one of three ways: having the company nominally cease to exist upon the withdrawal of a member ; placing restrictions on the transferability of ownership interests ; or designating all members as nominal managers . in 1997 , the irs issued final regulations that in effect allow companies to elect how they will be taxed by simply checking a box on a form . these regulations are typically referred to as "check - the - box" regulations . this includes the portion of allocations that are separately stated . s corporation shareholders are not subject to self - employment taxes on items passed through the corporation . all shareholders must be u.s. citizens or residents . certain banks , insurance companies , possession corporations ( i.e. , corporations predominately operating in a u.s. possession ) , and other select business operations are ineligible to elect s corporate status . an eligible corporation that seeks s corporation status must file a timely election with the irs . each shareholder must consent in writing to the election . the shareholders agree to report and pay tax on their shares of the corporation's income . the election can be revoked with the consent of shareholders holding more than 50% of the outstanding shares of stock . such payments are fixed and do not depend on the profitability of the firm . fringe benefits such as health insurance are also considered a guaranteed payment . the partnership deducts guaranteed payments as ordinary business expenses , and the partners include them as ordinary income . to the extent that the guaranteed payments are for personal services performed by a partner , the income is subject to self - employment tax . an s corporation is a "closely held" corporation that elects to be treated as a pass - through entity for tax purposes . s corporations are named for subchapter s of the irc , which details their tax treatment . by electing s corporation status , a business is able to combine many of the legal and business advantages of a c corporation with the tax advantages of a partnership . several criteria must be met if a corporation wishes to elect s corporation status . the corporation must be incorporated and organized in the united states . an s corporation can only issue one class of stock and is limited to no more than 100 shareholders . the shareholders must be individuals , estates , certain types of trusts , tax - exempt pension funds , or charitable organizations . if an s corporation election is revoked , the corporation cannot elect s status for five years without the consent of the irs . s corporations generally do not pay corporate - level income taxes .