for example , p.l . 110-329 , signed into law on september 30 , 2008 , provided funds for several disasters that occurred in 2008 , including hurricanes gustav and ike , wildfires in california , and the midwest floods . determining the funding amounts directed toward each individual disaster is difficult , if not impossible , unless the legislative text specifies these amounts . if so , what oversight mechanisms are in place to prevent such occurrences ? the amendment could be designed to take effect in three years , giving states time to act , or not . the stafford act could be amended to discontinue all assistance for snow removal unless directed by congress . the amendment could be designed to take effect in three years to give states and localities an opportunity to increase snow removal budgets , or not . the data in this section are not based solely on those in section i . rather , the data in section ii were derived from a variety of authoritative sources , including agency websites , crs experts who received information directly from agencies , and governmental reports . section ii presents funding information by federal entity and includes a narrative summarizing each agency's disaster assistance efforts . the sections also provide the authorities that authorized the activities that were provided . when possible , funding data are provided in tabular form . it should be noted that the data on appropriations in section i , table 1 , are not directly comparable to funding data in section ii . the former were drawn solely from the public laws cited in the source note to table 1 . the data in section ii were obtained , as cited in each subsection , from a range of published and unpublished sources , and include various fiscal years . funding data on federal ( and nonfederal ) assistance are not systematically collected . given the absence of comprehensive federal information on disaster assistance , the data provided in this report should only be considered as an approximation , and should not be viewed as definitive . in addition to the above , the following caveats apply to this report: it is difficult to identify all of the federal entities that provide disaster relief because many federal entities provide aid through a wide range of programs , not necessarily through those designated specifically as "disaster assistance" programs . because data on federal ( and nonfederal ) assistance are not systematically collected , funding data were drawn from a wide range of sources including published and unpublished data that have been collected at different times and under inconsistent reporting methods . following the exodus of thousands of residents from the gulf coast states after hurricane katrina in 2005 , many other states received federal assistance to cope with the influx of those seeking aid . the aid provided to the states outside the gulf coast is not discussed in this report . the appropriations language reviewed for section i usually designates funds to a federal entity for a range of disasters without identifying how much funding is to be disbursed to each incident .