although h.r . 1896 includes provisions that would implement the convention , it includes many other provisions as well . section 1 of the bill provides a title ( name ) for the bill ; section 2 provides the amendments needed for the convention / treaty ; section 3 provides for the development of a standard format for exchange of cse data ; section 4 allows certain researchers under certain circumstances to use the national directory of new hires database with personal identifiers ; and section 5 provides information related to the budgetary effects of the bill . the stated purpose of the bill is to ensure that the united states has the legal authority to comply fully with the obligations of the convention , and for other purposes . 1896 is called the international child support recovery improvement act of 2013 . the references in h.r . 1896 generally refer to amendments made to the social security act , or to a section or provision in the social security act . 104-193 ) clarified the definition of a child's home state and made several revisions to ensure that the full faith and credit laws could be applied consistently with uifsa . the bill would provide further clarification ( as noted above ) of under what conditions a state could modify a child support order . as mentioned earlier , h.r . 1896 would stipulate that each state's uifsa must include any amendments officially adopted as of september 30 , 2008 , by the nccusl . given that this provision must be approved by state legislatures , the bill contains a grace period tied to the meeting schedule of state legislatures . in any given state / jurisdiction , the bill would become effective no later than the effective date of laws enacted by state legislatures implementing the uifsa amendments , but in no event later than the first day of the first calendar quarter beginning after the close of the first regular session of the state legislature that begins after the date of enactment . in the case of a state that has a two - year legislative session , each year of such session shall be deemed to be a separate regular session of the state legislature . 1896 would require the secretary of hhs to issue a rule designating standard data exchange elements for any category of information required to be reported under the cse program . the rule would be developed by hhs in consultation with an interagency workgroup established by the office of management and budget ( omb ) and with consideration of state and tribal perspectives . to the extent practicable , the standard data exchange elements required by the rule would be non - proprietary , permit data to be exchanged , and incorporate the interoperable standards developed and maintained by recognized international bodies , intergovernmental partnerships , and federal entities with authority over contracting and financial assistance .