fhwa data do not substantiate this assertion . the terms "structurally deficient" and "functionally obsolete" are not synonymous with "unsafe. an effort to eliminate all structurally deficient bridges quickly could lead to inefficient spending if a significant percentage of these bridges do not actually have major safety problems . under map - 21 , fhwa is to develop performance measures in regard to bridges . the speed of their development and the effectiveness of implementation will be oversight issues for congress . to encourage state spending on structurally deficient bridges , map - 21 sets a penalty threshold under the nhpp: any state whose structurally deficient bridge deck area on the national highway system within the state's borders exceeds 10% of its total national highway system bridge deck area for three years in a row must devote nhpp funds equal to 50% of the state's fy2009 highway bridge program apportionment to improve bridge conditions during the following fiscal year and each year thereafter until the deck area of structurally deficient bridges falls to 10% or below . even if a state were required to spend more of its federal highway funding on bridges ( and therefore less on roadway projects ) due to this penalty , its mandated spending on deficient bridges would be less than was required prior to the enactment of map - 21 . given the lags in state reporting and the time required to complete major bridge projects , it is not clear whether the states' desire to spend their stp or nhpp funds on nonbridge projects is obstructing the declared national policy of reducing the number of deficient bridges . federal motor fuel tax revenues , which have provided most of the funding for the federal - aid highway program since 1956 , have been insufficient to support the program as authorized by congress for several years . map - 21 allocated money from the treasury's general fund for highway and bridge programs in fy2013 and fy2014 . the highway and transportation funding act of 2014 ( p.l . 113-159 ) also used transfers to extend map - 21's funding levels and policies for eight months , through may 31 , 2015 . if congress wishes to increase spending on bridges in a long - term reauthorization bill , it has a number of options: provide general fund monies to accelerate the repair of structurally deficient and functionally obsolete bridges . consider resurrecting a stand - alone program for structurally deficient bridges , which would essentially reverse the change made in map - 21 and would force the states to provide minimum spending levels for bridge maintenance and repair . raise the fuel taxes that finance the vast majority of surface transportation outlays , possibly with a portion of the increase dedicated to a federal bridge program . emphasize public - private partnerships ( p3s ) as a mechanism to help reduce the number of structurally deficient bridges , for example , by allowing states to offer long - term leases of toll facilities to private investors in return for large up - front payments that could be used to supplement normal state and federal spending on bridge replacement and repair .