plutonium disposition program is also conducted by nnsa . other observers , including within the executive branch , note that the purpose of this program is nonproliferation — rendering weapons - grade plutonium unusable for nuclear weapons on the basis of mutual verification . the american nuclear society has come out strongly in favor of the program for nonproliferation reasons . recent public debate surrounding the u.s. plutonium disposition program has centered on the budget trade - offs of funding the u.s. plutonium disposition program in light of sequestration and other funding limitations . the trump administration proposed the same strategy in its fy2018 budget request . in september 1998 , the united states and russia each agreed to convert 34 metric tons of surplus weapons - grade plutonium to a form that could not be returned to nuclear weapons under the plutonium management and disposition agreement ( pmda ) . the agreement was designed to ease concerns about the possible theft or diversion of weapons - grade plutonium by nations or others seeking to develop their own nuclear weapons . according to the agreement , the parties could use two methods for disposing of the plutonium — they could either convert it to mixed oxide ( mox ) fuel for nuclear power reactors or immobilize it and dispose of it in a way that would preclude its use in nuclear weapons . however , russia had expressed little interest in the permanent immobilization and disposal of plutonium , or burning it in conventional reactors , preferring to use the material as fuel for its civilian fast reactor program . the united states initially intended to pursue both immobilization and mox fuel for conventional reactors . however , after reviewing u.s. nonproliferation policies in 2001 , the bush administration concluded that the dual approach would be too costly . instead , it outlined a plan for the united states to convert almost all its surplus plutonium to mox fuel . the pmda was amended with a protocol which entered into force on july 13 , 2011 . the pmda protocol renewed the commitment of each side to dispose of 34 metric tons of weapons - grade plutonium . it also laid out conditions for russian use of the plutonium as fast reactor fuel , including restrictions on breeding additional plutonium in fast reactors . the two countries agreed to begin plutonium disposition in 2018 . the united states pledged to pay $400 million to support the russian plutonium disposition . supporters of the mox option , however , counter that sunk costs in the current program would make pursuing an alternative path more expensive in the long run . in testimony before congress , obama administration officials reiterated their commitment to the pmda agreement with russia . the fy2014 and fy2015 doe budget justifications stated that "nnsa remains committed to the plutonium disposition mission. however , as noted above , the obama administration switched to the dilute - and - dispose option for achieving that mission , and the trump administration has adopted the same policy . according to the 2010 protocol amending the pmda , the united states would have to obtain written agreement with russia to implement any alternative to irradiating plutonium in nuclear reactors .