what are the costs to the federal government if agencies are not appropriately preserving records ? this report provides background and information on the increasing volume of electronic records and the variety of platforms used to create them . will digital and electronic records created today be accessible in the future ? new and emerging technologies have continuously allowed federal agencies to create and accumulate more records , complicating and adding costs to record collection , retention , and preservation . a single record can take many forms , such as a sheet of paper , several linear feet of paper , a map , a digital document , a vast database , or a vhs videocassette . each type of record requires particular archival responsibilities and presents unique challenges to ensure its perpetual retrieval . as noted above , agencies are required to collect , retain , and schedule for disposal or permanent retention all series of records regardless of format . agencies may not destroy "or permanently transfer any record to nara unless it has been scheduled. the scheduling requirement provides nara with an estimate of the records series maintained by each federal agency . what policies or actions might be needed to ensure that digital federal records are authentic , authoritative expressions of government deliberation or action ? additionally , congress may choose to revisit the laws that govern federal recordkeeping and disposal to ensure that they include federal records created on different platforms using diverse technologies . it then presents data on agencies' increasing use of electronic media to create federal records and examines the potential implications of increasing creation and use of electronic mediums , including the complications of mixed platforms , the difficulties of ensuring a record's trustworthiness , and understanding and preparing for the risks of using electronic platforms . the report also details and analyzes actions by the administration of president barack obama to streamline and clarify agencies' recordkeeping responsibilities — with a focus on electronic records . this report does not address all government records issues , such as the collection , preservation of , and access to presidential records . this report also does not provide details about the collection and retention of federal records , generally . related topics , such as the laws governing access to federal records and meetings , as well as background on federal information classification policies , are beyond the scope of this report , but are addressed in other congressional research service products . the contemporary challenges government agencies face in creating and retaining records resemble those discussed and debated prior to the enactment of the fra in 1950 . the act was prompted in part by the recommendations of the commission on the organization of the executive branch of the government . the commission researched and provided recommendations on a wide variety of public policies and found that "revolutionary mechanization , specialization , and duplication in recordmaking and recordkeeping" had prompted records to "accumulate in admittedly fantastic quantities" that could be "maintained only at excessive costs. the fra addressed many of the concerns expressed by the commission and provided the administrator of the gsa the authority to "make provisions for the economical and efficient management of records of federal agencies.