these funds are not appropriated by congress . they are available for obligation and included in the president's budget to calculate the gross budget authority . 302 ( a ) and 302 ( b ) allocations in general practice , the maximum budget authority for annual appropriations ( including dhs ) is determined through a two - stage congressional budget process . in the first stage , congress sets overall spending totals in the annual concurrent resolution on the budget . subsequently , these amounts are allocated among the appropriations committees , usually through the statement of managers for the conference report on the budget resolution . these amounts are known as the 302 ( a ) allocations . they include discretionary totals available to the house and senate committees on appropriations for enactment in annual appropriations bills through the subcommittees responsible for the development of the bills . in the second stage of the process , the appropriations committees allocate the 302 ( a ) discretionary funds among their subcommittees for each of the appropriations bills . these amounts are known as the 302 ( b ) allocations . these allocations must add up to no more than the 302 ( a ) discretionary allocation and form the basis for enforcing budget discipline , since any bill reported with a total above the ceiling is subject to a point of order . the house or senate appropriations committee may adjust its 302 ( b ) allocations during the year by issuing a report delineating the revised suballocations as the various appropriations bills progress towards final enactment . the fy2012 appropriations bills were the first appropriations bills affected by the budget control act ( bca ) , which established discretionary spending caps for fy2012 through fy2021 . for fy2014 , the bca initially set a separate cap for security spending , defined to include the departments of defense and veterans affairs , budget function 150 for all international affairs programs , the national nuclear security administration , and the intelligence community management account that funds the offices of the director of national intelligence . with the failure of the supercommittee process to produce $1.2 trillion in deficit reduction and amendments made by the american taxpayer relief act , the bca now expresses its discretionary spending caps in terms of defense ( $497 billion for fy2014 ) and non - defense ( $469 billion for fy2014 ) . dhs is included in the latter category . in addition , the bca allows for adjustments that would raise the statutory caps to cover funding for overseas contingency operations / global war on terror , emergency spending , and , to a limited extent , disaster relief and appropriations for continuing disability reviews and for controlling health care fraud and abuse . these funds are not counted as revenue . instead , they are counted as negative outlays . dhs net discretionary budget authority , or the total funds that are appropriated by congress each year , consists of discretionary spending minus any fee or fund collections that offset discretionary spending . some collections offset a portion of an agency's discretionary budget authority . other collections offset an agency's mandatory spending .