appendix a . distribution of u.s. funds , cy2012-2014 appendix b . burdensharing . both congress and the administration have encouraged other countries to provide humanitarian assistance for the syria situation and to turn pledges into actual commitments . it is not always evident whether figures listing donor amounts represent pledges of support or more specific obligations . pledges made by governments do not always result in actual contributions , as demonstrated by the donor conferences in kuwait . it also cannot be assumed that the funds committed to relief actually represent new contributions , since the money may have been previously allocated elsewhere . moreover , it is not readily apparent how the actual costs of a humanitarian emergency might be shared among international donors . comparing u.s. assistance and international aid can also be difficult because of the often dramatically different forms the assistance takes ( relief items versus cash , for instance ) . more broadly , political considerations play a role in the way humanitarian assistance is given and to whom . while the images of human suffering only reinforce the need to "do something," humanitarian assistance carries some weight as an instrument of "neutral" intervention and is the most flexible policy tool that can be quickly brought to bear in a crisis . sometimes humanitarian assistance is expanded beyond its immediate function to avert a crisis , to provide support to allies , and to maintain a presence in the region . how it is used and whether it becomes more of a strategic , policy tool depends upon the situation , what other governments are doing , and the degree to which the united states has further interest in the region . providing humanitarian assistance also raises questions about implications for future action . on the one hand , if the united states decides to reduce its humanitarian support to syria , would this diminish u.s. standing among its allies or affect its interests in other ways ? on the other hand , since the president has a great deal of flexibility over u.s. involvement , once commitment to a humanitarian effort is made , does this make the long - term u.s. participation in reconstruction and political solutions more likely ? regardless , the level and sources of u.s. humanitarian assistance will inevitably have an important impact not only on the syrian relief operation itself , but on broader u.s. foreign policy goals .