unlike the u.c . berkeley labor center's study , jorgensen and baker's study likely captured any initial employers' responses to shifting workers below the 30-hours - per - week cutoff because , according to the aca , the baseline measurement period for measuring a firm's fte employees began in 2013 . also , jorgensen and baker's study better captures more recent improvements in the labor market ; there are likely to be more "underemployed" workers ( working under 40 hours ) in the older data because the macroeconomy was in an earlier stage of recovery . changing the cutoff from 30 hours per week to 40 hours per week would not eliminate the incentive for employers to shift more workers to part - time status and could actually provide a greater incentive for firms not to offer health insurance to their employees . in other words , a firm that employed 49 full - time workers and then hired a 50 th full - time worker would be subject to a penalty based ( in part ) on 30 full - time workers . this 30-worker exemption could be increased to reduce the cliff that firms could face at the hiring of their 50 th full - time worker , thereby reducing the marginal disincentive to hire around the employer penalty threshold . however , reducing the sheerness of this cliff could reduce the marginal incentive that an employer has to begin offering health care to its employees . if fewer firms offer employer - sponsored health plans , then more workers could rely on government subsidies for coverage in individual insurance exchanges . this option also could reduce the revenue raised by the employer penalty . these revenue losses could be offset , at least in part , by changing the calculation of the penalty from "full - time workers" to "fte employees," as discussed below . the latter definition would change the calculation of the penalty to include uninsured part - time workers . although this change might impose a larger compliance burden on some firms , it also would eliminate the incentive for firms to hire part - time workers instead of full - time workers ( or reduce the hours of existing full - time workers ) in an attempt to reduce their exposure to the employer penalty . this rule also could be applied if an option based on payroll size were included to eliminate that cliff as well . the employer penalty exemption could be revised such that it was based on fte employees to reduce the incentive for firms to hire more part - time workers or change full - time workers to part - time status . in this case , hiring two part - time workers to substitute for one full - time worker would not change the calculation of the penalty . this option could be combined with the exemption - increase option , above , to offset for at least some of the revenue loss associated with increasing the exemption . for example , the employer penalty could be revised to exempt the first 49 fte employees instead of the current exemption of the first 30 full - time employees .