§§801 et seq. ) u.s. ghg emissions peaked in 2007 . during the period 1990 to 2012 , u.s. economic activity , measured as gross domestic product ( gdp ) , rose 73% , while population increased 26% . the u.s. energy information administration projected u.s. energy - related co 2 emissions , about 78% of all u.s. ghg emissions , to grow 3.5% from 2012 to 2020 , under existing regulations and policies — not taking into account the new guidelines for co 2 reductions from existing power plants . in may 2013 , the administration released an updated range for the "social costs of carbon" ( scc ) — dollar values representing the benefits of avoiding damages of climate change , expressed as dollars per ton of co 2 released in particular years . these scc estimates have been , and will be used , to compare the benefits with the costs of prospective regulations , though cost - benefit analysis has not typically been a determinative factor in regulatory choices . while the interagency group that developed the scc acknowledged the difficulties of providing such values , the 9 th circuit court ruled in 2007 that estimating the benefits of rules without including such values for climate damages is "arbitrary and capricious. some observers have expressed concern that the new scc values could be used to justify tighter standards , while others have criticized the methods for understating the scc . congress may wish to consider the process by which the scc have been developed , the role of public and congressional input , and how the scc may affect future actions . some in congress may seek to enact a more cohesive alternative to epa regulation of ghg emissions and the assortment of administration measures in the obama plan . some policy makers have proposed that fees on ghg emissions ( eg , "carbon taxes" ) would be a preferable alternative , while others oppose this option . the keystone xl pipeline , to transport canadian oil sands crude across the u.s. border , requires a presidential permit from the president . while many support approval of the pipeline , some environmental proponents have called the project the "line in the sand" on climate change and urge the president to deny the permit . pursuant to the president's statement that "[our] national interest will be served only if this project does not significantly exacerbate the impacts of carbon pollution," congress may wish to examine systematically the trade - offs to national interest of the project . a number of crs reports are available with background relating to some of president obama's announced policies on climate change . additional reports are available at http: / / www.crs.gov , and at the crs climate change science , technology , and policy web page . crs report r43127 , epa standards for greenhouse gas emissions from power plants: many questions , some answers , by [author name scrubbed] . crs report r42613 , climate change and existing law: a survey of legal issues past , present , and future , by [author name scrubbed] . crs report r41561 , epa regulations: too much , too little , or on track ? , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] .