these include . diagnostic codes appendix b . legislation national defense authorization for fiscal year 2013 the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2013 ( p.l . 112-239 ) contained several sections addressing military mental health issues , including: section 580 required the secretary of defense , acting through the under secretary of defense for personnel and readiness , to establish within the office of the secretary of defense a position with responsibility for oversight of all suicide prevention and resilience programs of dod and each of the military departments . section 581 amended chapter 1007 of title 10 , united states code , to codify the suicide prevention and community health and response program for national guard and reserve component members , to require the secretary of defense to provide training on suicide prevention , resilience , and community healing and response at yellow ribbon reintegration program events and activities , to move the program from within the office for reintegration programs to the office of the secretary of defense , and to repeal subsection ( i ) of section 582 of the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2008 ( 10 u.s.c . 10101 note ) . the program would terminate on october 1 , 2017 . section 582 required the secretary of defense , acting through the under secretary of defense for personnel and readiness , to develop within the department of defense a comprehensive policy on the prevention of suicide among servicemembers . section 583 required the secretary of the army to conduct a study of resilience programs within the army that would draw upon professionally accepted measurements and assessments to evaluate the impact of these programs . section 703 amended section 1074m ( a ) of title 10 , united states code , to align mandatory post - deployment person - to - person mental health assessments for certain servicemembers with other existing health assessments by changing the required assessment period from between 180 days after deployment to 1 year after deployment , to between 180 days after deployment to 18 months after deployment . section 706 authorized the secretary of defense to carry out a pilot program to enhance the efforts of dod in research , treatment , education , and outreach on mental health , substance use disorders , and traumatic brain injury in members of the national guard and reserves , their family members , and their caregivers through agreements with community partners . section 723 required the secretary of defense and the secretary of veterans affairs to jointly enter into a memorandum of understanding providing for the sharing between departments of the results of examinations and other records on members of the armed forces that are retained and maintained with respect to the medical tracking system for members deployed overseas . section 724 required the secretary of defense and the secretary of veterans affairs to jointly enter into a memorandum of understanding providing for certain members of the armed forces to volunteer or be considered for employment as peer counselors under certain peer support counseling programs carried out by the secretary of veterans affairs .