the discussion of enactments other than prwora and the legal issues they raise is selective . in fact , congress has recently considered a number of changes to noncitizens' eligibility for public benefits , some intended to expand , and other to restrict , such eligibility . the report does not attempt to identify all legal measures that might affect noncitizens' eligibility for particular benefits , or all legal issues that could potentially be raised . rather , its focus is upon illustrative measures , and major legal issues that have recurred . the report also does not address legal issues that could potentially be raised by noncitizens' receipt of public benefits , particularly whether the receipt of such benefits may result in aliens being found to be inadmissible or deportable on public charge grounds . a separate report , crs report r43220 , public charge grounds of inadmissibility and deportability: legal overview , by [author name scrubbed] , discusses these issues . there are also several crs reports addressing policy issues related to noncitizens' eligibility for public benefits . prwora , as amended , establishes certain default rules regarding noncitizens' eligibility for federal , state , and local public benefits by creating various categories of aliens and benefits , and prescribing when particular aliens may receive certain benefits . however , numerous measures had been enacted prior to prwora , which prwora effectively nullified or modified . in addition , congress , states and , in some cases , localities have enacted additional measures post - prwora that either expand , or restrict , noncitizens' eligibility for particular benefits . construing and applying prwora and related measures to determine whether individual aliens are eligible for particular benefits can raise a number of legal issues , including ( 1 ) the constitutional rights of aliens ; ( 2 ) whether federal law preempts state or local measures ; and ( 3 ) whether particular types of government assistance constitute benefits under particular definitions of this term . in particular , questions regarding noncitizens' rights to equal protection and preemption are particularly likely to arise in facial challenges seeking to invalidate particular measures . questions regarding what constitutes a benefit , in contrast , tend to occur in challenges to applications of particular measures . the personal responsibility and work opportunity reconciliation act of 1996 ( prwora ) was enacted to establish "national policy with respect to welfare and immigration. with certain exceptions , prwora bars aliens who are not "qualified aliens" from receiving federal , state , or local "public benefits," and precludes qualified aliens from receiving federal "means - tested public benefits" for 5 or more years after they enter the united states in a qualified status . however , there are also a number of other federal , state , and local measures adopted prior to , or after , the enactment of prwora , some of which make different provisions for noncitizens' eligibility for particular benefits . congressional interest has been particularly high in recent years due to the sizable number of aliens who are unlawfully present in the united states ( i.e. , entered without inspection , or overstayed or otherwise violated the terms of their visas ) .