concerns about the exchange rate policies of other countries persist . during the 2016 presidential campaign , combatting currency manipulation , particularly by china , was a key issue for donald trump . tpa legislation signed into law in june 2015 ( p.l . some members of congress have also proposed taking more assertive action on currency . there are a number of options for doing so , some of which members have pursued through legislation . policy options could include the following , among others . 114-26 ) includes principal negotiating objectives addressing currency manipulation . provisions to combat currency manipulation were also included in the trade facilitation and trade enforcement act ( p.l . 114-125 ) , signed into law in february 2016 . in the 115 th congress , debates about currency manipulation have surfaced in the context of renegotiations of the north american free trade agreement ( nafta ) and modifications to the u.s. - south korea free trade agreement ( korus fta ) . this report provides information on current debates over exchange rates in the global economy . it offers an overview of how exchange rates work ; analyzes specific disagreements and debates ; and examines existing frameworks for potentially addressing currency disputes . it also lays out some policy options available to congress , should members want to take action on exchange rate issues . amid heightened concerns about slow growth and high unemployment in many countries , disagreements over exchange rate policies broadened following the global financial crisis . in 2010 , brazil's finance minister , guido mantega , declared that a "currency war" had broken out in the global economy . even as the global economy has recovered , many concerns about exchange rates persist . at the heart of disagreements is whether or not countries are using policies to intentionally push down the value of their currency in order to gain a trade advantage at the expense of other countries . a weak currency makes exports cheaper to foreigners and imports more expensive to domestic consumers . this can lead to higher production of exports and import - competing goods , which could help spur export - led growth and job creation in the export sector . however , if one country weakens its currency , there can be negative implications for certain sectors in other countries . in general , a weaker currency in one country can hurt exporters in other countries , since their exports become relatively more expensive and may fall as a result . additionally , domestic firms producing import - competing goods may find it harder to compete with imports from countries with weak currencies , since weak currencies lower the cost of imports . under certain circumstances , policies used to drive down the value of a currency in one country can cause other countries to run persistent trade deficits ( imports exceed exports ) that can be difficult to adjust and can be associated with the build - up of debt .