this collaboration was termed the great lakes regional collaboration . it consisted of over 1,500 stakeholders and released the great lakes regional collaboration strategy ( hereinafter referred to as the strategy ) . the strategy recommended implementing a series of actions and activities to start the restoration of the great lakes ecosystem over a five - year period from 2006 to 2011 . the strategy encompassed eight issue areas: aquatic invasive species , fish and wildlife habitat ( habitat / species ) , coastal health , contaminated sediments , nonpoint source pollution , toxic pollutants , indicators and information , and sustainable development . ( see figure 1 . ) the great lakes contain nearly 90% of the surface freshwater of the united states and 20% of the surface freshwater of the world . in the last several decades , agricultural activity throughout the basin , and urban and industrial development concentrated along the shoreline , have degraded water quality in the great lakes , posing potential threats to the ecosystem . development has also led to changes in terrestrial and aquatic habitats , the introduction of nonnative species , the contamination of sediments , and the listing of more than 50 threatened or endangered species in the ecosystem . in response to deteriorating conditions in the ecosystem , the federal governments of the united states and canada and the state and provincial governments in the great lakes basin have implemented several restoration activities . an estimated 40 million people rely on the great lakes ecosystem for jobs , drinking water , and recreation , among other things . in economic terms , the present - value benefit in 2007 of restoring the great lakes was estimated to be $50 billion ( in direct and indirect benefits ) over the long term . the ultimate cost for restoring the great lakes is unclear , but the value of the potential benefits of restoration has caused , in part , several in congress to regard restoring the great lakes a priority . the u.s. congress has played a role in restoration efforts in the great lakes and enacted more than 30 laws over several years focused on restoring aspects of the great lakes ecosystem . these laws have authorized activities ranging from mitigating the harmful effects of toxic substances on water quality to mitigating damages caused by invasive species . most laws address specific issues in the great lakes ; yet few address the entire ecosystem . over the years , several stakeholders have expressed the need for initiating and implementing a comprehensive approach for restoring the great lakes ecosystem . restoration efforts in the great lakes have been implemented over several decades by the federal government , states , and local stakeholders . efforts have focused on specific aspects of the ecosystem , but rarely the entire ecosystem . for example , the great lakes water quality agreement ( glwqa ) , initially signed in 1972 and then revised several times afterwards , addresses water quality characteristics in the great lakes , but not habitat issues . after several years of restoration , the government accountability office ( gao ) concluded that progress in restoring the great lakes was slow and restoration efforts were too loosely organized .