appendix a . the west bank / gaza strip experience the west bank and gaza strip ( wb / gs ) have a very small export program under the qiz amendment , and a history of imports from the united states characterized by wide inconsistency in products . this inconsistency in trading is primarily due to political conditions in these two territories which interfere with the ability of trade to flow freely . should the qiz program be expanded or contracted ? should , for example , the conditions for country eligibility , scope of coverage , or other criteria under the qiz program be changed ? should there be a co - production arrangement between u.s. fta partner and non - partner countries ? that is , should there be a new program that permits and encourages non - fta countries to co - produce with fta countries in order to meet a minimum content requirement ? should a regional mena trade preference program be established similar to what the united states has established for other regions , such as the caribbean or sub - saharan africa ? or , is gsp an effective program for the region ? west bank and gaza strip exports to the united states must contain 11.7% materials originating in the territory ( like requirements for jordan , text box 2 , under the qiz program ) . west bank / gaza strip exports to the united states reached a peak of $8 million in 2008 and u.s. exports to the territories reached a peak of $18 million in 2007 ( figure a - 1 ) . west bank / gaza strip exports under the qiz program started out primarily as textiles and apparel , and have evolved into a more diversified mix of products ( figure a - 2 ) . the composition of u.s. exports to the west bank and gaza strip has varied considerably from year to year , depending on what products are needed in the territory . in 1999 they were led by tobacco and jewelry ; in 2001 , motor vehicles ; in 2007 , grains ; in 2010 , electrical machinery ; and in 2011 , both mechanical and electrical machinery ( figure a - 3 ) . appendix b . data for figures 2-13 , and a - 1-a - . it does not address the current turmoil in egypt . some of the 13 qizs in jordan are not currently involved in qiz export , but still produce for export to the united states ( see figure 1 notes ) . the qiz program extends u.s. tariff - free benefits to the west bank and gaza strip , and to certain goods co - produced by israel and jordan , or israel and egypt in export processing zones that meet country of origin and local content requirements . for a discussion of this issue , see crs report rl33003 , egypt: background and u.s. relations , by [author name scrubbed] . the qualifying industrial zone ( qiz ) program was created by the 1996 west bank and gaza strip free trade benefits act , which amended the 1985 u.s. - israel free trade agreement ( usifta ) .