the manufacturers defended on preemption grounds . justice thomas , writing for a majority that included the three levine dissenters and justice kennedy , held that the fdca's requirements for generic drugs implicitly preempted state failure - to - warn claims for impossibility reasons . deferring to the fda's views , the court held that fda regulations prevented generic manufacturers from "independently changing" a generic drug's safety label , and accordingly , a state tort duty requiring a generic manufacturer to strengthen the drug's label was impossible to comply with while simultaneously adhering to the federal "sameness" requirement for generic drugs . class i devices are subject to the least amount of oversight . instead , mensing concluded that "when a party cannot satisfy its state duties without the federal government's special permission and assistance , which is dependent on the exercise of judgment by a federal agency , that party cannot independently satisfy those state duties for pre - emption purposes. thus , for the five - justice majority , mensing was distinguishable from levine in that federal law permitted manufacturers of brand name drugs to unilaterally strengthen the warning without advance approval from the fda . two years after mensing , the supreme court again revisited the topic of preemption and prescription drugs in mutual pharmaceutical v. bartlett . these devices "present no unreasonable risk of illness or injury" and are subject to minimal regulation by "general controls. class ii devices pose a moderate risk to patients , and are subject to general controls as well as certain "special controls" to reduce or mitigate risk . finally , class iii devices are generally considered the devices with the highest risk and are typically at issue in medical device preemption litigation . these devices are used to support or sustain human life , for a use which is of substantial importance in preventing impairment of human health , or which present a potential , unreasonable risk of illness or injury . class iii devices receive the greatest amount of federal oversight and are generally subject to premarket approval by the fda . having discussed the various ways the fdca has been interpreted to preempt state tort claims with respect to medical devices , the report turns to the issue of fdca preemption and prescription drugs . in contrast to its provisions on medical devices , the fdca does not contain an express preemption clause with respect to its prescription drug mandates . nonetheless , the elaborate premarket approval scheme for drugs created by the fdca has the potential to clash with state tort law , raising questions as to whether federal drug law preempts state tort law . on one hand , as discussed above , state tort law , depending on the specific theory pursued , could result in a manufacturer paying damages for marketing a prescription drug that has been approved by the fda on the theory that the underlying product is unreasonably dangerous or has an insufficient warning or was fraudulently marketed . after all , common law tort doctrines typically do not treat compliance with a regulation as a bar to liability .