corporations can be fined . they can be ordered to pay restitution . their property can be confiscated . they can be barred from engaging in various types of commercial activity . corporations and individuals alike are sentenced in the shadow of the federal sentencing guidelines . federal courts must begin the sentencing process for felonies or class a misdemeanors with a calculation of the sentencing ranges recommended by the sentencing guidelines . when they impose sentence , they must consider the recommendation along with the factors prescribed in 18 u.s.c . appellate courts review the sentences imposed on an abuse of discretion standard and will overturn lower court sentences that are procedurally or substantively unreasonable . a sentence is procedurally unreasonable when the sentencing court fails to correctly identify and apply the appropriate sentencing guidelines' recommended sentencing range . a sentence is substantively unreasonable when it is unduly harsh or unduly lenient or otherwise inexpedient . the sentencing guidelines for organizations measure punishment according to the seriousness of the offense as well as the defendant's culpability and history of misconduct . on the other hand , they reward self - disclosure , cooperation , restitution , and preventive measures . the guidelines supply special corporate sentencing directions for fines , probation , forfeiture , special assessments , and remedial sanctions . fines : the corporate fine guidelines begin with the premise that a totally corrupt corporation should be fined out of existence , if the statutory maximum permits . a corporation operated for criminal purposes or by criminal means should be fined at a level sufficient to strip it of all of its assets . on the other hand , a fine need not be imposed at all , if it would render full victim restitution impossible . otherwise , corporations face different fine standards depending upon the offense of conviction . in chapter 8c , the guidelines set specific standards for crimes with a commercial flavor — antitrust , smuggling , and gambling offenses , for instance . the sentencing commission explicitly declined to promulgate special corporate fine standards for other offenses . instead , corporate fines for such offenses are governed by two general statutory sentencing provisions . one , §3571 , sets the permissible maximum amount for any fine . the other , §3553 , outlines the sentencing factors and procedures applicable to both individuals and corporations . this is the least common of the three . it arises in the context of a regulatory scheme , crafted to ensure public welfare and capped with a criminal proscription which says nothing of the knowledge necessary for conviction . the decision to prosecute a corporation or its culpable employees or both is vested in the justice department . the courts will review the exercise of that discretion only in rare instances and then primarily to protect the constitutional rights of a defendant or potential defendant . the justice department has two sets of guidelines governing the decision to prosecute — one general ( "principles of federal prosecution" ) and the other a supplement devoted to corporations ( "principles of federal prosecution of business organizations" ) . as they make clear , the decision to prosecute is in fact a series of decisions .