federal appropriation . some contend that the salton sea should not be restored . they argue that the geological history of the salton sea demonstrates a pattern of water bodies naturally shrinking and disappearing , and then reforming over time . they note that the salton sea will follow a similar process and that countering this natural process will be costly and ultimately not worth the cost . these opponents argue that the restoration funds should instead be used to restore other natural wetlands in california , such as the sacramento and san joaquin rivers' delta confluence with san francisco bay ( bay - delta ) . to counter this argument , some respond by noting that the natural inflows of water into the salton sea have been artificially diverted by humans when the colorado river was diverted into a canal and that natural processes and cycles will not exist again with these structures in place . further , they note that the value of restoring the salton sea lies in its ecological significance as a large wetland along the pacific flyway and a habitat for fish and wildlife , and its potential to stimulate economic development in the region through tourism , recreation , and energy development . progress towards restoring the salton sea has been slow in recent years , largely due to the lack of a comprehensive plan to guide efforts and lack of funding . indeed , some contend that there is not full consensus behind restoring the sea . high salinity levels combined with toxic concentrations of substances have led to disease and widespread mortality of fish and birds . current saline levels are nearing fatal levels for all fish , leading some scientists to predict that fatal saline levels will occur by 2018 . the subsequent population decline of fish could have severe effects on migratory birds that use the salton sea as a primary stopover point on the pacific flyway . furthermore , exposed lake beds could allow toxins and dust to enter the air , which could lead to air pollution and human health problems . attention to the ecological condition of the salton sea and efforts to restore the sea have existed for several decades . however , interest in the ecological health of the salton sea has amplified since 2003 , when the quantification settlement agreement ( qsa ) was signed by several water districts in california , the state of california , and the department of the interior ( doi ) , and signed into california law . qsa requires california to gradually reduce its consumption of colorado river water to 4.4 million acre - feet a year ( afy ) through voluntary agriculture - to - urban water transfers and other water efficiency measures . the implementation of this agreement has resulted in less water flowing into the salton sea , thus accelerating its ecological decline . however , as part of the qsa , participating water districts agreed to contribute $163 million toward mitigation and restoration . in addition , the water districts agreed to provide 200,000 afy of colorado river water to the sea though december 31 , 2017 .