appendix a . legislation initiatives 113 th congress p.l . 3547 ) : consolidated appropriations act , 2014 . signed into law january 17 , 2014 . the administration requested $5 million in economic support funds for venezuela democracy and human rights projects , and ultimately an estimated $4.3 million in appropriations is being provided . 83 ) : consolidated and further continuing appropriations act , 2015 . signed into law december 16 , 2014 . as reported , the resolution would have ( 1 ) expressed profound concern about widespread shortages of essential medicines and basic food products and urged president maduro to permit the delivery of humanitarian assistance ; ( 2 ) called on the venezuelan government to release all political prisoners , to provide protections for freedom of expression and assembly , and to respect internationally recognized human rights ; ( 3 ) supported meaningful efforts toward a dialogue that leads to respect for venezuela's constitutional mechanisms and resolves the country's political , economic , social , and humanitarian crisis ; ( 4 ) affirmed support for the oas secretary general's invocation of article 20 of the inter - american democratic charter and urged the oas permanent council to undertake a collective assessment of the constitutional and democratic order in venezuela ; ( 5 ) called on the venezuelan government to ensure the neutrality and professionalism of all security forces and respect the venezuelan people's rights to freedom of expression and assembly ; ( 6 ) called on the venezuelan government to halt efforts to undermine the principle of separation of powers , its circumvention of the democratically elected legislature , and its subjugation of judicial independence ; ( 7 ) stressed the urgency of strengthening the rule of law and increasing efforts to combat impunity and public corruption in venezuela ; and ( 8 ) urged the u.s. president to provide full support for oas efforts in favor of constitutional and democratic solutions to the political impasse and instruct appropriate federal agencies to hold venezuelan government officials accountable for violations of u.s. law and abuses of internationally recognized human rights . appendix b . links to u.s. government reports u.s. relations with venezuela , fact sheet , state department date: august 31 , 2016 full text : http: / / www.state.gov / r / pa / ei / bgn / 35766.htm congressional budget justificati on for foreign operations fy2017 , annex 3 , pp .