related: h.r . 1205 , to require health plans to disclose in their annual summary of benefits aca - imposed taxes and fees . s. 764 , to require health plans to disclose in their annual summary of benefits aca - imposed taxes and fees . in addition to formal legislation , there has been debate regarding other , possible changes to the aca insurer premium fee . a number of state governors caution that the premium fee will result in higher costs to states that offer fully capitated medicaid managed care plans under contract with insurers . federal regulations require that premiums paid to medicaid managed care plans be "actuarially sound. to make that determination , state licensing entities consider insurers' costs , including health benefits , marketing and administrative expenses , and taxes . because of cost - sharing limitations in medicaid , the fees may not be passed on to enrollees . instead , if premium rates go up , states and the federal government , which jointly fund medicaid , could pay more to operate the program . the federal government will collect the insurer premium fee , but states will not have new , offsetting revenues to defray any new costs . the republican governors association has asked congress to exempt medicaid and chip managed care plans from the insurance tax . some analysts say that states will be able to negotiate with insurers to control premium costs , meaning that the full impact of the fee is unlikely to be passed along . the association of american medical colleges has proposed using a portion of the premium tax to help fund u.s. graduate medical education . health policy experts are concerned about the current size , specialty mix , and geographic distribution of the healthcare workforce . some experts forecast a shortage of physicians , a situation that will be made more acute when millions of previously uninsured consumers obtain coverage under the aca . another outstanding issue involves tax treatment of aca fees "recovered" by affected insurers . some large health care providers have indicated that they plan to recoup the cost of these excise taxes by levying fees or raising insurance premiums on those enrolled in their plans . in other words , although the excise tax is levied on health insurance providers , the economic impact of the excise tax might be borne by consumers . under current law , increased insurer fees and premiums that are imposed to compensate , at least in part , for the imposition of the excise tax will contribute to the health insurers' calculations of their gross income for tax purposes . therefore , these fees will be subject to corporate income tax ( just like ordinary revenues earned through the sales of products and services ) . a coalition of insurers has submitted comments to the irs requesting that extra fees and higher premium costs be excluded from calculations of gross income . the insurers argue that they are effectively being "double - taxed": once through the aca's fees / excise taxes , and next based on income earned from new fees and higher premiums instituted to offset any reduction in profits due to the tax .