appendix a . list of acronyms the following is a list of acronyms that have been used throughout this report . appendix b. appropriations for selected hea - authorized msi programs table b - 1 of this appendix lists the authorizations and discretionary and mandatory appropriations for selected hea - authorized msi programs , from fy2013 to fy2017 . there are two types of special project grants . under the higher education amendments of 1998 ( p.l . 105-244 ) , the developing hsi program was moved to its own title , hea title v. in moving the hsi program to title v , congress stated , "[i]n recognition of the importance of finding new ways of serving our nation's rapidly growing hispanic community , [congress] has created a new part within title v dedicated solely to supporting the needs of hispanic - serving institutions. the purpose of the program was and is to expand educational opportunities for and improve the academic attainment of hispanic students and to enhance the institutional stability of institutions that are educating the majority of hispanic college students . currently , title v is divided into two parts . part a contains the hsi program , which provides grants to hsis to support and expand educational opportunities for hispanic students and is similar to the various hea title iii - a and iii - b msi programs . part b contains the promoting postbaccalaureate opportunities for hispanic americans program , which assists in expanding postbaccalaureate education opportunities for hispanic students . title iii - f contains the hsi science , technology , engineering , and mathematics and articulation program ( hsi stem ) , which assists in increasing the number of hispanic and low - income students attaining degrees in stem fields and in the development of transfer and articulation agreements between two - year and four - year institutions in stem fields . although hsi stem is not part of title v , grants made under hsi stem are generally subject to the same requirements as grants made under the title v - a hsi program ; therefore , title v - a and title iii - f hsi stem will be addressed in the same section of this report . this section of the report will discuss each of the three hsi programs ; for each program , this report will discuss eligibility criteria , authorized uses , and program administration . additional programs are available specifically to msis under the hea . these programs are not targeted to a specific type of msi but , rather , are available to most ihes with a high concentration of minority students . two such programs are the endowment challenge grant and the minority science and engineering improvement program . the endowment challenge grant program under hea title iii - c provides matching grants to eligible institutions to either establish or increase endowments and to increase self - sufficiency at such institutions . eligible institutions are those that are eligible under hea title iii - a and title iii - b and institutions of higher education that make substantial contributions to postgraduate medical educational opportunities for minority and economically disadvantaged students .