on introducing h.r . 1135 , the bill's sponsor said that the pay ratio provision of the dodd - frank act [c]reates an enormous burden for publicly traded companies while offering no corresponding benefit . by forcing publicly traded companies to report median total compensation , the federal government is requiring companies to provide data that is potentially misleading to investors due to the differing geographic locations of the business . a salary in detroit is going to be different than a salary in san francisco , which is going to be different than a salary in london . or do they reward excessive caution or risk taking ? forbes calculated the average value of total ceo compensation for the largest public companies ( the 800 largest domestic companies up to 1999 and the 500 largest domestic companies since then ) in 2012 dollars for the past two decades . the data include average annual ceo total pay in five - year increments between 1991 and 2010 and then single - year annual pay data for 2011 and 2012 based on forbes ' calculations . as shown in figure 1 , forbes finds that the average ceo compensation of $3.57 million during 1991-1995 grew by more than threefold to $12.9 million by 2006-2010 , the peak pay period . the average pay then fell by about $3.5 million dollars to $9.4 million in 2011 , then rose by about one - tenth to $10.5 million in 2012 . a widely embraced view on corporate board and ceo dynamics is that several factors distort the market for public company ceos . some have observed that board directors are formally elected by shareholders , but are often nominated by top management . under these circumstances , it is rare for management's slate of directors to be voted down . once a director becomes a member of a board , he or she may be reluctant to bargain hard with top executives over the executive's pay because cordial relationships between the executives and board members are generally believed to be important for fostering functional boards . in this narrative , rather than haggle over top management pay , boards hire compensation consultants , who recommend a "best practices" approach , which generally involves matching what the most successful companies in the industry pay their ( the peer group ) heads . other factors that may help to reinforce a "cozy" ceo / board dynamic are when ceos also serve as the board chair and when many directors are themselves active or retired ceos . adherents of this view , often called the managerial power thesis , describe an inefficient market for public company ceos . evidence consistent with a ceo market in which there is some board ''capture" by top management comes from research by larcker , richardson , tuna , and seary . the research examined possible connections between ceo pay and a ceo's "back door" links with members of the company's board , defined as shared board memberships in other companies . among other things , the research found that ceos with any back door link to someone on the company's board compensation committee ( which oversees compensation issues ) received $453,688 on average more than ceos without such links .