with regard to oil , h.r . 1190 , the keep america's oil here act , was introduced in the house by then - representative ed markey . the bill would provide that the secretary of the interior could accept bids on new oil and gas leases of federal lands ( including submerged lands ) only from bidders certifying that oil produced pursuant to such leases , and any refined petroleum products produced from that oil , would be sold only in the united states . the bill would allow the president to waive this requirement for a lease in certain circumstances , including when a waiver is necessary under an international agreement . in addition , s. 435 , the american oil for american families act of 2013 , was introduced in the senate by senator robert menendez . the bill would ban the export of crude oil or refined petroleum products derived from federal lands ( including land on the outer continental shelf ) . at least two other bills that pertain to the export of natural gas have been introduced . chapter 6 of nafta deals with "energy and basic petrochemicals. chapter 6 reconfirms the parties' obligations under the gatt and imposes additional obligations on the parties , such as certain requirements for export taxes . nafta also imposes barriers to invoking some of the general exceptions to the gatt . for example , a country may only invoke the "conservation of exhaustible natural resources" exception if it does not result in a higher price for exports than for domestic consumption of the energy products . these additional obligations illustrate that compliance with ftas must be considered when establishing export regulations for energy products . in addition , according to news reports , two proposed ftas — the trans - pacific partnership ( tpp ) and the transatlantic trade and investment partnership ( ttip ) — could potentially include international obligations regarding the automatic approval by the united states of lng exports to countries such as japan ( tpp ) or the european union ( ttip ) . s. 192 , the expedited lng for american allies act of 2013 , was introduced in the senate on january 31 , 2013 , by senator john barrasso . an identical bill , h.r . 580 , was introduced in the house of representatives by representative michael turner . the bills would amend section 3 of the nga to provide that expedited approval of lng exports would be granted to four different categories of foreign countries: ( 1 ) nations for which there is in effect a free trade agreement ( fta ) requiring national treatment for trade in natural gas ; ( 2 ) a member country of the north atlantic treaty organization ( nato ) ; ( 3 ) japan , so long as the treaty of mutual cooperation and security of january 19 , 1960 , between japan and the united states remains in effect ; and ( 4 ) "any other foreign country if the secretary of state , in consultation with the secretary of defense , determines that exportation of natural gas to that foreign country would promote the national security interests of the united states.