until recently , this administrative oversight was undertaken with little fanfare . however , controversy over the proposed keystone xl oil pipeline — a project that would transport oil sands crude from alberta , canada , into the united states — has focused attention on federal permitting of energy infrastructure border crossings . executive order 13337 refers only to the "constitution and the laws of the united states of america , including section 301 of title 3 , united states code. § 301 simply provides that the president is empowered to delegate authority to the head of any department or agency of the executive branch . executive order 10485 cites section 202 ( e ) of the federal power act as a source of executive branch authority to permit cross - border electricity transmission facilities and section 3 of the natural gas act as a source of the executive branch authority to permit cross - border natural gas pipelines . it also states that "the proper conduct of the foreign relations of the united states requires that executive permission be obtained for the construction and maintenance at the borders of the united states of facilities for the exportation or importation of electric energy and natural gas. federal courts have addressed the legitimacy of cross - border permitting authority not explicitly granted by statute . however , they have indicated that congressional inaction plays a role in validating this exercise of executive branch authority , suggesting that these roles could be amended through legislation should congress choose to do so . during the obama presidency , congress considered various bills to amend the presidential permitting process generally , or to authorize construction and operation of the keystone xl border crossing facility . in sisseton - wahpeton oyate v. u.s. department of state , the plaintiff tribes asked the court to suspend or revoke a presidential permit issued under executive order 13337 for the transcanada keystone pipeline . the plaintiffs claimed that the issuance of the national interest determination and the border crossing permit for the project violated nepa and the administrative procedure act ( apa ) . the u.s. district court for the district of south dakota determined that even if the plaintiffs' injury could be redressed , "the president would be free to disregard the court's judgment," as the case concerned the president's "inherent constitutional authority to conduct foreign policy," as opposed to statutory authority granted to the president by congress . the court further found that even if the tribes had standing , the issuance of the presidential permit was a presidential action , not an agency action subject to judicial review under apa . the court stated that the authority to regulate the cross - border pipeline lies with either congress or the president . the court found that "congress has failed to create a federal regulatory scheme for the construction of oil pipelines , and has delegated this authority to the states . therefore , the president has the sole authority to allow oil pipeline border crossings under his inherent constitutional authority to conduct foreign affairs. in sierra club v. clinton , the plaintiff sierra club challenged the secretary of state's 2009 decision to issue a permit authorizing the alberta clipper .