appendix a . legislative tables the leadership act , as amended , lantos - hyde act , and foreign assistance act as amended , include several reporting requirements . the tables below list each requirement by section . the status column provides an interpretation of the extent to which the requirements have been addressed in formal reporting documents .

" / " means some elements of the reporting requirement were included in the report , but not all. means all elements of the reporting requirement were included in the report . these sections are listed below . ( a complete list of reporting requirements and the status of compliance is outlined in table a - 2 ) . section 101 requires ogac to publish annually a best practices report that highlights the programs receiving financial assistance from the united states that have the potential for replication or adaption , particularly at a low cost , across global aids programs . section 101 requires ogac to publish annually a report on per - patient hiv / aids treatment costs . section 403 requires the president to submit annual reports on the u.s. global hiv sexual transmission prevention strategy . the lantos - hyde act ( primarily through amendments to permanent statutes ) includes authorities that expanded u.s. engagement in research and development for the identification of improved tools for controlling and curing the three diseases . the relevant sections are summarized below . subpart 1 of part d of title xxii of the public health service act , as amended , requires nih to carry out research on identifying safe and effective methods of preventing hiv transmission , including microbicides , among women . the table below distinguishes authorities the bills seek to amend from those that are set to expire . permanent authorities are not detailed here . section 307 of the public health service act , as amended , authorizes hhs to enter into cooperative agreements with other countries for the advancement of biomedical research , health care technology , health services research , and statistical analysis , and permitted hhs to provide financial assistance for the construction of facilities in foreign countries as part of related research efforts . section 206 of the lantos - hyde act requires usaid to coordinate with other development agencies to collect evidence for informed decision - making and introduction of new vaccines , including potential hiv / aids , tb , and malaria vaccines ; and to review protocols for clinical trials . the section also requires the united states to participate in negotiations for advance market commitments for the development of future vaccines , including potential vaccines for hiv / aids , tb , and malaria . language in the section requires the president to produce a comprehensive report that sets forth a coordinated strategy to accelerate development of vaccines for infectious diseases . the subsections are discussed sequentially . congress has played a key role not only in ensuring that global hiv / aids , tb , and malaria programs are adequately funded , but also in shaping how the programs are to be implemented . the section below highlights the sections in these acts that are enduring .