corporations can be fined . they can be ordered to pay restitution . their property can be confiscated . they can be barred from engaging in various types of commercial activity . corporations and individuals alike are sentenced in the shadow of the federal sentencing guidelines . federal courts must begin the sentencing process for felonies or class a misdemeanors with a calculation of the sentencing ranges recommended by the sentencing guidelines . when they impose sentence , they must consider the recommendation along with the factors prescribed in 18 u.s.c . appellate courts review the sentences imposed on an abuse of discretion standard and will overturn lower court sentences that are procedurally or substantively unreasonable . a sentence is procedurally unreasonable when the sentencing court fails to correctly identify and apply the appropriate sentencing guidelines' recommended sentencing range . a sentence is substantively unreasonable when it is unduly harsh or unduly lenient or otherwise inexpedient . the sentencing guidelines for organizations measure punishment according to the seriousness of the offense as well as the defendant's culpability and history of misconduct . on the other hand , they reward self - disclosure , cooperation , restitution , and preventive measures . the guidelines supply special corporate sentencing directions for fines , probation , forfeiture , special assessments , and remedial sanctions . the corporate fine guidelines begin with the premise that a totally corrupt corporation should be fined out of existence , if the statutory maximum permits . a corporation operated for criminal purposes or by criminal means should be fined at a level sufficient to strip it of all of its assets . on the other hand , a fine need not be imposed at all , if it would render full victim restitution impossible . otherwise , corporations face different fine standards depending upon the offense of conviction . in chapter 8c , the guidelines set specific standards for crimes with a commercial flavor — antitrust , smuggling , and gambling offenses , for instance . the sentencing commission explicitly declined to promulgate special corporate fine standards for other offenses . instead , corporate fines for such offenses are governed by two general statutory sentencing provisions . nor can they be put to death . otherwise , corporations and individuals face many of the same consequences following conviction . they can be placed on probation . one , §3571 , sets the permissible maximum amount for any fine . the other , §3553 , outlines the sentencing factors and procedures applicable to both individuals and corporations . the limited case law suggests that sentencing courts may disregard the guidelines completely in the case of a corporation convicted of one of these other offenses . for the offense to which chapter 8c's fine provisions apply , a sentencing court must begin by deciding whether the defendant entity is able to pay a fine . if so , the amount of an organization's fine is determined by the applicable offense level and the level of its culpability . an organization's offense level is calculated in the same manner as an offense level for an individual but without the adjustments for things like vulnerability of the victim or role in the offense .