the u.s. threats did not influence the decision. president asad also stated that his government will be sending documents "in the next few days" to the united nations for joining the international convention that bans the use of chemical munitions . speaking in a national address on september 10 , president barack obama said: ... over the last few days , we've seen some encouraging signs , in part because of the credible threat of u.s. military action , as well as constructive talks that i had with president putin . the russian government has indicated a willingness to join with the international community in pushing assad to give up his chemical weapons . the assad regime has now admitted that it has these weapons and even said they'd join the chemical weapons convention , which prohibits their use . it's too early to tell whether this offer will succeed , and any agreement must verify that the assad regime keeps its commitments , but this initiative has the potential to remove the threat of chemical weapons without the use of force , particularly because russia is one of assad's strongest allies . i have therefore asked the leaders of congress to postpone a vote to authorize the use of force while we pursue this diplomatic path . i'm sending secretary of state john kerry to meet his russian counterpart on thursday , and i will continue my own discussions with president putin . i've spoken to the leaders of two of our closest allies - - france and the united kingdom - - and we will work together in consultation with russia and china to put forward a resolution at the u.n. security council requiring assad to give up his chemical weapons and to ultimately destroy them under international control . president obama and senior members of his administration continue to seek authorization from congress for a limited use of military force against the asad regime while exploring the potential for the establishment of international control over syria's chemical weapons stockpiles and related elements of its chemical weapons program . action on either of these initiatives would have major implications for the ongoing conflict in syria and the international crisis the conflict has created . given stated u.s. objectives and fears of a deeper power vacuum in syria , it appears unlikely that any u.s. actions in the immediate future would attempt to eliminate the asad regime entirely . president obama has said "i have no interest in any kind of open - ended conflict in syria," and , at present , u.s. officials hope to achieve a negotiated political settlement to establish a new government that can keep the syrian state intact , secure its chemical weapon stockpiles , secure its borders , and prevent or combat terrorism . the importance of the war in syria for broader u.s. national security policy objectives may be linked more to its consequences for regional and global stability than to the details and outcome of the syrian conflict itself .