i am not going . if they ever make me carry a rifle the first man i want to get in my sights is [president] l.b.j. the defendant was arrested and charged with violating 18 u.s.c . section 871 ( a ) for "knowingly and willfully ... [making a] threat to take the life of or to inflict bodily harm upon the president of the united states. the court held that , although the federal statute was not unconstitutionally overbroad , the defendant's statement was protected because it was not a "true threat. the court found that the content of watts's statement , the context in which the statement was made , and the audience's reaction to the statement were all supportive of watts's claim that he engaged in protected "political hyperbole. the court recognized that "true threats" should not be afforded first amendment protection , and stated , "what is a threat must be distinguished from what is constitutionally protected speech. watts did not establish a bright - line test for distinguishing a true threat from protected speech . as such , lower courts have created varying tests for determining whether speech rises to the level of a true threat . the main point of contention among the appellate courts is whether the focus of a "true threat" test should be on the speaker or the listener . some courts evaluate the existence of a threat by determining whether the speaker should reasonably have foreseen his words to be threatening , while others rest the determination on whether a reasonable recipient would be threatened by the statement . based on these principles , it is possible that anti - bullying laws or policies could be deemed constitutionally deficient if the prohibited behavior does not rise to the level of a "true threat" under most circumstances . this analysis , however , may differ depending on whether the challenged language is contained in a state statute or school policy . in the school context , school officials who use anti - bullying policies to take disciplinary action against students may face legal challenges based on the first amendment . while students generally retain the protections of the first amendment , these protections may not always mirror the constitutional protections afforded in other contexts . for example , in tinker v. des moines independent community school district , the court held that student expression may be regulated only if it would substantially disrupt school operations or interfere with the rights of others . in tinker , students wore black armbands to school to protest the united states' involvement in vietnam , despite knowledge that such action was in violation of school policy . the students were asked to remove the armbands , and upon their refusal were suspended until they came to school without the armbands . the court held that the wearing of armbands for the purpose of expressing different viewpoints is the type of symbolic act within the protection of the first amendment . specifically , the court ruled that "first amendment rights , applied in light of the special characteristics of the school environment , are available to teachers and students .