current hmtf expenditure reports . in 1992 , congress requested the corps to issue annual reports on the status of the hmtf , to include a description of expenditures from the trust fund on a project - by - project basis . the most recent such report listed on the corps website covers fy2005 and fy2006 . the corps has continued to request funds in its yearly budget justification to prepare and distribute such reports to congress . data comparing harbor usage with o&m expense . the corps has collected cargo tonnage data from waterborne carriers since 1922 . it therefore knows how much tonnage ( by commodity ) and how many vessels ( by type and draft ) use each of the channels and waterways it maintains . since 1977 , the corps has kept track of its o&m expenditures on each facility . however , the facility nomenclature in its tonnage database does not match and is not mapped to the nomenclature in its expenditure database . a channel condition and performance report . corps documents do not compare the depth and width of shipping channels to their authorized dimensions or to the dimensions needed to adequately serve modern vessels . the corps also does not publish estimates of the economic loss from such deficiencies or the expected benefit and cost associated with correcting them . the corps has established the "navigation economic technologies program" ( nets ) , whose purpose is to develop a standardized and defensible suite of economic tools for navigation improvement evaluation . the nets website states that "the u.s. army corps of engineers is committed to spending the nation's tax dollars wisely by investing in navigation projects that provide the best value for the dollar long term . the nets program supports this mission by developing independently - verified economic models , tools and techniques. nets appears to focus more on economic analysis of construction dredging projects rather than on the economics of operating and maintaining existing harbors and channels at authorized dimensions , although the majority of federal spending on dredging is for maintenance . in july 2012 , congress requested that the corps estimate the nationwide average availability , expressed as a percentage , of the authorized depth and width of all channels that are maintained from the hmtf that would result from the amount requested in the annual budget request , starting in fy2014 . it also asked for an estimate of the average annual amount from the hmtf needed to increase average availability to 95% over a three - year period . it appears that this information was not submitted with the fy2014 budget request . the federal maritime commission ( fmc ) has estimated that the average hmt payment for a 40-foot shipping container is $109 . the hmt rate , 0.125% , is small compared to cargo value , but it is more significant when measured against typical freight charges , particularly for containers holding relatively valuable cargo . the cost of shipping a 40-foot container from an asian port to the u.s. midwest is in the neighborhood of $4,000 .