59 to the house . enactment of this measure would have ended the emergency furlough for the entire government , at least until its date of expiration . as the measure currently stands , as is usually the case with crs , account - level direction for funding is not provided , and no explanatory statement of congressional intent ( such as a committee report ) exists . figure 2 , at the end of this section , shows a graphical representation of the relative size of dhs annualized appropriations that would be restored under a continuing resolution for the entire department at a rate equivalent to post - sequester resources provided under p.l . 113-6 — the same rate and coverage provided in h.j.res . it compares that annualized appropriation to the resources that would be provided through h.j.res . 85 , and the actions taken in p.l . this continuing resolution was introduced on october 3 , 2013 . it is a temporary appropriations measure that would provide funding for several dhs components , including u.s. customs and border protection ( cbp ) , u.s. immigration and customs enforcement ( ice ) , u.s. coast guard ( uscg ) , u.s . citizenship and immigration services , and part of the national protection and programs directorate ( nppd ) — the office of biometric identity management . these entities would be funded at the same rate as was provided in p.l . there are four sections in h.j.res . 59 that contain legislative language that applies to dhs . generally speaking , the sections carry authority and direction given to dhs and its components in both annual appropriations legislation and crs covering the department in recent years . cbo's scoring assumes that $5 billion in costs for the coast guard would have been paid already under h.r . figure 2 , below , shows a graphical representation of the relative size of the dhs appropriations that would be restored under the bill , relative to the resources that would be provided through h.j.res . enactment of this measure would have ended the emergency furlough for the five dhs entities listed in the bill , at least until its date of expiration . as the measure currently stands , as is usually the case with continuing resolutions , account - level direction for funding is not provided , and no explanatory statement of congressional intent ( such as a committee report ) exists . it would also not provide the four legislative extensions of authority for dhs as envisioned under h.j.res . the components included in this measure include three of the five largest discretionary budgets at dhs — cbp , ice , and uscg . these components also represent three of the four largest groups of employees furloughed at dhs , totaling 16,866 employees — 54% of dhs's total initial projected furlough . figure 2 , at the end of this section , shows a graphical representation of the relative size of the dhs appropriations that would be restored under the bill , relative to the resources that would be provided through h.j.res . 85 and the actions taken in p.l .