it did not receive any further action . providing the secretary and the administrator with the power to recommend the termination of a memorial's authorization raises two potential issues: can a memorial be completed or be issued a construction permit within seven years as required by 40 u.s.c . §8903 and what impact might a recommendation for termination have on congressional decision - making . in 1846 , congress accepted james smithson's gift to create the smithsonian institution . since then , the smithsonian has expanded to include 17 museums in the district of columbia , most of which are located on or adjacent to the national mall . in recent years , congress has authorized a new smithsonian museum — the national museum of african american history and culture , which is under construction — and legislation has been introduced to establish another — the national museum of the american latino . the cwa applies only to land administered by the nps or gsa in the district of columbia . thus , museums sited on non - nps or - gsa administered land would not be subject to the cwa . additionally , the cwa does not include museums in its definition of commemorative works . pursuant to 40 u.s.c . §8902 ( a ) ( 1 ) , any statue , monument , sculpture , memorial , plaque , inscription , or other structure or landscape feature , including a garden or memorial grove , designed to perpetuate in a permanent manner the memory of an individual , group , event or other significant element of american history , except that the term does not include any such item which is located within the interior of a structure or structures which is primarily used for other purposes . further , the cwa prohibits the siting of museums in area i or east potomac park . pursuant to 40 u.s.c . §8905 ( b ) ( 5 ) , no commemorative work primarily designed as a museum may be located on lands under the jurisdiction of the secretary in area i or in east potomac park as depicted on the map referenced in section 8902 ( 2 ) . when authorizing the national museum of african american history and culture in 2003 , congress specifically exempted it from the cwa prohibition against the creation of museums on nps - or gsa - administered land . the granting of this exemption arguably suggests that congress believes the cwa applies to museums at any district location , if they are located on nps - or gsa - administered land . this application of the cwa to a museum would be in contrast to the specific cwa prohibition against the placement of a museum in area i or east potomac park . whether the cwa applies to museums , therefore , is an open question . to reconcile the application of the cwa to museums , congress could choose to apply the cwa and its process to museums . this could standardize the process for creating museums in the district of columbia .