in the house , h.r . 309 would impose a tax on co 2 emissions from highway fuels , with the idea that the tax on emissions would replace the current federal excise tax on fuels . other legislation ( h.r . 972 ) would require emissions permits be purchased from the treasury , and impose a tax on persons failing to obtain such permits . division p of p.l . 114-113 also temporarily modified the section 199 deduction for independent refiners . these tax policy changes were enacted alongside provisions that removed crude oil export restrictions . the 114 th congress also passed legislation reauthorizing current law tax rates on motor fuels , which fund the highway trust fund ( htf ) and leaking underground storage tank ( lust ) trust fund ( the fixing america's surface transportation [fast] act [ p.l . in addition to extending current law , the fast act changed the way excise taxes are levied on liquefied natural gas ( lng ) , liquefied petroleum gas ( propane ) , and compressed natural gas ( cng ) . specifically , the legislation specifi ed that excise taxes on these fuels be levied on an "energy equivalent" as opposed to per gallon basis . members of the 114 th congress have introduced various pieces of energy - tax - related legislation . this section briefly reviews selected legislation and proposals . on june 10 , 2016 , the house passed h.con.res . 89 , expressing the sense of congress that a carbon tax would be detrimental to the united states economy . earlier in the 114 th congress , s.con.res . 1 was introduced to express the sense of congress that a carbon tax is not in the economic interest of the united states . 11 , proposed and withdrawn on march 25 , 2015 , would have created a point of order against carbon tax or carbon fee legislation . similar resolutions were introduced in the 113 th congress , as was legislation that sought to prohibit the secretary of the treasury or the environmental protection agency from implementing a carbon tax ( see h.r . 1486 in the 113 th congress ) . legislation has been introduced in both the house and senate that would impose a tax or fee on carbon or greenhouse gas emissions . 1027 would take a "cap and dividend" approach to requiring emissions permits . 2202 proposes an excise tax on greenhouse gas emissions , while h.r . 3104 proposes an excise tax on any taxable carbon substance . the american opportunity carbon fee act of 2015 ( s. 1548 ) would assess fees on major sources of greenhouse gas emissions . legislation in the 114 th congress proposes repealing various energy tax incentives , using revenues to reduce the corporate tax rate ( see the energy freedom and economic prosperity act [ h.r . legislation has also been proposed that would repeal a subset of energy tax expenditures , specifically those available to certain oil and gas companies ( eg , the close big oil tax loopholes act , s. 1907 ) . in the house , similar provisions have also been included in legislation that would repeal the excise tax on medical devices ( h.r .