the fmla was enacted in 1993 . as amended , the act requires covered employers to provide eligible employees with two types of job - protected leave: regular leave and military family leave . military family leave consists of qualifying exigency leave and military caregiver leave . proposals have been made to expand or restrict employee eligibility for fmla leave . one proposal would eliminate the requirement that employees must work 1,250 hours or more during the preceding 12 months for the same employer . these proposals would ( 1 ) eliminate the requirement that employees must work 1,250 hours or more during the preceding 12 months for the same employer , ( 2 ) prorate the 12 weeks of leave based on the number of hours worked , ( 3 ) eliminate or reduce the requirement that employees must work for the same employer for at least 12 months , and ( 4 ) lower employee eligibility from the current threshold of 50 employees who work within 75 miles of an employee's worksite . other proposals would allow eligible employees to take leave to care for additional members of the family or household . these additional persons may include grandparents , grandchildren , nondisabled children ages 18 or older , domestic partners , or same - sex spouses . some employers may oppose an expansion of employee eligibility for fmla leave . such an expansion could increase employer administrative and operating costs . employers may need to make additional adjustments to work schedules if more employees become eligible for , and take , fmla leave . to maintain the same level of output of goods and services , some employers may need to hire more workers or pay more workers for overtime . employers must continue health insurance coverage while employees are on fmla leave , which could increase employer costs if more employees take fmla leave . an expansion of fmla coverage could create an incentive for employers to hire more part - time workers , who may not be eligible for fmla leave . some proposals to amend the fmlsa would expand the reasons for which employees could take fmla leave . one proposal would allow employees to take "parental leave," where employees could take limited amounts of leave to attend parent - teacher conferences , participate in their children's educational and extracurricular activities , or take children ( or other family members ) to routine medical or dental appointments . other proposals would allow employees to take leave to participate in activities that result from domestic violence or because of a death in the family . using data from the 2012 dol employer survey , table 3 shows the percentage of employers that offer parental leave to their employees . an employer is defined as a unique worksite . a firm may have one or more worksites . column 1 shows the percentage of all worksites that offered parental leave . column 2 shows the percentage of worksites with fmla - eligible employees , which are worksites with at least 50 employees within 75 miles of the worksite . table 3 shows that , compared to all worksites , employers with fmla - eligible employees are more likely to offer parental leave .