the mcm covers almost all aspects of military law . because military courts are not considered article iii courts but instead are established pursuant to article i of the constitution , they have limited jurisdiction . congress , exercising its constitutional authority to raise , support , and regulate the armed forces , has attempted to address the issue of sexual assaults and other sex - related offenses under the ucmj through the introduction of various legislative proposals . the proposed language , if enacted , would prohibit the enlistment of individuals previously convicted of sexual offenses , eliminate the statute of limitations on prosecution of sexual offenses , and prohibit commanders from overturning a court - martial conviction as part of the post - trial review process . the house and senate have included numerous provisions addressing sexual assault , including those mentioned above , in the respective versions of the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2014 ( fy2014 ndaa ) . for example , the house version includes at least 20 provisions requiring statutory changes to the ucmj , modification of the rules for courts - martial , and other policy changes ; while the senate version , as reported by the senate armed services committee , incorporates at least 26 changes . additionally , secretary of defense chuck hagel recently announced that the department of defense would implement a series of new initiatives designed to address sexual assaults in the military , many of which are addressed by proposals contained in the house and senate versions of the fy2014 ndaa . due to the sheer number and scope of the provisions contained in the house and senate versions of the fy2014 ndaa , this report addresses selected proposals including requiring creation of special victims' counsel programs , changes to disposition and clemency authorities , mandatory minimum punishments , commander's authority to transfer an accused , and protections for recruits and trainees . in addition to the various provisions discussed above , senator kirsten gillibrand ( ny ) introduced a bill with a different approach to sex - related offenses . s. 967 addresses sex - related offenses under the ucmj by modifying the authority to proceed to trial by court - martial , modifying the manual for courts - martial to eliminate the factor relating to character and military service of the accused on initial disposition , modifying the authority to convene general and special courts - martial , creating a deadline for a military judge to call general and special courts - martial into session , modifying clemency authority of the convening authority , and requiring command action on reports of sexual offenses . the u.s. constitution imposes on the government a system of restraints to provide that no unfair law is enforced and that no law is enforced unfairly . what is fundamentally fair in a given situation depends in part on the objectives of a given system of law weighed alongside the possible infringement of individual liberties that the system might impose .