this legislation was not enacted . congress may also wish to continue to monitor the activity of u.s. trade partners with respect to compulsory patent licenses . for example , on june 18 , 2013 , 171 members of congress wrote to president obama expressing concern over india's "intellectual property ( ip ) climate. the letter in part observed: [t]he indian government issued its first compulsory license ( cl ) on a stage three liver and kidney cancer drug . it has been reported that additional drugs may be subject to cls imminently and that the decisions related to these cls are being improperly driven by an interest in growing the pharmaceutical market in india . these actions by the indian government greatly concern us because innovation and the protection of intellectual property are significant driving engines of the u.s. economy . the letter urged the president "to make sure these issues are raised at the highest levels of the indian government. compulsory licenses for patented inventions highlight the tension between two competing aspirations of the patent system: encouraging the labors that lead to innovation , on one hand , and placing the fruits of those labors before the public , on the other . as different patent - granting states possess distinct perceived interests and values with respect to innovation , proprietary rights , and public health and other social needs , conflicts among these jurisdictions have occurred in the post - wto era . assessing the role of compulsory licenses within the patent system of the united states and our trading partners remains a matter for congressional judgment . this permission is typically granted in exchange for the payment of a royalty or other consideration . this private contractual arrangement is termed a "license. in addition to a voluntary license , patents may be subject to a compulsory license . although no universally accepted definition exists , the term "compulsory license" implies that anyone who meets certain statutory criteria may use the patented invention . the permission of the patent owner is not required . depending upon particular national laws , the grounds for government award of a compulsory license may include: circumstances of national emergency or extreme urgency . where the invention serves vital public health needs . a strong societal interest has arisen in access to the patented invention . the patent owner has failed to practice the patented invention in the jurisdiction that granted the patent within a reasonable period of time . the patent owner has abused its economic power in such a manner as to violate the antitrust laws . in circumstances where multiple patents held by different owners cover a particular technology . for example , combination therapies — such as triple antiretroviral drugs — may be subject to more than one patent . in such cases , if one patent owner refuses to license , then the technology may not be marketed absent a compulsory licensing . these statutes typically require an interested party formally to request the compulsory license from a foreign government . competent authorities then decide whether to grant the license as well as the terms of any granted license .