, effectiveness ) . how much weight should student learning have in teacher evaluation ? the teacher incentive fund , race to the top , and the esea waiver package all require that teacher evaluations be based "in significant part" on evidence of improved student academic achievement and growth ( both s. 1094 and h.r . 5 also use this phrase ) . although states and school districts have flexibility around how to incorporate student learning , some serious implementation challenges likely exist — particularly regarding measurement in non - tested grades and subjects . it is unclear whether these challenges are best addressed by "letting a thousand flowers bloom" at the local level or through guidance and / or support at a federal or national level . several educational organizations have been contracting with states and school districts in this capacity for some time . federal endorsement of such partnerships might be an efficient and effective way to promote reform . what , if any , role should teacher evaluation systems play in the accountability of teacher preparation programs ? some argue that the success of these programs should be judged on the extent to which their graduates contribute to student academic achievement . as evaluation reform may build data linkages between student learning and teacher performance , in turn teacher evaluation could be linked to preparation program performance . on the other hand , building such data systems across numerous school systems and educational levels may not be simple or inexpensive and possibly may not be feasible . should current federal requirements for the equitable distribution of teacher quality include an effectiveness component ? nclb requires that states "ensure that poor and minority children are not taught at higher rates than other children by inexperienced , unqualified , or out - of - field teachers. if credential - based teacher quality measures are replaced with performance - based measures , perhaps equity provisions should be amended similarly . in some ways , current school - level accountability provisions have laid the groundwork for principal evaluation reform . turnaround models for low - achieving schools included in the esea waiver package may involve removing poorly performing principals . recently , a handful of states have newly required that teachers demonstrate positive performance in order to receive and retain tenure . states and school districts have also instituted performance pay , with and without tif support . some assert that evaluation reforms are too nascent for such high - stakes decisions and argue that evaluation results are better suited to provide feedback to teachers and inform professional development . others argue that basing such high - stakes decisions on teacher performance can be a needed catalyst for wider systemic reform . should evaluation reform include school leadership ? as the individual who may be most responsible for school - wide success , principal performance may be synonymous with school performance . moreover , so - called value - added models , which face large implementation barriers and methodological challenges with regard to individual teacher performance , may be better suited when applied to school - wide ( or principal ) performance . should federal funds be provided to support the development of evaluation systems and evaluator training ?