in march , s.res . 110 was agreed to by unanimous consent in the senate . a similar resolution , h.res . 195 , was introduced in the house in april . inherent to these debates is the question of how to provide access to spectrum on a competitive basis . actions taken by the fcc that are intended to improve competitive access to spectrum include modifying fcc auction rules to provide licenses with smaller area coverage ; encouraging participation by designated entities ; and establishing limitations on the number of licenses available to verizon or at&t . spectrum caps might limit the amount of spectrum available through auction to the top two carriers in key auctions such as those for repurposed television spectrum . the spectrum act employs three key policy tools for increasing the availability of radio frequency spectrum for wireless broadband: allocating additional spectrum ; reassigning spectrum to new users ; and opening up spectrum for unlicensed use . the middle class tax relief and job creation act of 2012 ( p.l . 112-96 ) was signed into law on february 22 , 2012 . many of the provisions in title vi of the act focus on spectrum assignment within the existing regulatory framework , in which licenses for designated radio frequencies are awarded through competitive bidding systems ( auctions ) . specific provisions of title vi ( frequently referred to as the public safety and spectrum act , or spectrum act ) include expediting auctions of licenses for spectrum designated for mobile broadband ; authorizing incentive auctions , which would permit television broadcasters to receive compensation for steps they might take to release some of their airwaves for mobile broadband ; requiring that specified federal holdings be auctioned or reassigned for commercial use ; and providing for the availability of spectrum for unlicensed use . major provisions in the spectrum act that are summarized in this report cover deficit reduction ; directed auctions ; incentive auctions for television broadcasters ; reallocation of spectrum from federal to commercial use ; and unlicensed spectrum . other provisions in the act , not covered in this report , include simplifying the approval of zoning requests for modification of cell towers at the state and local level and putting in place measures to facilitate antenna placement on federal property . the act also provides for the establishment of a new authority to plan and develop a nationwide public safety broadband network ( firstnet ) and other measures in support of improved emergency communications . implementation of the spectrum act raises a number of policy issues such as how to structure incentive auctions and how best to utilize spectrum assigned for federal use . other policy options that may be employed to increase spectrum capacity include requiring that wireless network infrastructure be shared ; changing the cost structure of spectrum access ; moving to more spectrum - efficient technologies ; and sharing spectrum . facilitating the adoption of new wireless technologies that enable spectrum sharing is emerging as a major policy consideration for spectrum management . policies to auction licenses for exclusive use of spectrum still appear to prevail in spectrum management planning .