he and his supporters held some protest actions . some observers regard the relative peacefulness of the election campaign ( compared to the october 2012 legislative election violence ) as a positive sign that democratization might be consolidating in georgia . these observers suggest that since elections have become an effective means to change political power in georgia , the impetus for mass demonstrations and a disruption of the democratic process has been reduced . on the other hand , some observers have raised concerns that with saakashvili's exit from the presidency and ivanishvili's intended resignation , a period of political instability could emerge if these former leaders eschew substantial political involvement . such instability might include the fracture of the unm or the gd coalition and intense competition or even violence between unm and gd supporters during local elections in mid - 2014 . ndi has highlighted a number of trends in georgian politics over the past year that could harm future democratization progress . these trends include coercion by gd supporters against directly or indirectly elected local executive and legislative officials ( who are unm members ) to force them to resign or switch parties ; politically motivated harassment of religious , ethnic , political , and sexual minorities and inadequate government responses to such harassment ; and a continuing atmosphere of political polarization between unm and gd . a major question for many georgians during the election campaign was whether ivanishvili would follow through on his statements that he would step down as prime minister soon after margvelashvili's election . on november 2 , 2013 , ivanishvili proposed that interior minister irakli garibashvili be confirmed by the legislature as the new prime minister . ivanishvili indicated that garibashvili already had been accepted by the leadership of gd and the legislative majority . under the constitution , after the legislative majority approves garibashvili as its candidate , he will be formally designated as the nominee by the president ( in this case , soon after margvelishvili's inauguration on november 17 , 2013 ) . the nominee will propose a cabinet and program , which will then be voted on by the legislature . ivanishvili has stated that he will "move to the civil sector," but will maintain a "big influence" over decision - making processes in the country after leaving office . observers who predict that ivanishvili aims to play an influential role in future politics point to various statements , such as his intention to suggest a candidate for the planned 2014 tbilisi mayoral election . a few observers assert that margvelashvili's win , and the apparent support by gd for garibashvili's elevation as prime minister , represents the consolidation of ivanishvili's power over the political system . garibashvili , in particular , has had a long career working for ivanishvili and has pledged , if confirmed as prime minister , to continue ivanishvili's policies . if ivanishvili — whose personal wealth rivals georgia's total gdp — continues to dominate georgian politics , albeit informally , georgia may come to more closely resemble other plutocratic developing countries , they suggest .