investigation . once the background investigation is complete , the application enters the adjudication phase . during this phase , a determination is made whether to grant the applicant a security clearance . generally , this decision is made by the sponsoring agency and is based on the information obtained during the background investigation . opm and the office of the director of national intelligence ( odni ) , however , reduced the reinvestigation timeline to five years for all clearance holders , regardless of access level . private contractors are subject to the same clearance procedures as direct government employees . as noted above , an individual may not obtain or initiate a security clearance on his or her own . the process to obtain a security clearance must be initiated by a sponsoring federal agency . the process differs slightly for an individual who is employed by a company that performs work under contract with the federal government . first , the contractor must determine whether the employee requires access to classified information in order to perform the duties of his or her position . the contractor must inform the sponsoring agency ( i.e. , the "customer" agency for whom the work is being performed ) that the employee requires access to classified materials . the sponsoring agency will consider the request and then determine whether to initiate the security clearance process for the employee . previously , the office of personnel management , federal investigative services ( opm - fis ) oversaw approximately 95% of all background investigations . on october 1 , 2016 , president obama transferred responsibility for investigative work and related services from opm - fis to the newly established national background investigations bureau ( nbib ) . like opm - fis , the nbib conducts some of the investigative work itself and contracts the rest out to private firms . while opm oversees the majority of security clearance background investigations , at least 21 federal agencies have delegated or statutory authority to conduct all or some of their own investigations . for example , the federal bureau of investigation ( fbi ) , the u.s . marshals service ( usms ) , and the bureau of alcohol , tobacco , firearms , and explosives ( atf ) have authority to conduct security clearance background investigations of certain categories of contractor positions . the central intelligence agency ( cia ) has authority to conduct its own security clearance background investigations . the cia also conducts background investigations for odni employees and contractors . typically , the requesting agency pays for background investigations of federal employees and contractor employees . as stated above , the vast majority of federal background investigations are handled by opm , which charges other federal agencies for the investigations it oversees . the cost of background investigations vary depending on the level of clearance requested and the scope of the investigation conducted . the requesting agency is responsible for any costs associated with the adjudication process and period reinvestigations .