the waters bill ( h.r . 3088 ) would have disposed of these mandatory minimums as well . 3553 ( a ) before sentencing a defendant . offenders are punishable by death or life imprisonment . it also outlaws the murder of a state correctional officer by a federal prisoner or while the officer is transporting a prisoner in interstate commerce . offenders are punishable by imprisonment for not less than 20 years or for life or by death . murder of a federal , state , or local law enforcement officer in furtherance of a violation of the controlled substances act or the controlled substances import and export act is punishable as well by imprisonment for not less than 20 years or for life or by death . 1577 / s. 698 would have established 30-year mandatory minimum terms of imprisonment for killing , attempting to kill , or conspiring to kill three classes of public servants: ( 1 ) federal judges and federal law enforcement officers , regardless of whether the crime occurred during or on account of the performance of their duties ; ( 2 ) federally funded public servants ( state , local , territorial , and tribal law enforcement officers , firefighters , chaplains , rescue squad and ambulance crew members ) during or on account of the performance of their official duties ; and ( 3 ) former federal judges , former law enforcement officers , and former federally funded public servants , killed on account of performance of their official duties . in addition to the 30-year mandatory minimum , the offense would have carried the prospect of imprisonment for life and , if a killing occurred , of the death penalty . it is a federal crime punishable by imprisonment for not more than five years to travel in interstate or foreign commerce for the purpose of avoiding state or federal prosecution . 1577 / s. 698 would have created an additional flight statute that would have proscribed flights to avoid prosecution for killing , attempting to kill , or conspiring to kill a federal judge , federal law enforcement officer , or federally funded public servant . the offense would have been punishable by imprisonment for any term of years not less than 10 years . section 111 prohibits assaulting a federal officer or employee during or on account of his or her official duties . simple assault is punishable under the provision by imprisonment for not more than one year . if the assault results in physical contact or is committed with the intent to commit another felony , the penalty increases to imprisonment for not more than eight years . if the assault involves the use of a deadly or dangerous weapon or results in bodily injury , the penalty becomes imprisonment for not more than 20 years . if the assault resulted in substantial bodily injury ( temporary but substantial disfigurement or loss of bodily or mental capacity ) to a federal judge or federal law enforcement officer , h.r . 1577 / s. 698 would have made the offense punishable by imprisonment for not less than five years or more than 30 years .