appendix a . 1908 — and possibly on s.amdt . also , floor managers are exploring the possibility of incorporating a select group of amendments into the underlying bill in order to ensure enough votes to achieve a cloture vote that would end debate and limit the number of amendments to be considered . details of s. 1392 provisions title i: buildings achieving energy - efficiency improvements in a building is a much more complex undertaking than , for example , improving efficiency in an electric appliance . the array of critical barriers to improving energy efficiency in buildings has been well documented . in particular , the regional nature of building codes ( e.g . houses in minneapolis need more insulation than houses in los angeles ) and other factors have made it impractical to set a single national building energy code . there was no further action on the motion to proceed until after adjournment . so far , only two amendments have been the subject of major floor debate: s.amdt . 1866 , on the affordable care act , and s.amdt . 1908 , on the keystone xl pipeline . several amendments that have not been the subject of major floor debate over s. 1392 have , nonetheless , been the subject of significant controversy in other venues . three notable examples have been selected for discussion here: fossil fuel use in new federal buildings , carbon emissions regulation , and regional haze regulation . in order to get an agreement to limit the time available for debate , amending , and voting on amendments , the floor managers secured leadership approval to take a vote on s.amdt . however , the proponents of other non - energy amendments expanded the request beyond s.amdt . 1866 to encompass votes on four additional health care and environmental amendments and an unlimited number of energy amendments . unable to resolve those differences , senate attention turned to work on a cr and an agreement to raise the federal debt ceiling . floor managers indicated that — once the cr , shutdown , health care , and debt limit issues are resolved — they hope to resume action on s. 1392 . meanwhile , efforts are continuing to narrow the list of amendments and to allow votes on s.amdt . instead , congress has directed doe to use its analytic capacity to develop model energy codes for residential and commercial buildings that states can adopt and adapt to local circumstances . this title would strengthen voluntary model building codes to make new homes and new commercial buildings more energy efficient . doe would be required to work with states and private industry to make the code - writing process more transparent . all doe model code updates would be coordinated with updates of specified industry standards . federal training and funding assistance would be available to states that adopt codes which meet or exceed the model codes . states seeking such assistance would be required to certify their code updates and code compliance with doe . incentives would be provided to train the next generation of workers in energy - efficient commercial building design and operation , and university - based building training and research assessment centers would be expanded .