table 2 . major provisions of title ii of wia and title iii of s. 1356 . this table covers provisions for adult education and literacy activities . table 3 . major provisions of title iii of wia and title iv of s. 1356 . this table covers changes to the wagner - peyser act of 1933 , which was also amended in title iii of wia . wagner - peyser provides authorization for the employment service , which provides job matching and job search assistance for unemployed individuals . table 4 . major provisions of title iv of wia and title v of s. 1356 . this table addresses amendments to the rehabilitation act of 1973 , in particular to the vocational rehabilitation and other employment - related provisions of that act , which authorizes various employment services for individuals with disabilities . title i of the workforce investment act — workforce investment systems — authorizes the establishment of a one - stop delivery system through which state and local wia training and employment activities are provided and through which certain partner programs must be coordinated . title i also authorizes appropriations for the three major state formula grant programs ( adult , youth , and dislocated worker ) , job corps ( a dol - administered program for low - income youth ) , and several other national programs that are directed toward subpopulations with barriers to employment ( eg , native americans ) . s. 1356 would maintain the existing one - stop delivery system as the delivery mechanism for employment and training services but would change the governing structure , performance accountability , and some programs . s. 1356 would split the current title i into a new title i ( system alignment and governance ) and a new title ii ( programs ) . below is a brief summary of the major provisions of s. 1356 . this list is followed by a thematic comparison in table 1 of current law and s. 1356 . the adult education and family literacy act ( aefla ) is the primary federal legislation that supports basic education for out - of - school adults . commonly called "adult education," the programs funded by aefla typically support educational services at the secondary level and below , as well as english language training . approximately 95% of aefla funding is allotted to the states via formula grants . , which authorizes the employment service ( es ) . the es is the central component of most states' one - stop delivery systems , as es services are universally accessible to job seekers and employers and es offices may not exist outside of the one - stop delivery system . es is one of the required partners in the one - stop delivery system . its central mission is to facilitate the match between individuals seeking work and employers seeking workers . it has been a central component of the workforce development system through wia . title iii adds section 15 ( "employment statistics" ) to wagner - peyser , which requires the secretary of labor to develop , provide , and improve various types of labor market information .