appendix a . major federal agencies and laws governing invasive species appendix b . , as amended . the department of defense ( dod ) manages over 25 million acres of lands within military installations and engages in management and control of invasive non - native species . congress also authorized usace to study and carry out other means to control asian river carp in the same area , as well as a larger study of potential methods to prevent the transfer of aquatic nuisance species between the great lakes and mississippi river basin . although not the focus of this report , certain invasive species can harm both ecosystems and human health . the most widely reported estimates put the potential aggregate economic costs from selected invasive species at $127 billion annually in the united states ( error ! reference source not found .

 ) , excluding estimated costs for human diseases ( which are not covered in this report ) . these estimated economic costs include control costs and direct damages and losses to property values , agricultural or natural resource productivity or output , and other costs . based on these estimated economic costs , the single largest cost is damage to u.s. agricultural crop and livestock production , totaling nearly $65 billion annually . the coast guard , an agency of dhs , works with other federal agencies to develop and implement a national ballast water management program aimed at preventing the unintentional introduction and dispersal of nonindigenous aquatic species into waters of the united states from ship ballast water . as mandated by nisa ( 16 u.s.c . §§4701 et seq . , amending nanpca ) , this national program became mandatory in 1999 . this estimate is for losses , damages , and control costs associated with agricultural crop weeds ( estimated at $20.5 billion annually ) ; crop plant pathogens ( $18.4 billion ) ; livestock diseases ( $9 billion ) ; and weeds in pastures ( $6 billion ) . plant pathogens and pests in forests account for another $4.2 billion annually . the text box below highlights available individual estimates of the estimated costs of some selected invasive species and describes their potential impacts . these cost estimates do not account for possible offsetting benefits from some introduced species . some criticize the estimates for overstating the cost of damages from invasive species or for not considering possible offsetting benefits . the estimates also do not account for some types of indirect losses and costs or certain nonmarket welfare losses . others note that a full accounting would consider other types of losses and would result in a higher estimate . comprehensive legislation on the treatment of invasive species has never been enacted , and no single law directs coordination among federal agencies . no laws focus on the broad problems of invasive species , their interception , prevention , and control across a variety of industries and habitats . instead , the current legal framework is largely governed by a patchwork of laws , regulations , policies , and programs . some laws are tailored to individual species or narrowly focused on what is affected by the species , such as agricultural production or certain aquatic or terrestrial ecosystems .