that report did not endorse any privacy initiatives . its authority covers both online and traditional advertising . the ftc bureau of consumer protection enforces rules regarding online consumer privacy . in recent years , the ftc has investigated several companies , including sears , myspace , and google , for their online behavioral advertising practices . the food and drug administration ( fda ) enforces the federal food drug and cosmetic act ( p.l . in april 2013 , the senate commerce committee held a hearing on the progress of industry self - regulation of online behavioral advertising . senators ron wyden and mark kirk reintroduced geolocation privacy legislation ( s. 639 ) . 75-717 ) , which regulates food package labeling and health claims and consumer prescription drug advertising . trillions of digital ads are served up annually . these ads are linked to many types of content and may be viewed on a wide variety of devices . according to nielsen data , more than 209 million americans were active online in january 2013 . facebook reported nearly 230 million daily desktop and mobile device views in the united states at the end of june 2013 . although television remains the dominant advertising choice , in 2011 spending on online advertising exceeded spending on print advertising for the first time . due to the expanding online market , many print publications face increased financial stress . they have responded by attempting to increase their own online advertising revenues , although few print publications have managed to charge enough for online ads to make up for the loss of print revenue . in 2012 , online ad revenue made up 15% of total newspaper advertising revenues , compared with 7% in 2007 . although online and traditional advertising are similar in many ways , there are important differences . a print newspaper may be the dominant source of information in its local market and therefore be able to charge advertisers a premium price , but on the internet that same newspaper competes against hundreds or thousands of websites , bloggers , and twitter users , and has less pricing power . the supply of online advertising opportunities is almost unlimited , and very few of the estimated 670 million websites on the internet are essential buys for advertisers . the abundance of ad inventory means that online advertising rates can be substantially lower than ad rates in other media . a 2011 federal communications commission report found that in may 2010 a typical online ad cost about $2.52 per 1,000 viewers , whereas the average cost per thousand viewers on primetime broadcast television networks was $19.74 . digital advertising can also be sold in other ways , including cost - per - click or by keyword purchase . despite the multitude of websites and social media outlets , the online advertising market is a concentrated market . in 2012 , the top 10 sellers of advertising space on websites accounted for more than 70% of online ad revenue , and the top 50 for nearly 90% , according to iab . real - time bidding systems ( rtbs ) like google's doubleclick or facebook's exchange let marketers buy and publishers sell advertising inventory through automated exchanges .