ampv is a vehicle integration program . regarding the decision to replace remaining m - 113s , the army notes the following: the m - 113 lacks the force protection and mobility needed to operate as part of combined arms teams within complex operational environments . for example , "commanders will not allow them to leave forward operating bases ( fobs ) or enter contested areas without extensive mission protection and route clearance. dod estimates if the m - 113s are replaced by ampvs at eab , total program costs could be increased by an additional $6.5 billion . according to the government accountability office ( gao ) , in march 2012 , the under secretary of defense for acquisition , technology , and logistics ( usd , at&l ) approved a materiel development decision for ampv and authorized the army's entry into the materiel solution analysis phase . the army completed the ampv analysis of alternatives ( aoa ) in july 2012 and proposed a nondevelopmental vehicle ( the candidate vehicle will be either an existing vehicle or a modified existing vehicle — not a vehicle that is specially designed and not in current service ) . because the ampv is to be a nondevelopmental vehicle , dod decided the program would start at milestone b , engineering and manufacturing development ( emd ) phase and skip the milestone a , technology development phase . the army planned for a full and open competition and aimed to award one industry bidder a 42-month emd contract to develop all five ampv variants . will the army simply "leave" m - 113s at eab and continue to maintain them , will they replaced by another vehicle , or is the army still trying to decide on a course of action and a program strategy ? dod's april 2017 ig report , while acknowledging effective management of the ampv program , also raised fundamental concerns about performance and design , as well as inaccurate procurement quantities , which could adversely impact program costs . gao's 2018 concerns regarding cost growth , difficulties meeting a variety of developmental requirements , and dependencies on other programs that are experiencing developmental challenges suggest that programmatic issues continue . the ampv will have multiple variants tailored to specific mission roles within hbct . mission roles are as follows: general purpose , medical evacuation , medical treatment , mortar carrier , and mission command . the use of other vehicles for m - 113 mission sets ( casualty evacuations , for example ) reduces unit combat effectiveness . the majority of the army's m - 113s are found in armored brigade combat teams ( abcts ) , where they comprise 32% of the tracked armored vehicles organic to that organization . the 114 m - 113 variants in the abct are distributed as follows . in addition to the ampv requirement in the abcts , the army also planned to procure an additional 1,922 ampvs to replace m - 113s in echelons above brigade ( eab ) . the army notes that these ampvs might have different requirements than the abct ampvs .