the ins never finalized these regulations . however , at the same time it issued the proposed regulations , the ins also issued a field guide on inadmissibility and deportability on public charge grounds that incorporated the definition of public charge and other guidance provided in the proposed regulations . commonly referred to as the "pearson memorandum," after its author , this field guidance has continued to be cited as an authoritative source on the public charge grounds of inadmissibility and deportability . similar guidance appears in other sources , most notably the state department's foreign affairs manual , discussed below . the public charge grounds are currently discussed in the regulations of both the departments of homeland security ( dhs ) and state ( dos ) , as well as in dos's foreign affairs manual . the dos regulations address only the grounds of inadmissibility , since consular officers are responsible for the issuance of visas to aliens outside the united states , but generally play no role in determining whether aliens within the united states are deportable . dhs officials , in contrast , determine whether aliens arriving at u.s. ports of entry are to be admitted ; whether applications for adjustment of status are to be granted ; and whether aliens within the united states are to be removed . thus , the dhs regulations address both inadmissibility and deportability . collectively , the various sources addressing the meaning of public charge suggest that an alien's receipt of public benefits , per se , has historically been unlikely to result in the alien being deemed removable on public charge grounds . as previously noted , the ina does not define public charge , or link the public charge grounds of inadmissibility and deportability with the receipt of public benefits . dhs and dos regulations are also silent as to the definition of public charge and the role that receipt of public benefits may play in public charge determinations . other guidance from dhs and dos does link the ina's public charge grounds with public benefits , in part , by defining public charge in such a way as potentially to encompass aliens who receive certain public benefits ( i.e. , ssi ; certain tanf assistance ; state and local cash assistance for income maintenance ) . however , this guidance also indicates that prior or current receipt of public benefits , in itself , has generally not sufficed for an alien to be found removable on public charge grounds . this guidance emphasizes that determinations as to admissibility involve projections regarding whether the alien is "likely to become a public charge" in the future that are based on the totality of the circumstances . these circumstances include , but are not limited to , prior receipt of benefits . the guidance similarly emphasizes that determinations as to deportability are made by applying a three - part test , previously discussed , which considers whether payment for any government - provided assistance was legally required , was demanded , and could be made .