precipitation , when it occurs , is expected to be more intense . human societies and ecosystems are sensitive to climate . some climate changes benefited civilizations ; others contributed to some societies' demises . the range of possible impacts on humans and ecosystems is also very wide . as is common and constructive in science , scientists debate finer points . some disagree with the broader consensus that ghg have been the major influence on global warming over the past few decades . some suggest that , if ghg emissions continue unabated , the resulting climate change would be small and possibly beneficial overall . most climate modelers project changes that are significant to large , with small likelihoods of changes that could be catastrophic for some human societies and ecosystems in coming decades . even the best science cannot provide absolute proof ; it is fundamental to the scientific method that all theories are to some degree provisional and may be rejected or modified based on new evidence . private and public decisions to act or not to act , to reduce the human contribution to climate change or to prepare for future changes , will be made in the context of accumulating evidence ( or lack of evidence ) , accumulating ghg concentrations , ongoing debate about risks , and other considerations ( eg , economics and distributional effects ) . that said , billions of dollars have been invested in research on a wide range of climate change topics , including the possibility of attribution to alternative causes than greenhouse gases . to date , scientists have found little support for the hypothesis that ghg are not responsible for observed warming , nor have they found much evidence that other factors ( including solar changes ) can explain more than a small portion of global average temperature increases since the 1970s . for example , measurements of solar irradiance suggest that the solar influence on global temperatures has been decreasing overall since the 1930s , with the up - and - down pattern of the 11-year solar cycle evident in observations . the presence of ghg in the atmosphere warms the earth to its current temperature . human activities , especially fossil fuel burning , deforestation , agriculture , and some types of industry , have increased ghg concentrations in the atmosphere . co 2 , the main ghg emitted by human activities , has risen almost 40% over the past 150 years . about one - third of human - related co 2 has been absorbed by oceans , increasing surface water acidity by 30% . the enhanced levels of ghg in the atmosphere contributed to the observed global average warming in recent decades . over other time and geographic scales , such factors as the earth's orbit , solar variability , volcanoes , and land cover change have been stronger influences than human - related ghg . there is a wide range of projections of future human - induced climate change , with all pointing toward warming . human - induced change will be superimposed on , and interact with , natural climate variability .