app. , inspector general act of 1978 , § 3 , 12 ) . the fca consists of three members ( no more than two may be from the same political party ) , who serve six - year terms . a member may not succeed himself or herself unless he or she was first appointed to complete an unexpired term of three years or less . a member whose term expires may continue to serve until a successor takes office . one member is designated to serve as chair for the duration of the member's term . the fcc consists of five members ( no more than three may be from the same political party ) , who serve five - year terms . when a term expires , a member may continue to serve until the end of the next session of congress , unless a successor is appointed before that time . the president designates the chair . the fdic board of directors consists of five members , of whom two — the comptroller of the currency and the director of the office of thrift supervision ( ots ) — are ex officio . the three appointed members serve six - year terms . an appointed member may continue to serve after the expiration of a term until a successor is appointed . not more than three of the members of the board of directors may be from the same political party . the president appoints the chair and the vice chair , with the advice and consent of the senate , from among the appointed members . the chair is appointed for a term of five years . § 1812 ) the president also appoints the inspector general , with the advice and consent of the senate . app. , inspector general act of 1978 , §§ 3 , 12 ) . the fec consists of six members ( no more than three may be from the same political party ) , who may serve for a single term of six years . when a term expires , a member may continue to serve until a successor takes office . the chair and vice chair , from different political parties and elected by the commission , change each year . generally , the vice chair succeeds the chair . the ferc , an independent agency within the department of energy , consists of five members ( no more than three may be from the same political party ) , who serve five - year terms . when a term expires , a member may continue to serve until a successor takes office , except that such commissioner may not serve beyond the end of the session of the congress in which his or her term expires . the president designates the chair . the flra consists of three members ( no more than two may be from the same political party ) , who serve five - year terms . after the date on which a five - year term would expire , a member may continue to serve until the end of the next congress , unless a successor is appointed before that time . the president designates the chair .