spectrum , by itself , is not of any use . there is no consensus about the changes needed . steep projected growth in demand for both mobile and fixed wireless services and other spectrum - using services make efficient spectrum management an increasingly important policy goal . as never before , there will be costs to society if the statutory framework does not foster efficient spectrum use . it has value when technology is applied to it to create services . but the direction that the applied technology takes will depend on the way spectrum is allocated for use and rules about such use . more generally , product development tends to follow the path defined by statutory and regulatory rules . just as different portions of the spectrum have different characteristics , different technologies that can be applied to spectrum to create services have different characteristics . for example , "spread spectrum" technology , which underlies wi - fi , spreads a radio signal out over a wide range of frequencies ; this makes the signal both difficult to intercept and less susceptible to interference . it is an especially effective technology for shared spectrum use , but loses its advantages in an environment of exclusive channel assignments . in contrast , the technologies being deployed by the cellular wireless broadband network providers in their macro networks create more interference and lend themselves to exclusive channel assignments . as explained earlier , u.s. wireless broadband service relies heavily on both types of technology . this suggests that relying on a single way to allocate spectrum — for example , only through auctions for exclusive channel rights or only through rules for shared , unlicensed use — could favor one type of technology over another , thereby artificially cutting off potentially rich avenues for innovation . in fact , the fcc already employs multiple approaches . as discussed below , since 1993 it has been authorized by congress to hold spectrum auctions and has held a number of auctions . but as far back as 1985 , the fcc also has set aside blocks of spectrum for shared use . recently it has moved toward a hybrid approach to spectrum allocation in the "white spaces" that exist between licensed television broadcasters by creating rules that allow different types of users to share that block of spectrum while protecting broadcasters from interference . traditionally , spectrum management has included three tasks — allocating blocks of spectrum to different uses , granting individual entities exclusive spectrum licenses for specific radio frequency channels within those spectrum blocks , and setting rules on how licensees may utilize the spectrum channels they are granted , for example , not allowing them to transmit in a fashion that creates electromagnetic interference with any other channel . to protect against interference , a lot of spectrum was set aside to provide buffers . these buffers have taken the form of "guard bands" ( unused spectrum channels ) between spectrum blocks and "white spaces" between licensees operating within a channel .