cost . utilities have limited resources . their capital and operations budgets are constrained , while the up - front costs of installing more energy - efficient equipment can be prohibitive . some funding sources to finance projects do exist ( eg , private sector , municipal bonds ) , but may not be suitable or well known to water utility officials . federal and state funding for energy efficiency projects is limited . municipalities that own and operate water utilities generally are risk - averse , reluctant to change practices , and hesitant to implement new technologies . water utilities are slow adopters of new technology in part because of environmental and public health risks if new technologies fail to perform and in part because of the economic , political , and regulatory consequences of failure . the tendency is to wait until equipment fails rather than be pro - active . facility operators who could advocate for energy efficiency often are disconnected from those in the utility who pay the electricity bill . most water and wastewater facilities were built decades ago when electricity costs were low enough to be of little concern . facilities and equipment were designed to run continuously , without regard for wasted energy . to the extent that water utilities can pass on energy costs to customers , there may be little incentive to investigate energy efficiencies . utility managers may not understand how energy is used at a plant and how to reduce , or even control , energy costs . regulatory barriers also exist . many state renewable portfolio standards require that a specified percentage of energy produced within the state comes from renewable sources . however , many of these state policies do not recognize biogas that is recovered from wastewater treatment as an energy source in renewable energy credit programs and renewable portfolio standards . this results in biogas use projects being ineligible for incentives for which other competing renewable energy projects are eligible . further , some electric utilities restrict sale of excess power to the electric grid , impairing project economics . in some cases where excess power can be sold to the grid , the water utility musts accept low prices for wastewater - generated energy , which can be a disincentive to on - site energy generation projects . other barriers stem from a lack of coherence and coordination between water and energy policies , planning , and decision - making roles . energy and water decisions have historically been made independently of each other . water planners typically assume that they have the energy that they need , and energy planners assume that they have the water that they need . both are likely to use different strategic planning: private companies acting under market forces dictate the location of energy infrastructure , while water infrastructure is often located using public interest criteria . a mismatch in planning objectives by different actors can prevent the beneficial siting and combining of technologies . likewise , water policy in the united states is usually structured in a bottom - up fashion with decisions driven by local water authorities , because water supply management is generally the responsibility of states .