a number of indicators paint a mixed picture of the prospect for stronger consumer spending . consumer confidence , as measured by households' attitudes and expectations about their finances , economic conditions and the buying climate has increased to the highest level in six years according to the thomson reuters / university of michigan index . the federal reserve's senior loan officer opinion survey on bank lending practices reported for the fifth consecutive month that the demand for prime residential mortgages had strengthened on net . in addition , the demand for automobile and credit card loans had strengthened on balance . the personal saving rate out of real disposable income in 2012 was 4.1% , down from 5.1% in 2011 . in the first quarter of 2013 , the personal saving rate decreased to 2.5% . a fall in the saving rate could be an indicator of households turning away from balance sheet repair and toward increased consumption spending . however , the first quarter result could also be a manifestation of lower disposable income caused by the increase in the payroll tax in january . with income down , households may have reached into saving to maintain their level of consumption spending , an action unlikely to be sustainable . real consumer spending in the first half of 2013 increased at an annual rate of 2.0% , slower than the 2.2% pace seen over the previous three years . this rate of spending falls short of what would be needed to accelerate the pace of the recovery ( and as noted above may have received a temporary boost from reduced saving ) . also , core retail sales for april through june 2013 have slowed relative to the first three months of the year . if household net worth is judged not to have fully recovered from the damage incurred in 2008-2009 , particularly for the typical household , then this would suggest to some a continuing need for macroeconomic policy to provide stimulus to maintain the recovery's upward momentum . at this point , stimulus from fiscal policy has ended and concerns about long term fiscal imbalance are a barrier to its being reapplied . so the question of continued need relates to monetary policy and when the federal reserve could begin to taper its asset purchases associated with its current policy of quantitative easing ( commonly referred to as qe3 ) . the fed has said that a slowing of qe3 is contingent on clear signs of improving economic conditions , particularly labor market conditions . the incomplete repair of the household balance sheet would be one factor suggesting that those clear signs are not likely to appear in the immediate future . the current state of household net worth , particularly the still large number of households with negative equity in their homes , could also have implications for the continuing need for federal policies such as the home affordable modification program ( hamp ) that are aimed at providing direct help in removing the burden of household debt through policies that restructure mortgage debt . the report then considers the near - term prospect for stronger consumer spending and more rapid economic recovery .