premiums . the path act would establish a minimum annual premium of 0.55% , and fha would be required to set its premiums high enough to cover its administrative costs and salaries as well as the cost of insurance and the capital that fha has to hold in reserve . fha would be allowed to set premiums that vary based on the risk characteristics of the mortgage . capital requirements . fha's financial reports would have to be prepared using private - sector accounting standards . the capital ratio — the amount of additional capital that fha must hold in reserve to pay for any additional , unanticipated future losses , beyond what it holds to pay for expected losses — would be increased to 4% of its outstanding insurance obligations for mortgages insured after the end of a transition period . ( under current law , the required capital ratio is 2%. ) if the capital ratio fell below certain thresholds , fha would have to take certain steps , including submitting a capital restoration plan to fhfa and reducing the maximum loan - to - value ratio for new mortgages that it would insure while its capital ratio remained below the required level . lender oversight . lenders could be required to reimburse fha for defaulted mortgages that did not meet its standards in certain circumstances . lenders would also need to agree to repurchase mortgages that default soon after the mortgage was originated . fha would be required to publish a consolidated handbook , updated annually , with all of its requirements for lenders and servicers . other fha programs . the path act would require fha to set affordability requirements to ensure that buildings with fha - insured multifamily mortgages include units affordable to low - or moderate - income households . under the capital magnet fund , treasury would award competitive funding to community development financial institutions ( cdfis ) or non - profit housing organizations . the funds would be used for rental or homeownership housing or related economic development activities that primarily benefit low - income households , with an emphasis on projects that will leverage other sources of funds . the new market access fund would provide funds to support research and development or credit support for affordable homeownership and rental housing activities that benefit low - and moderate - income households and underserved or hard - to - serve populations . the johnson - crapo gse bill would also provide for a set - aside of funds to be awarded competitively to tribes under the housing trust fund . multifamily housing . the gses would transfer their multifamily businesses into subsidiaries of each company within one year of enactment and would continue to operate their primary multifamily programs . fmic would manage the disposition ( eg , the sale or spinning off ) of the multifamily businesses on or before the system certification date . fmic would also approve and supervise multifamily guarantors , requiring them to maintain a minimum capital buffer of 10% . guarantors could guarantee and issue multifamily mbs . similar to the single - family program , the fmic guarantee would require private capital in a first - loss position .