courts , on the other hand , lack such expertise . a reviewing court shall not determine whether the agency's construction is the most obvious or the best interpretation of the statute in question , but , instead , must yield to the agency's construction if it is merely a "permissible" reading of the statute . some scholars have noted that the significance of this decision cannot be underestimated , arguing that it created a "counter - marbury for the administrative state" because " chevron seemed to declare that in the face of ambiguity , it is emphatically the province and duty of the administrative department to say what the law is. in order to understand the broad implications of the chevron test , the following sections take a closer look at the application of the test as it has evolved since the chevron decision . even if an agency interpretation does not qualify for deference under chevron , a reviewing court may still accord the agency construction of a statute significant weight pursuant to reasoning established in skidmore v. swift . skidmore involved a claim by a group of employees for recovery of overtime pay under the fair labor standards act ( flsa ) . the case turned on whether "waiting time" — or time that an employee spends on the employer's premises in the case of an emergency — constituted "working time" for purposes of the flsa . the administrator of the department of labor wage and hour division had determined , through an interpretive bulletin and a series of informal rulings , that whether periods of inactivity constituted working time depended on "the degree to which the employee is free to engage in personal activities ... and the number of consecutive hours that the employee is subject to call ..." thus , the court was left with the question of "what , if any deference courts should pay to the administrator's conclusion ? the supreme court determined that these types of agency determinations had significant value . while acknowledging that the administrator's determinations were neither conclusive nor binding , the court also noted that respect was due to agency policies that are "made in pursuance of official duty , based upon more specialized experience and broader investigations and information than is likely to come to a judge in a particular case. the court explained its holding as follows: we consider that the rulings , interpretations and opinions of the administrator under this act , while not controlling upon the courts by reason of their authority , do constitute a body of experience and informed judgment to which courts and litigants may properly resort for guidance . the weight of such a judgment in a particular case will depend upon the thoroughness evident in its consideration , the validity of its reasoning , its consistency with earlier and later pronouncements , and all those factors which give it power to persuade , if lacking power to control . the skidmore holding was grounded in a respect for agency expertise . but skidmore deference does not require that a court simply defer to an agency's interpretive choice . rather , the degree of deference accorded by a reviewing court directly correlates to the strength of the agency's reasoning .