( d ) written policies and procedures . policies and procedures regarding the creation collection , use , and disclosure of personally identifiable information must , at minimum: ( 1 ) be in writing , and available to the secretary of hhs upon request ; and ( 2 ) identify applicable law governing collection , use , and disclosure of personally identifiable information . consumers have a right to revoke the authorization at any time . the potential for privacy violations and other consumer swindles extends well beyond exchange - sanctioned consumer assistance programs , however . the federal trade commission warned consumers in 2012 about scam artists seeking to obtain personal information under the guise of verifying information regarding aca coverage . 45 cfr §  155 .260   privacy and security of personally identifiable information . ( a ) creation , collection , use and disclosure . ( 1 ) where the exchange creates or collects personally identifiable information for the purposes of determining eligibility for enrollment in a qualified health plan ; determining eligibility for other insurance affordability programs , as defined in 155 .20 ; or determining eligibility for exemptions from the individual responsibility provisions in section 5000a of the code , the exchange may only use or disclose such personally identifiable information to the extent such information is necessary to carry out the functions described in §  155 .200 of this subpart . ( 2 ) the exchange may not create , collect , use , or disclose personally identifiable information while the exchange is fulfilling its responsibilities in accordance with §  155 .200 of this subpart unless the creation , collection , use , or disclosure is consistent with this section . ( 3 ) the exchange must establish and implement privacy and security standards that are consistent with the following principles: ( i ) individual access . individuals should be provided with a simple and timely means to access and obtain their personally identifiable information in a readable form and format ; ( ii ) correction . individuals should be provided with a timely means to dispute the accuracy or integrity of their personally identifiable information and to have erroneous information corrected or to have a dispute documented if their requests are denied ; ( iii ) openness and transparency . there should be openness and transparency about policies , procedures , and technologies that directly affect individuals and / or their personally identifiable information ; ( iv ) individual choice . individuals should be provided a reasonable opportunity and capability to make informed decisions about the collection , use , and disclosure of their personally identifiable information ; ( v ) collection , use , and disclosure limitations . personally identifiable information should be created , collected , used , and / or disclosed only to the extent necessary to accomplish a specified purpose ( s ) and never to discriminate inappropriately ; ( vi ) data quality and integrity . persons and entities should take reasonable steps to ensure that personally identifiable information is complete , accurate , and up - to - date to the extent necessary for the person's or entity's intended purposes and has not been altered or destroyed in an unauthorized manner ; ( vii ) safeguards .