section 5702 . the committee explained that: in determining a level of cash compensation for civilian captives , the committee attempted to weigh the issues presented in the debate over the rate of compensation for the iran hostages . at the time that the president's commission on hostage compensation presented its findings , many felt that the commission's recommendation that the hostages receive $12.50 per day for every day in captivity vastly underestimated both the captivity itself and the sympathy of the american people for the captives' plight . others suggested that any cash award should be upward of $100 per day or more . the per diem rate chosen by the committee is a uniform rate which is a reliable gauge of the government's obligation to its employees when they are engaged in official business away from the normal duty station . this formula would have provided compensation in the amount of $66 per day for each former hostage . a floor amendment to reduce the amount to $20 failed , but the provision was amended in conference to provide $50 per day to the iran hostages and to reduce the minimum per - diem based rate for future victims by half . the conference report provides no explanation for the substitution . after congress amended the fsia in 1996 to include a new exception to immunity for acts of terrorism conducted or sponsored by designated terrorist states , the former hostages again brought suit against iran . in order to assess how much revenue the fund envisioned by the bills described above could likely be expected to accrue , crs has compiled data available from several sources in order to estimate the total revenue from penalties and settlement agreements connected with violations of regulations proscribing economic activity with iran for the calendar years 2005-2014 . information was obtained from the department of the treasury , office of foreign assets control ( ofac ) website ; the department of commerce , bureau of industry and security ( bis ) annual reports to congress for the years 2005-2014 ; and a report of major violations from the department of justice . crs identified 373 penalties stemming at least in part from violations of sanctions against iran ( there may be more than one penalty per violation ) . the data include criminal fines , forfeitures , significant special assessments , and civil penalties that were reported to have some connection with iran . because the data sets are not complete through the time covered , and because it is not always easily ascertained whether the enforcement action summarized pertained to iran , the following should be considered an estimate only . moreover , crs has not undertaken a thorough legal analysis of the bills' language concerning which laws and regulations might be deemed to be included under the definition of covered penalties and settlements . it is not clear , for example , whether laws providing for forfeiture are necessarily included . so far in 2015 , ofac and the department of justice report a total of $1,958,030,478.00 in forfeitures and fines having to do in part with violations of sanctions against iran , some of which has gone to state law enforcement and regulatory agencies .