, not billions ) . adaptation to climate change has grown in attention across the federal agencies , as well as across segments of the public and private sector . these amounts do not include resources in the u.s. geological survey , as their efforts to provide related science to support the bureaus and other agencies are reported in the usgcrp . over the past two decades , federal funding for climate change - related activities has expanded from scientific research , almost exclusively , to a wide variety of programs to ( 1 ) develop and disseminate technologies ; ( 2 ) build an informational and analytical foundation for future policy actions ; ( 3 ) plan for adaptation to actual or expected climate change ; ( 4 ) assist private sector decision - makers and lower - income countries ; and ( 5 ) address additional needs . federal strategy on climate change largely reflects the aggregation of a variety of existing programs , presidential initiatives , and congressionally directed activities . presidential initiatives have been built largely from existing programs , and agencies have contributed to shared program goals using existing resources and expertise . priorities tend to be based on departmental missions and the degree of support for the input activities . as the debate continues over appropriate strategies to address climate change , the needs and priorities for funding are likely to evolve further . federal budget for climate change - related programs is primarily aimed at investment and tax provisions aimed at stimulating energy technologies that may reduce ghg emissions . the clean energy technologies category represents 68% of the president's request for fy2014 . over the period since fy2001 , including the fy2014 request , these technology programs constitute more than 70% of all funding for identified climate change - related programs ( excluding tax provisions ) . by itself , the one - time injection of resources in the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 ( p.l . 111-5 ) — almost entirely for energy technology development — is nearly one - quarter the cumulative spending from fy2001 through fy2013 . since fy2001 , funding for climate change science has remained roughly constant , varying up or down by as much as 15% in real dollars ( i.e. , adjusted for inflation ) . funding for science was near its real - dollar low in fy2008 , and would almost reach a high if the fy2014 request were enacted . ( the peak was $2,577 million in fy2003 in 2012 constant dollars. ) international assistance , to facilitate capacity - building and efforts by selected , low - income countries to mitigate their ghg emissions and adapt to expected climate change , has nearly tripled from fy2001 to the current fy2013 budget authority . the fy2014 request proposed an increase of the current fy2013 amount by 9.5% , to $856 million . this is 8% of the president's request . although activities in the federal agencies have expanded , especially since 2009 , little of this activity is reported in omb's budget cross - cut .