the report closes with concluding observations . the patent system covers a broad variety of inventions . u.s. patents cover traditional subject matter such as machines , pharmaceuticals , and manufacturing processes , along with high - tech inventions in the fields of biotechnology , computer software , and nanotechnology . no matter what the sort of technology , however , the patent system in large measure operates under the same general principles . in particular , all inventors who wish to obtain patent rights must file an application at the u.s. patent and trademark office ( uspto ) . uspto examiners then review the application to ensure that certain statutory requirements are met . these statutory requirements — including that the invention be adequately described in the patent application , and that the invention must not have been obvious to a skilled artisan — apply to every invention for which a patent is sought . similarly , once a patent has issued , the statutory term is set uniformly to 20 years from the date of filing no matter what the type of invention . all patents received the identical exclusive rights — namely , the right to prevent others from making , using , selling , offering to sell , or importing the patented invention in the united states . some exceptions exist to this general notion of standardization . the united states has long provided for the protection of industrial designs through so - called "design patents. the patent law treaties implementation act of 2012 , p.l . 112-211 , recently caused u.s. law to conform to the hague agreement concerning the international registration of industrial designs , the leading international agreement on these specialized rights . the united states also established two sorts of intellectual property rights for plants: plant patents , which are administered by the uspto ; and plant variety protection certificates , which are administered by the department of agriculture . in addition , the hatch - waxman act extends the terms of patents covering pharmaceuticals , medical devices , and other products which are subject to premarketing approval by the fda . as well , over the years private legislation has increased the terms of a number of particular patents . further , some commentators observe that the statutory provisions for patents are stated fairly generally . in their view , these broad parameters provide courts and the uspto with some ability to recognize the diverse characteristics of distinct technologies and tailor their rulings accordingly . for example , one core patentability requirement is that the invention must not have been obvious to a person of ordinary skill in the art . the courts have arguably developed nuanced obviousness principles that take into account whether the invention falls within a predictable art , including many mechanical and electrical inventions , as compared to a less predictable art , such as some branches of chemistry and biotechnology . inventions within these latter , less predictable arts may possibly be more readily able to satisfy the obviousness requirement and therefore are more likely to be patented .