the united states has negotiated a number of ftas with substantial services components . should a model services agreement be developed that identifies u.s. interests across services ? advancements in information technology expand the number and types of services that can be traded and help to create new types of services . is it possible to develop a trade arrangement that is clear enough to be effective and flexible enough to take into account rapid changes in the services sector ? available data measure only a limited set of sectors and countries across the various modes of international trade in services . to the degree that data help to determine policies , should congress consider requiring the executive branch to collect more complete data where possible ? the 164 members of the wto negotiated and have maintained a basic set of multilateral rules in the form of the gats . however , the gats is largely viewed as limited in scope , predating significant technological developments over the past two decades , and in need of expansion if it is to be an effective instrument of trade liberalization . the efforts of the wto members to expand on these rules have stalled , with little prospect of success at least in the foreseeable future . the lack of progress in the wto negotiations due to the complexity of the issues and parties involved has led to the rise of sector - specific plurilateral agreements as an alternative path forward . in negotiating tisa , the united states has been pursuing a services - specific plurilateral agreement that includes the 28-member eu and japan — two of the most important u.s. trade partners — plus other participating countries . the united states has made services trade liberalization and rules - setting an important component of the ftas it has negotiated and is currently renegotiating . while these agreements have gone beyond the gats in terms of coverage , they apply to a limited number of countries , accounting for small shares of u.s. trade in services . the outlook for the ongoing negotiations remains uncertain , as participants in each negotiation deal with difficult and complex issues . potential policy issues for congress and negotiators to address include the following: to what extent are u.s. positions on trade in services in the renegotiation of nafta , potential renegotiation of korus , tisa , and t - tip negotiations consistent with u.s. trade negotiating objectives on services as defined in the tpa legislation ? how might congress work with the administration in relation to these pending negotiations ? how could the conclusion of or withdrawal from one agreement impact negotiations in the others ? what impact would these proposed agreements , or withdrawal from existing agreements , have on the u.s. economy and various stakeholders ? should congress conduct hearings to examine potential new bilateral fta negotiations with specific countries , such as other tpp members , or to examine implementation of commitments in past agreements ? should the executive branch pursue enhanced regulatory cooperation with key trading partners or mutual recognition efforts in specific service sectors to lessen the burdens created by varied regulatory regimes and requirements across different markets ?