first , proposals for a fisa public advocate appear to be unified in the mission of the advocate . such ex parte proceedings typically exist in the context of pretrial criminal procedure . for example , the only parties allowed to be present in a grand jury proceeding are the jurors , prosecutor , witnesses , and a court stenographer , and an authorized magistrate can issue a search warrant upon the request of an attorney for the government . in this vein , fisa proceedings are also primarily ex parte in nature , as the fisc is authorized to issue orders approving of electronic surveillance , certain physical searches , the use of a pen register or a trap and trace device , or the access to certain business records for foreign intelligence and international terrorism investigations upon a proper showing made in an application by a federal officer . in the wake of the recent revelations regarding the size and scope of the government's foreign surveillance activities , lawmakers and others have suggested transforming fisa proceedings such that the process is more adversarial in nature . critics of the current fisa proceedings have cited the infrequency of the fisc's rejections of government surveillance requests as evidence that the lack of an adversarial process has prevented the court from fully and properly scrutinizing the government's position . while some reject this line of reasoning , those who have found the ex parte nature of fisa proceedings troubling have argued that allowing another attorney to argue in opposition to the requests of the department of justice ( doj ) to conduct foreign intelligence activity would allow the fisc to better protect civil liberty interests . proposals on the public advocate issue have varied , even with respect to the title of the attorney who would be charged with opposing the government's surveillance requests . for example , such an office has been referred to as the "special advocate," the "privacy advocate general," the "public advocate," the "constitutional advocate," a "public interest advocate," or an "ombudsman. beyond nomenclature , ideas for enhancing the adversarial nature of fisa proceedings have differed in structure . several proposals envision having an office of a public advocate as part of the executive branch , either as a wholly new "independent" agency or as a part of an existing agency , such as within the doj's national security division . in contrast , others have suggested establishing the office of a public advocate as an independent entity within the judicial branch , perhaps akin to the structure of federal public defender organizations that exist in many federal judicial districts in aid of providing criminal defense representation . moreover , with respect to who would appoint the attorney to lead a public advocate's office , a variety of government actors , including the president or a cabinet officer , such as the attorney general , the privacy and civil liberties oversight board ( pclob ) , or a federal court have been suggested as potential appointing authority .