the corps project development process is complex . by focusing on environmental requirements that must be addressed during planning , this report does not identify every element of project development that may affect project delivery . as a result , they may require a high degree of resources agency involvement ( eg , in developing ecosystem restoration projects ) . to understand why a potentially complex array of environmental requirements may apply to water resource projects , it is useful to understand the social and environmental concerns that led congress to enact the various laws that may apply to both the project development process and projects themselves . during planning , the corps is obligated to determine a project's potential economic , social , and environmental benefits and detriments . processes and procedures that the corps uses to ensure compliance with that directive and any other applicable planning requirements are implemented in accordance with the corps' planning guidance notebook . the notebook provides the overall internal agency direction by which civil works projects are formulated , evaluated , and selected for recommendation to congress . as the corps implements the project development process , environmental requirements are integrated into the planning process in accordance with the "environmental evaluation and compliance" requirements provided in the notebook . processes and procedures necessary to meet the environmental evaluation and compliance requirements are intended to ensure corps compliance with nepa , the water resources planning act ( as reflected previously in planning requirements established in the p&g and now in the p&r ) , and other applicable federal environmental laws , regulations , and executive orders , and other applicable federal planning requirements . while waiting for authorization , the corps can continue with preconstruction engineering and design ( ped ) activities , if it is funded to do so , but cannot move forward until the project is approved by congress . construction authorization to the appropriation of construction funds . once the project receives congressional authorization , federal funds for construction may be sought in the annual energy and water development appropriations act . competition for inclusion in annual appropriations has curtailed the initiation of new construction projects . for example , many new civil works projects authorized in wrda 2007 have not received construction funding as of fy2013 . instead , funding priorities have generally been on existing projects ( eg , ongoing construction or maintenance activities ) . given the range of environmental issues and impacts that congress requires the corps to evaluate for civil works projects , there is little debate that the body of requirements that may be deemed "environmental" that apply to corps projects often represents a significant element of the project development process . what is unclear is whether or which specific environmental requirements routinely delay project delivery . for example , the issuance of permits by a state water quality agency pursuant to the clean water act or consultations with the u.s . fish and wildlife service required pursuant to the endangered species act may take longer than anticipated for a given project . that does not necessarily mean that compliance with those requirements will delay project delivery , especially if compliance is demonstrated concurrently with other required elements of project development .