patel has been followed by other courts . in lucas v. jerusalem cafe , the u.s. court of appeals for the eighth circuit maintained that the "flsa's sweeping definitions of 'employer' and 'employee' unambiguously encompass unauthorized aliens. moreover , the eighth circuit found that allowing undocumented workers to recover damages for work actually performed is consistent with the irca . the eighth circuit noted that the flsa and the irca "together promote dignified employment conditions for those working in the country , regardless of immigration status , while firmly discouraging the employment of individuals who lack work authorization. in a 2008 fact sheet , the whd of the dol emphasized that it would continue to enforce the flsa without regard to whether an employee is undocumented . the whd sought to distinguish the court's decision in hoffman from actions brought by undocumented workers under the flsa . the whd maintained that claims brought under the flsa seek backpay for hours actually worked , and that the supreme court's concern with awarding backpay under the nlra did not apply to work actually performed . legislation in the 113 th congress would reform foreign guest worker visa categories to strengthen worker protections while increasing flexibility and responsiveness to employer needs . s. 744 , border security , economic opportunity , and immigration modernization act , among other things , would reverse the effect of hoffman by permitting all workplace remedies to apply regardless of immigration status and would thereby make reinstatement available for those authorized to work ; create new nonimmigrant worker categories , including two that would replace the h - 2a category ; establish whistleblower protections ; and extend coverage of the msawpa to include all nonimmigrant agricultural workers . 2131 , the supplying knowledge - based immigrants and lifting levels of stem visas act or skills visa act , among other things , would specify employment protections , such as wages , working conditions , contract requirements , for various high - skilled , professional visa categories that currently do not have such protections ; require verification of foreign degrees ; increase h - 1b numerical limits ; authorize streamlined certification procedures for employers filing multiple petitions for workers in certain visa categories ; and authorize the secretary of labor to subpoena employers of h - 1b , h - 1b1 , and e - 3 nonimmigrant workers . 1773 would establish a new h - 2c agricultural worker visa category , which , however , would be excluded from coverage by the msawpa . 1773 pending before the 113 th congress . protections for foreign workers are generally provided pursuant to the immigration and nationality act ( ina ) and are strongest for nonimmigrant ( i.e. , temporary ) workers in visa categories generally associated with lower - skilled occupations , such as h - 2a agricultural workers and h - 2b forestry / logging workers , since such workers are perceived as more vulnerable to exploitation and less likely to have sufficient resources to enforce their rights effectively . in particular , nonimmigrant foreign workers may find themselves subject to deportation in the event of a job loss .