a summary of the perspectives of the u.s . entity , u.s. stakeholders , and bc is provided below . the president , through the national security council , determines the negotiating position on the crt , and the state department is responsible for conducting negotiations related to the treaty . however , congress is also involved in this process . the constitution gives the senate the power to approve , by a two - thirds vote , treaties negotiated by the executive branch . the senate does not ratify treaties ; instead it takes up a resolution of ratification , by which the senate may formally provide its advice and consent on the ratification process . the senate is not required to provide an up or down vote on a resolution of ratification , nor are treaties required to be resubmitted after each congress . in the case of the crt , as the treaty has been previously negotiated and ratified , the senate would take up a resolution of ratification if the united states and canada agree to treaty modifications and the executive branch submits the modification to the senate for review ( if the treaty is continued without modification or terminated , there would be no advice and consent role unless there was a new treaty that needs to be ratified ) . both the house and the senate have also weighed in on treaty review in their oversight capacities . additionally , the northwest delegation ( including all 26 lawmakers representing idaho , montana , oregon , and washington ) sent letters to president obama in 2014 and 2015 expressing concerns with the perceived slow pace of the interagency policy committee review process . in april 2015 , lawmakers expressed a collective desire to finalize an administration position and begin negotiations with canada in 2015 . on june 21 , 2017 , a bipartisan group of seven house members from washington and oregon wrote to president trump requesting prompt commencement of crt negotiations . the value of the canadian entitlement has been estimated by the u.s . entity to be worth between $229 million and $335 million annually , depending on a number of assumptions . all of these users have an interest in management of basin water supplies . the negotiation and ratification of the crt were precipitated by several events in the basin . most notably , a major flood event in the northwest in 1948 , the vanport flood , caused significant damage throughout the basin and served as the impetus for negotiations between the united states and canada , including studies by the international joint commission ( ijc ) . initially , following the flood , the united states had proposed in 1951 to build libby dam in montana ( which would flood 42 miles into canada ) . canada was opposed to this solution , and as a response proposed to divert as much as 15.5 million acre feet from the columbia river for its own purposes . based on a number of technical studies , the ijc recommended a compromise , which included development of upriver storage in canada to help regulate flows on the columbia river , including those for flood control and hydropower generation .