in the 113 th congress , h.r . accordingly , consular officers within the u.s. department of state ( dos ) generally have nonreviewable authority to deny visas . therefore , the dos regulations only provide for administrative , supervisory review of visa denials . this doctrine of consular non - reviewability has long been recognized by the courts and has rarely been challenged . however , there is some case law supporting limited judicial review of a visa denial with regard to the first amendment rights of u.s. citizens to hear and debate the religious and political views of aliens . in kleindienst v. mandel , the u.s. supreme court held that , when an executive branch officer / agency exercised discretion to not waive the exclusion of an alien as an anarchist and communist advocate for a facially legitimate and bona fide reason , the courts will not look behind the exercise of discretion nor test it by balancing the reason against the first amendment interests of u.s. citizens who desire to hear the political views of and debate the alien . some later federal appellate decisions have followed mandel and extended its holding to visa denials by consular officers or to the assertion of other constitutional rights by u.s. citizens . although they cannot order a consular officer to grant or deny a visa , courts have differed about whether they have jurisdiction to review consular failure to perform the nondiscretionary duty of deciding to grant or deny a visa and to require a consular officer to make a decision . it appears that courts have generally held that the doctrine of consular nonreviewability applies to revocation of visas issued to aliens who are outside the united states , but that revocation of a visa issued to an alien who is already in the united states is subject to judicial review . for a visa revocation , there is no judicial review ( including review pursuant to 28 u.s.c . §2241 , or any other habeas corpus provision , and 28 u.s.c . §§1361 and 1651 ) , except in the context of a removal proceeding if such revocation provides the sole ground for removal . furthermore , federal courts have differed about whether the doctrine of nonreviewability extends to nonconsular officials , including officers of the former immigration and naturalization service and the u.s. department of homeland security ( dhs ) . the judicial review provisions and related litigation for the legalization program under the immigration reform and control act of 1986 ( irca ) remain relevant in light of the legalization provisions of s. 744 , the senate - passed bill known as the border security , economic opportunity , and immigration modernization act . under ina §245a ( f ) ( 3 ) and pertinent regulations , there is a single level of administrative appellate review via the administrative appeals unit of the uscis . pursuant to ina §245a ( f ) ( 4 ) , judicial review of irca legalization denials is only available as review of a deportation order under former ina §106 , since denial of legalization would generally lead to the initiation of deportation proceedings against the unauthorized alien .