on the other hand , h.r . 1910 could be characterized as simply "leveling the playing field" for domestic products and not as treating imported products any less favorably . 1910 is adopted and later found to violate the requirements of the gatt , the united states could potentially justify the registration requirement under the exceptions provided at article xx ( b ) and ( d ) of the gatt . these obligations have been implemented in u.s. law . enforcing consumer product safety laws at the border remains a priority for the cpsc and cbp . in 2008 , following widely publicized recalls of children's toys , congress passed the cpsia . the ffa contains a similar provision . some international trade agreements classify measures that regulate on the basis of a product's characteristics or processes and production methods as technical regulations , standards , or conformity assessment procedures . these measures are commonly referred to as "standards - related measures" or , when they act as obstacles to international trade , "technical barriers to trade. several international agreements contain obligations for the united states with respect to the promulgation of standards - related measures such as product safety regulations promulgated by the cpsc or product safety laws enacted by congress . among other things , the act contained provisions modifying the cpsc's role and authority with regard to the import and export of consumer products . some members of congress have proposed additional legislation to address the potential harm caused by imported products . 1910 became law , it could potentially be subject to challenge before a wto panel on the grounds that it violates the national treatment requirement contained in article iii:4 of the gatt by requiring foreign manufacturers to bear the costs of establishing a registered agent and becoming subject to product liability lawsuits , therefore possibly hurting the competitiveness of the manufacturers' products in the u.s. market as a result of higher product prices . both of these exceptions may require the complaining member to identify possible alternative measures available to the defending member that would be consistent — or at least less inconsistent — with the gatt . if a measure is provisionally justified under article xx ( b ) or ( d ) , it must also satisfy the article xx chapeau . 1910 , the foreign manufacturers legal accountability act of 2013 , was introduced in the house on may 9 , 2013 . the cpsia also made a similar amendment to the ffa . as described above , the cpsa makes it unlawful for persons to engage in certain prohibited acts with respect to importation . similarly , the cpsa prohibits export from the united states for the purpose of sale of a product or substance within the jurisdiction of the cpsc that ( 1 ) is subject to a cpsc order for a recall or corrective action , a court order declaring an imminent hazard , or that is a banned hazardous substance under section 2 ( q ) ( 1 ) of the fhsa ; or ( 2 ) is subject to a publicly notified voluntary corrective action taken by the manufacturer , in consultation with the cpsc .