remittances can be sent through informal or formal channels . for example , representative spencer bachus introduced legislation in the 111 th congress , h.r . 4331 , the money services business compliance facilitation act of 2009 , that would have established an office of msb compliance in the u.s. department of the treasury , charged with ensuring that state and federal regulators coordinate standards for msb licensing and registration . other legislation has been introduced , and passed , that aims to facilitate remittances services by making it easier for msbs to comply with federal and state regulations . the money remittances improvement act of 201 4 ( p.l . increasing migration is a defining feature of the current global economy . migrants account for around 3.4% of the global population and the number of foreign - born residents in the united states is at its highest level in u.s. history , reaching 42.4 million in 2014 . some observers argue that current federal and state money transmission laws may be inappropriate for new and emerging payments systems . remittance payments already touch multiple regulatory agencies , and as mobile remittances services increase , the federal communications commission ( fcc ) and the federal trade commission ( ftc ) will likely play an increasing role . mobile carriers and other alternative providers are less familiar than msbs with u.s. and international banking laws , and the lack of u.s. guidance or framework for mobile payments creates coverage , liability , and aml / cft concerns that congress may move to explore . members may also pay special attention to the implementation of the "dodd - frank" consumer protections following their october 2013 implementation . on one hand , some argue that the new protections will drive down the cost of remitting by requiring greater transparency of fees associated with money transfers . others argue that the costs of new systems and increased liability for transaction problems will raise costs and deter msbs and financial institutions from providing remittance services . foreign - born residents of the united states made up 13.3% of the u.s. population in 2010 , approaching levels not seen since 1910 ( 14.8% ) . foreign migrants and their communities in the united states sent $56.3 billion in remittances in 2014 , around 13% of the worldwide total . as migrants have become increasingly integrated into the global economy , their involvement in the economic activities of their home countries has also increased . others argue that the remittances are foremost an anti - poverty tool , and that policymakers should be cautious about placing too much emphasis on remittances as a development tool or possibly confusing remittances with foreign aid . in 2015 , worldwide remittance flows are estimated to have exceeded $601 billion . members may consider the interplay of u.s. remittance policy efforts and u.s. immigration policy . some members of congress , however , have raised concerns that current customer identification policies , which do not require a remittance customer to provide documentation of legal u.s. immigration status , may undermine efforts to enforce u.s. immigration laws . of that amount , developing countries are estimated to receive about $432 billion , nearly three times the amount of official development assistance ( oda ) .