this report has three major sections . the first section answers some basic questions about bitcoin and the operation of the bitcoin network and its interaction with the current dollar - based monetary system . the second section summarizes likely reasons for and against widespread bitcoin adoption . the third section discusses legal and regulatory matters that have been raised by bitcoin and other digital currencies . the united states is not the only nation taking an interest in the potential impact of increased use of bitcoin . because digital currency knows no national boundaries , it may require an international solution and , thus , has drawn the attention of international regulators . traditional payment systems are based on statutory - based monetary systems , overseen by central banks that process transactions of depository banks and other authorized or chartered financial institutions . with virtual currencies , however , no laws and regulations define the duties and obligations of parties or provide for finality of settlement , resolution of disputes , or supervision of services provided . an october 2012 study of digital currencies by the european central bank is premised on the possibility that growth of digital currencies will carry with it a need for international cooperation in developing a regulatory framework . according to the study , the current level of virtual currencies poses little risk to price stability ; there are , however , risks to users and a potential for criminal schemes . the study also notes that neither the european monetary directive nor the european payment services directive clearly applies to virtual currencies such as bitcoin . the financial action task force , an inter - governmental organization of which the united states is a member , released a report assessing the risks that virtual currencies present to global efforts to combat money laundering and financing of terrorists in june 2014 and "guidance for a risk - based approach to virtual currencies" ( fatf guidance ) in june 2015 . the 2014 report provides a glossary of key definitions , such as digital currency , virtual currency , convertible ( or open ) currency , and non - convertible ( or closed ) currency . it includes sections on legitimate uses of virtual currency and potential risks of virtual currency . it summarizes three law enforcement actions involving virtual currency , all spearheaded by the u.s. department of justice . the 2015 fatf guidance is aimed at explaining how fatf's risk - based approach to standards for anti - money laundering and anti - terrorist financing apply to exchanges of virtual currencies that can be converted into fiat money . the goal is to aid national authorities seeking to develop regulatory regimes . the fatf guidance recommends specific standards for countries to take a risk - based approach to identify and mitigate money laundering and terrorist financing risks implicated in virtual currency activities . it includes summaries of approaches taken in certain jurisdictions — canada , china , the european banking authority , france , germany , hong kong , italy , russia , singapore , south africa , switzerland , united kingdom , and the united states .