no other subscriber could view that particular copy . the 1976 copyright act provides copyright holders with exclusive rights to control certain uses of their works . these exclusive rights include "in the case of literary , musical , dramatic , and choreographic works , pantomimes , and motion pictures and other audiovisual works" the right to do and to authorize the public performance of the copyrighted work . the copyright act defines "public performance or display" as ( 1 ) to perform or display it at a place open to the public or at any place where a substantial number of persons outside of a normal circle of a family and its social acquaintances is gathered ; or ( 2 ) to transmit or otherwise communicate a performance or display of the work to a place specified by clause ( 1 ) or to the public , by means of any device or process , whether the members of the public capable of receiving the performance or display receive it in the same place or in separate places and at the same time or at different times . the second part of the above definition , known as the "transmit clause," is the focus of the courts' legal analysis in the aereo and filmon cases . in 2012 , a group of broadcasters filed copyright infringement actions against aereo in the u.s. district court for the southern district of new york . in american broadcasting companies v. aereo , the district court denied the plaintiffs' motion for a preliminary injunction barring aereo from transmitting television programs . in wnet v. aereo , the plaintiffs appealed the district court's denial to the u.s. court of appeals for the second circuit . on april 1 , 2013 , the second circuit affirmed the district court's ruling that refused to grant the injunction against aereo . on remand , the district court refused to extend aereo's holding that technology "bearing an 'overwhelming likeness' to cable companies publicly perform within the meaning of the transmit clause" to dish anywhere . the court held that aereo's transmissions of broadcast television programs were not public performances under the copyright act because the transmissions are of unique copies created at the user's request . the following discussion will examine the second circuit's interpretation of the transmit clause in reaching this decision . the courts focused on two out of the four elements of the transmit clause discussed above: "performance of the work" and "members of the public capable of receiving the performance. these factors contribute to the alleged "loophole" used by aereo's one - antenna - per - subscriber service to avoid infringing the public performance right . the second circuit in its analysis discussed differences in technology in 1976 and 2013 and the resulting difficulty in distinguishing between private and public transmissions . in the 2012 case fox television stations , inc. v. barrydriller content systems plc , the plaintiffs , several broadcast television networks , brought an action against filmon in the u.s. district court for the central district of california . by emphasizing this conflict between the law and developing technology , the court has highlighted an opportunity for congressional action and clarification of the copyright act .