76 with a substitute amendment . later that same day , the house agreed to that senate amendment by a vote of 395-8 . 93-344 ; 88 stat . 297 ; 2 usc 60-688 ) . through this cba process , the appropriations committee in each chamber receives a procedural limit on the total amount of discretionary budget authority for the upcoming fiscal year , referred to as a 302 ( a ) allocation . the appropriations committee subsequently divides this allocation amongst the 12 subcommittees , referred to as a 302 ( b ) suballocation . the 302 ( b ) suballocation restricts the amount of budget authority available to each subcommittee for the projects and activities under its jurisdiction , and so effectively acts as a cap on each of the 12 regular appropriations bills . enforcement of the 302 ( a ) allocation and 302 ( b ) suballocations occur through points of order . the house and senate currently provide annual appropriations in 12 regular appropriations bills . these bills provide discretionary spending for the projects and activities of most federal government agencies . while all of these bills may ultimately be considered and enacted separately , it is also possible for two or more of them to be combined into an omnibus vehicle for consideration and enactment . alternatively , if some of these bills are not enacted , funding for the projects and activities therein may be provided through a full - year cr . the deadline for enactment of all regular appropriations bills is october 1 , the beginning of the fiscal year . during the fy2014 appropriations process , the house appropriations committee reported 10 of the 12 regular appropriations bills , while the senate appropriations committee reported 11 of the 12 regular bills . the house initially considered five regular appropriations bills on the floor and passed four of them before final action on regular appropriations occurred . the senate began floor consideration of one regular appropriations bill , but did not complete it . no regular appropriations were enacted prior to the beginning of the fiscal year . on august 20 , 2013 , omb projected that both the house and senate regular appropriations bills would , in total , exceed one or both of the existing bca discretionary spending limits . after a total amount for defense and nondefense fy2014 discretionary spending was provided through the enactment of the bipartisan budget act , the house and senate appropriations committees announced an agreement on regular appropriations for fy2014 . this agreement was enacted as the consolidated appropriations act , 2014 ( h.r . 113-76 ) on january 17 , 2014 . for up - to - date information on the status of regular appropriations measures , see the crs fy2014 status table , available at http: / / www.crs.gov / pages / appropriationsstatustable.aspx . because neither regular appropriations nor a broad continuing resolution ( cr ) to provide temporary funding for the previous fiscal year's projects and activities was law on october 1 , a funding gap commenced on that date for affected projects and activities .