section 24405 ( a ) . the statute requires that appropriations enacted to carry out chapter 244 , created in priia , may be obligated "only if the steel , iron , and manufactured goods used in the project are produced in the united states. however , this requirement only applies to "projects for which the costs exceed $100,000. unlike the statutory provisions governing fta funding , the fra statute does not authorize a waiver when procuring rolling stock if the cost of the domestic components is more than 60% of the cost of all of the components . proposed waivers must be published in the federal register and provide public notice and a reasonable period of time for public comment . completed waiver requests may also be viewed on the fra's website . just like the fta , the fra is prohibited from issuing waivers for goods produced in a foreign country if that country has an agreement with the united states , under which the buy america requirements have been waived , and has violated that agreement in specific ways . additionally , the fra has stated that it will apply the statutory buy america provision strictly and will issue a waiver only when the bidder / offeror has demonstrated by clear evidence that it has met the requirements for a waiver . moreover , fra considers the need to grant waivers under these circumstances as strictly temporary because it expects that achieving domestic manufacture and 100% domestic component content can and will occur in the very near future . amtrak was established in statute as a for - profit corporation and "not a department , agency , or instrumentality of the united states government. therefore , the buy american requirements that apply to direct purchases of the federal government do not restrict amtrak spending . however , amtrak has its own buy america requirements at 49 u.s.c . section 24305 ( f ) . when the cost of articles , material , or supplies bought is at least $1,000,000 , amtrak may only buy ( a ) unmanufactured articles , material , and supplies mined or produced in the united states ; or ( b ) manufactured articles , material , and supplies , manufactured in the united states substantially from articles , material , and supplies mined , produced , or manufactured in the united states . the fra has interpreted the "substantially from articles , material , and supplies mined , produced or manufactured in the united states" requirement to mean that the manufactured goods must have domestic component content greater than 50% , by cost . this interpretation borrows from the definition of "domestic end product" from buy american regulations . amtrak may also be subject to the buy america requirements in 49 u.s.c . section 24405 , discussed above , if it is operating under funds subject to those restrictions .