appendix a . defined benefit plan funding this appendix provides background on basic concepts related to the funding of db pension plans . defined benefit plan balance sheet figure a - 1 depicts a typical db pension plan's balance sheet . it consists of plan assets , which are the value of the investments made with accrued employer ( and employee , if any ) contributions to the plan , and plan liabilities , which are the value of participants' benefits earned under the terms of the plan . plan assets are invested in equities ( such as publicly traded stock ) , debt ( such as the u.s. treasury and corporate bonds ) , private equity , hedge funds , and real estate . defined benefit plan funding ratio the funding ratio measures the adequacy of a db pension plan's ability to pay for promised benefits . the funding ratio is calculated as a funding ratio of 100% indicates that the db plan has set aside enough funds , if the invested funds grow at the expected rate of return or better , to pay all of the plan's benefit obligations . funding ratios that are less than 100% indicate that the db plan will not be able to meet all of its future benefit obligations . because benefit obligations are paid out over a period of 20 years to 30 years , participants in an underfunded plan will likely receive their promised benefits in the near term . however , if the underfunding persists without additional contributions , plan participants might not receive 100% of their promised benefits in the future . in response to strong investment returns in the 1990s , many multiemployer db pension plans increased benefits to participants . many of these plans then became underfunded during the early 2000s as financial markets weakened . their financial position worsened as a result of ( 1 ) stricter funding rules put in place in the pension protection act of 2006 ( p.l . 109-280 ) , ( 2 ) the decline in equity markets in 2008 , ( 3 ) low interest rates as a result of weak economic conditions , and ( 4 ) the bankruptcy of some of the firms participating in the plans . the value of plan assets pension plans report the value of plan assets using two methods: market values ( the value at which each asset can be sold on a particular date ) or smoothed values ( the average of the past , and sometimes expected future , market values of each asset ) . the smoothing of asset values prevents large swings in asset values and creates a more predictable funding environment for plan sponsors . one of the drawbacks of smoothing is that smoothed asset values may be substantially different from market values . some advocates of reporting market values note that smoothed values are often higher than market values ( particularly during periods of market declines ) , which could overstate the financial health of some pension plans .