the federal government has addressed these changes through ecosystem restoration activities in the region over the past few decades . after the oil spill , efforts were focused on addressing the immediate impacts of the oil spill and monitoring how the spill was spreading through the ecosystems . major restoration projects led by the u.s. army corps of engineers ( corps ) , the fish and wildlife service ( fws ) , the national oceanic and atmospheric administration ( noaa ) , and the environmental protection agency ( epa ) have been implemented . significant state and local efforts to restore the gulf coast have also been undertaken , in some cases in consultation with the federal government . the gulf coast has also been affected by large - scale natural and manmade disasters that have significantly affected the environment and economy of the region . indeed , these disasters have led to changes in restoration efforts , sometimes in a significant fashion . animal , plant , and microbial populations depend on the gulf's unique processes to survive . overall , the gulf coast environment includes multiple interconnected ecosystems spanning 600,000 square miles of shoreline of the gulf of mexico . these ecosystems provide services that encompass aesthetic , economic , and environmental values for their residents . for instance , barrier islands and wetland complexes may provide some coastal storm damage protection benefits for coastal communities . they provide habitat for a number of commercially and recreationally important species of fish , invertebrates , mammals , and birds , including many threatened and endangered species . these ecosystems also filter water , remove and trap contaminants , and store carbon , among other functions . the deepwater horizon spill is one of several events and ongoing processes that have altered the gulf coast ecosystems over time . prior to the spill , the ecosystems were undergoing large changes due to human development and natural processes . for example , large - scale sediment and habitat loss was occurring , in part , due to altered water flows from the mississippi river ; water pollution was being exacerbated by excess nutrients such as phosphorus and nitrogen ; and waterways were being altered due to dredging and levee construction ; among other things . the spill did not change many of these processes but altered perspectives on how federal and state governments approach restoration . although the oil pollution act ( opa ) liability provisions are meant to address natural resource damages related to the oil spill , many policymakers and stakeholders expressed an interest in also addressing prespill natural resource issues in the gulf . thus , to some degree , gulf restoration activities may be divided into short - term efforts that address natural resource impacts related to the 2010 oil spill and long - term recovery efforts that address restoration issues in place well before the 2010 spill . many of the ongoing gulf coast restoration efforts discussed above have yet to be finalized , and the planning processes and funds available for deposit into the gulf coast restoration trust fund have yet to be fully determined . further , project priority lists , state implementation plans , and other required restoration planning documents are still being developed .