all agencies could be required to do this . however , particularly given the frequent disputes between vendors and agencies over who was , in fact , responsible for performance problems , such a requirement could potentially increase the amount of litigation , as vendors seek to have terminations for default be found to be improper and converted into terminations for convenience . also , a vendor that experiences significant performance failures on only one contract , due to exceptional circumstances , may pose no performance risks to other agencies . it has been widely noted that cms essentially served as the lead system integrator ( lsi ) for healthcare.gov , managing the assembly of component systems developed and tested by various vendors into a single system ; and some have questioned whether cms had the in - house capabilities to effectively perform this role . nothing in current law either required cms to serve as the lsi , or prohibited it from doing so . congress enacted legislation in 2006 and 2008 that imposed certain limits on the use of lsis by the department of defense ( dod ) , partly due to concern that agencies' use of lsis may give vendors "discretion to make program decisions. however , these restrictions only apply to dod , and then only in acquisitions of "major systems. litigation between the contract parties over costs or damages is also possible . the questions and answers in the report are organized into three broad categories addressing ( 1 ) the processes whereby the centers for medicare and medicaid services ( cms ) selected vendors ; ( 2 ) the terms of the vendors' contractual relationships with the government ; and ( 3 ) potential amendments to federal procurement law that , some commentators suggest , could help prevent issues of the sort experienced with healthcare.gov . the questions in this report are those that happen to have been frequently asked of the congressional research service by congressional staffers . the inclusion of a particular question , or the exclusion of another question , should not be taken to indicate that particular factors did—or did not—contribute to the problematic rollout of healthcare.gov . in addition , answers to these questions must often be provided in general terms , in part , because specific language in the parties' contracts may be subject to multiple interpretations and has not been construed by any court . in addition , the parties' conduct in the course of performing the contract—the details of which are still emerging—can affect their rights . for example , the government could potentially be found to have waived certain rights that the contract's plain language would appear to grant to it by engaging in conduct that warrants an inference that it has relinquished the right . the authors of this report rely upon third - party investigations of the facts and circumstances surrounding healthcare.gov , and additional information may emerge regarding topics discussed herein . currently , part 39 of the far directs agencies to "analyze risks , benefits , and costs" before entering into a contract for it .