it focuses on the sharing of surface waters . after presenting an introduction to u.s. - mexican water sharing , this report describes the legal obligations and processes under the treaty on utilization of waters of the colorado and tijuana rivers and of the rio grande ( hereinafter treaty or 1944 water treaty ) . it then describes developments in the colorado river and rio grande basins . the 1944 water treaty establishes water allocations for the united states and mexico and creates the current governance framework for the ibwc to resolve disputes arising from the treaty's execution . in april 1945 , the senate provided its advice and consent to the treaty , subject to certain "understandings. similar to treaty reservations and declarations , understandings are interpretative statements made by the senate that clarify or elaborate on provisions in a treaty but do not alter them . in november 1945 , president truman ratified the 1944 water treaty , subject to the senate's understandings . the two countries share a nearly 2,000-mile border . multiple rivers cross or form the border at various points . the principal shared river basins are the colorado river and the rio grande . this report is a primer on u.s. and mexican water sharing . as depicted in figure 1 , the colorado river flows through seven u.s. states ( arizona , california , colorado , nevada , new mexico , utah , and wyoming ) and forms the border between the mexican states of baja california norte and sonora , before emptying into the gulf of california ; 97% of the basin is in the united states . disputes have occurred over the use of the colorado river water supplies for most of the past century . although many of these disputes have related to state allocations on the u.s. side of the border , issues have also arisen over water quality , availability , and conservation between the united states and mexico . when the 1944 water treaty was signed , colorado river flows were estimated at some 16.8 million af per year . recent flows have averaged volumes closer to 14.4 million af annually . that is , the 1944 water treaty requirement that the united states provide mexico with 1.5 million af annually means that the united states retains roughly 90% of the average flow , but less than originally estimated . in december 2012 , the department of the interior's bureau of reclamation published a study documenting that the demand for the basin's water in the united states in some years exceeds supply , and that the demand - supply imbalance is anticipated to worsen in coming decades . while discussion of colorado river water issues within the united states is beyond the scope of this report , concern about meeting future demands in the united states is significant to the context of discussions about the basin's water sharing with mexico . the following treaty implementation issues in the colorado river basin are discussed in more detail below: salinity , environmental protection , and minute 319 . for a snapshot of drought conditions in the basin , see the drought monitor maps in appendix .