without them , many of our most important military advantages evaporate. although space debris is not the sole threat to u.s. space assets , this report focuses on the threat posed by orbital debris , the steps that have been taken thus far to mitigate it , and what might be done to ensure the long - term sustainability of the space environment . maintaining the benefits afforded by space is central to a wide range of u.s. national interests . these include significant government ( military , intelligence , and civil ) and commercial interests . in recent years , recognition has been growing among space - faring nations and the international scientific community that the mass of man - made debris in low - earth orbit ( leo ) has reached a critical density that will lead to a slow but unstoppable growth of space debris that could have profound implications for those interests . others perceive the danger as potentially affecting u.s. security interests , especially in its ability to interfere with consistent satellite support to u.s. military and intelligence organizations . however the issue is characterized , the space debris population , particularly in leo , may have reached a tipping point . catastrophic collisions are likely to continue to drive its growth , and the threat posed by orbital debris may be exacerbated by accidental or intentional debris - generating events . a few hearings in recent years have touched on orbital debris issues , but congress might consider additional hearings from major stakeholders in the military , intelligence , civil , and commercial sector on whether proposed mitigation measures are in the national interests of the united states . possible questions could focus on the perceived severity of the problem , whether mitigation efforts to date are adequate , and whether there should be any commitment to pursue remediation in earnest . congress might also consider requiring dod and nasa to develop a roadmap outlining a range of possible remediation programs to consider . significant debris - generating events in the past decade have heightened the issue , and a number of national and international studies confirm that the amount of current leo debris is both unstable and increasing . if the technologies to remove on - orbit debris are developed and implemented , the management requirements on nasa may become as significant as those associated with any major nasa program . congress might find it useful to begin investigating those potential budgetary costs , and whether funding should borne wholly by nasa or by dod or some combination . some observers have noted that the danger posed by orbital debris should be thought of fundamentally as a long - term environmental problem . this instability in the space environment presents a threat to u.s. national interests in space . u.s. deputy secretary of defense william j. lynn , iii , summarized the national security implications of interference with our satellites and space capabilities: "space systems enable our modern way of war . they allow our warfighters to strike with precision , to navigate with accuracy , to communicate with certainty , and to see the battlefield with clarity .