pursuant to s.res . 116 , a senate standing order adopted in the 112 th congress , the process is somewhat different for 272 positions in cabinet departments , certain advisory boards , and independent agencies . 116 provides a process by which these "privileged" nominations can be placed on the "nominations" portion of the executive calendar , and thereby made eligible for floor consideration , without being first referred to and reported by committee — but only as long as no senator requests that a nomination be referred . so while these nominations can potentially become eligible for floor consideration without committee action , any senator can require that they be instead referred to committee — thereby effectively requiring the nomination to be reported by committee before floor consideration . in sum , the potential effects of the new precedent on pre - floor action are effectively the same for all nominations ( whether "privileged" under s.res . 116 , or not ) , except for those to the supreme court . in addition , while the lower threshold for cloture on nominations will remain in effect until the senate takes further action to alter it , the reduction in the limits on post - cloture consideration for certain nominations ( pursuant to s.res . 15 , 113 th congress ) will revert back to 30 hours in the 114 th congress ( 2015-2016 ) . at the time the standing order was agreed to , senators understood that the support of three - fifths of the senate was potentially necessary to reach confirmation votes . accordingly , the november 21 precedent could affect the likelihood that the standing order will be renewed . particularly if the standing order is not renewed , senators will need to continue to negotiate unanimous consent agreements to process routine nominations swiftly . finally , the process by which the president selects nominees may be now influenced by the understanding that nominees considered on the floor in the future can receive a vote with only the support of a numerical majority . in the past , many nominees may have been selected with an eye towards the possible need for supermajority support . the procedures by which the precedent was set also may have implications for future proposals to alter senate rules or their application . a key procedural detail on which the november 21 proceedings turned was the inability of opponents of these proceedings to extend debate on the appeal of the chair's ruling . under senate practice , appeals are typically subject to no debate limit except in a post - cloture environment ; therefore , overturning a chair's decision on appeal in the face of sustained opposition typically would require a successful cloture process ( and therefore a supermajority vote ) to reach a vote on the appeal . the appeal of note in the events of november 21 , however , was in relation to a non - debatable question ( the cloture motion ) and the appeal was therefore treated as itself being non - debatable ; this allowed the senate to reach a vote on the appeal immediately .