population estimates . the 2014 statistics of income produced by the internal revenue service ( http: / / www.irs.gov / uac / soi - tax - stats — historic - table - 2 ) . all data are for year 2014 . the methodology for producing the state - by - state distributional estimates ( described below ) required use of the jct's estimate of the mortgage interest deduction tax expenditure by income . the 2014 american community survey produced by the u.s census bureau ( http: / / www.census.gov / acs / ) . there are two primary reasons for this . first , the value of the mortgage interest deduction , like all deductions , depends on an individual's marginal tax rate . for example , an individual in the 25% marginal tax bracket , paying $10,000 in mortgage interest , would realize a reduction in taxes of $2,500 ( $10,000 multiplied by 25% ) . in comparison , for someone in the 35% tax bracket the reduction in taxes for deducting the identical amount of interest would be $3,500 ( $10,000 multiplied by 35% ) . second , higher - income individuals tend to purchase more expensive homes , which results in larger mortgage interest payments , and hence , a larger deduction . although many contend that the purpose of the mortgage interest deduction is to promote homeownership , this was not the deduction's original purpose . when laying the framework for the modern federal income tax code in 1913 , congress recognized the importance of allowing for the deduction of expenses incurred in the generation of income , which is consistent with traditional economic theories of income taxation . as a result , all interest payments were deductible with no distinction made for business , personal , living , or family expenses . it is likely that no distinction was made because most interest payments were business related expenses at the time and , compared to today , households generally had very little debt on which interest payments were required — credit cards had not yet come into existence and the mortgage finance industry was in its infancy . among those that did hold a mortgage , the majority were farmers . for more than 70 years there was no limit on the amount of home mortgage interest that could be deducted . the tax reform act of 1986 ( tra86 ; p.l . 99-514 ) eventually restricted the amount of mortgage interest that could be deducted and limited the number of homes for which the deduction could be claimed to two . mortgage interest deductibility was limited to the purchase price of the home , plus any improvements , and on debt secured by the home but used for qualified medical and educational expenses . subsequently , the omnibus budget reconciliation act of 1987 ( p.l . 100-203 ) resulted in the basic deduction limits that exist today . in recent years a number of proposals to modify the mortgage interest deduction have emerged . some proposals would reduce the maximum mortgage amount on which the mortgage interest deduction could be taken , presumably to better target potential new homeowners and moderate income taxpayers . other proposals have suggested converting the deduction to a tax credit .