the threshold for these individuals is $1,820 in 2015 . ( the sga amount for nonblind individuals may increase even when there is no cola. ) these program elements are adjusted annually based on the increase in the national average wage index only if there is a cola . as a result , these program elements remained at their 2009 levels in 2010 and 2011 , but they were adjusted upwards in subsequent years , when colas were paid . likewise , these program elements will remain at their 2015 levels in january 2016 . other programs affected by the social security cola computation beneficiaries of other programs are also affected by the absence of a social security cola , including low - income elderly and disabled persons , veterans , and federal civil service annuitants . the taxable wage base is $118,500 in 2015 . exempt wage and salary amounts under the retirement earnings test , which reduces the monthly benefit of social security beneficiaries who are below the full retirement age and have earnings that exceed an annual threshold . the exempt amounts are $15,720 for workers under full retirement age in 2015 and $41,880 for workers who reach their full retirement age in 2015 . substantial gainful activity ( sga ) amounts for blind individuals who receive social security disability benefits . as a result , beneficiaries of the programs listed below did not receive colas in january 2010 and january 2011 and will not receive a cola in 2016 . the social security cola triggers an increase in benefits paid under supplemental security income ( ssi ) , veterans' pension benefit programs , and railroad retirement board ( rrb ) programs . the absence of a cola increase may impact certain medicare part b enrollees . most medicare part b enrollees have their part b premiums withheld from their monthly social security benefits . for these individuals , a hold - harmless provision in the social security act ( §1839 ( f ) ) ensures that their benefits will not decrease as a result of an increase in the part b premium . in most years , the hold - harmless provision has little impact ; however , in a year in which there is a 0% social security cola and a part b premium increase , such as happened in 2010 and 2011 , the hold - harmless provision may apply to a much larger number of people . as a result of a 0% social security cola in 2016 , an estimated 70% of medicare beneficiaries would be protected by this provision in the event of an increase in the part b premium , and their 2016 premiums would be the same as in 2015 . however , about 30% of beneficiaries are not protected by this provision . this includes higher - income enrollees , new medicare part b enrollees , individuals who do not receive social security benefits , and low - income enrollees whose premiums are paid by medicaid . to ensure that the part b program has sufficient income from premiums and general revenue contributions , the premiums paid by those not held harmless may be significantly higher than if the hold harmless provision were not in effect .