title i of p.l . 107-279 is entitled the education sciences reform act ( esra ) . organizationally , the act is comprised of six parts which contain the provisions authorizing ies , the nbes , and each of the national education centers . title ii of p.l . 107-279 is entitled the educational technical assistance act ( etaa ) . this act authorizes the secretary to award grants to local entities for the purpose of supporting technical assistance and evaluation and to award grants to states for statewide , longitudinal data systems . the secretary is authorized to award not less than 20 grants for comprehensive centers for technical assistance to local entities across 10 geographic regions . each comprehensive center must work with seas , leas , and schools in the region where the center is located . etaa outlines a number of authorized activities for the comprehensive centers , including but not limited to , the following: ( 1 ) providing training , professional development , and technical assistance for the implementation of programs under the esea ; ( 2 ) disseminating and providing information , reports , and publications to improve academic achievement and close achievement gaps ; and ( 3 ) developing teacher and school leader in - service and pre - service training models that reflect best practices in the use of technology . each comprehensive center must coordinate activities with its local rel , ncee , the office of the secretary , the state service agency , and other technical assistance providers . each comprehensive center must also establish an advisory board and report annually to the secretary . the secretary must conduct ongoing independent evaluations of the comprehensive centers and report to the appropriate congressional committees and the director of ies . etaa also authorizes the secretary to make competitive grants to seas to design , develop , and implement statewide longitudinal data systems to efficiently and accurately manage and use student data , consistent with the needs of the esea . in awarding grants , the secretary must ensure that applications are of adequate technical quality and address the data uses required by the esea , as well as any other reporting requirements related to closing achievement gaps . for fy2003 , section 209 authorized $80 million to carry out activities in title ii of p.l . 107-279 and such sums as may be necessary for each of the five succeeding fiscal years . although these authorities expired in fy2008 , funding has continued through annual appropriations legislation . title iii of p.l . 107-279 is entitled the national assessment of educational progress authorization act ( naepaa ) . this act establishes the national assessment governing board ( known as nagb or the "assessment board" ) and charges the commissioner of education statistics with conducting the national assessment of educational progress ( naep ) . naep is a series of assessments that includes a national assessment program , a state assessment program , a long - term trend study , and a trial urban district assessment program .