for presidents g.w . bush and clinton the percentage of vacant circuit court judgeships considered judicial emergencies decreased by 18.5% and 3.0% , respectively . as shown by table 6 , the percentage of vacant district court judgeships considered judicial emergencies on january 1 of a president's fifth year in office was greatest during the obama presidency ( 35.6% ) , followed by the g.w . bush and clinton presidencies ( 28.6% and 25.5% , respectively ) . bush , and obama presidencies . it then provides , for the same four presidents , a comparison of selected features of the judicial nomination and confirmation process during each president's first five years in office . the section concludes by comparing the percentage of circuit and district court judgeships vacant at the beginning of each president's fifth and sixth years in office as well as the percentage of such vacancies considered "judicial emergencies. this report does not analyze or take a position on the number or percentage of a president's judicial nominees that would be appropriate for the senate to confirm or on the average ( or median ) length of time that would be appropriate for , or needed by , the senate judiciary committee to process judicial nominations or for the senate to take final action on them . similarly , this report does not analyze or take a position on the appropriate amount of time for an administration to select nominees for circuit and district court judgeships . like other parts of this report , the discussion under this heading is based upon nomination and confirmation statistics from each president's first five years in office . for presidents clinton and obama the percentage of vacant circuit court judgeships considered judicial emergencies increased ( by 7.8% and 0.4% , respectively ) from january 1 of each president's fifth to sixth year . for the discussion related specifically to the confirmation process in the senate , the statistics generally account only for those nominees who were confirmed by the senate during a president's first five years ( thus excluding from the analysis nominees who were never confirmed or who were later confirmed in a president's term , i.e. , during his sixth year or later , and , for president obama , those nominations for which final disposition cannot yet be discerned ) . the percentage of vacant circuit and district court judgeships varies over the course of a presidency and is affected , in part , by the pace at which a president selects nominees for vacancies as well as the speed by which the senate considers the president's nominees . table 5 compares for the four presidents: ( i ) the percentage of vacant u.s. circuit and district court judgeships on january 1 of a president's fifth year in office ; ( ii ) the percentage of vacant u.s. circuit and district court judgeships vacant on january 1 of a president's sixth year in office ; and ( iii ) the change in the percentage of vacant u.s. circuit and district court judgeships from january 1 of a president fifth's year to january 1 of his sixth year in office .