since fy2006 , nhhbg funding has been appropriated in its own account . the nhhbg account generally includes a set - aside of funds to be used for training and technical assistance , and this amount has been relatively steady over the years . tribes have previously discussed these issues in negotiated rulemaking , but have not come to a consensus regarding any changes to date . using census data to calculate the need portion of the formula the nahasda regulations , as agreed upon in negotiated rulemaking , specify that the data source used to calculate the need portion of the formula must be data that are "collected in a uniform manner and that can be confirmed and verified for all aian [american indian and alaska native] households and persons living in an identified area. the regulations also specify that , initially , the data source used would be decennial census data . hud has continued to use census data to calculate the need portion of the formula grant amounts for the nahbg , including data on the number of american indian or alaska native ( aian ) households . there has been disagreement among tribes on whether census data are the best data for hud to use to allocate nahbg funding . some tribes believe that it is the most uniform , verifiable source of data available , and therefore is the fairest way to allocate funding among tribes . other tribes , however , argue that census data may not be representative of the population that nahasda is meant to serve . nahasda provides funds to tribes to provide affordable housing to people who are members of federally recognized ( or a small number of state recognized ) tribes and are living in a tribe's formula area . however , the census counts include anyone who identifies as american indian or alaska native , whether or not they are enrolled members of such a tribe . some of the people who identify as aian in the census might not be enrolled tribal members at all , or they might be members of tribes that are not eligible under nahasda ( such as state recognized tribes , or canadian or south american tribes ) . therefore , some tribes have argued that census data do not provide an accurate count of the tribal population , as opposed to the overall aian population , and have suggested that tribes should have the option of using alternative data sources that better reflect the population that nahasda is intended to serve . they also argue that using the reported aian numbers in the census rather than data that count enrolled tribal members effectively distributes nahbg funds based on the number of people who identify with a specific racial group rather than based on their political status as tribal members . some possible alternative data sources that could be used include tribal enrollment data , tribal censuses , or data collected by other federal agencies . many tribes have argued that one or more of these sources might more accurately reflect the tribal population .