see figure 1 . facilities possessing a chemical of interest in quantities above the screening threshold quantity submit a top screen . top screen results assist the cfats program in determining whether a facility presents a high - level security risk . after processing a top screen , the cfats program assigns the facility a preliminary tier or determines that the facility does not meet the criteria for cfats regulation . when a facility receives a preliminary tier assignment notification , it must prepare and submit a security vulnerability assessment ( sva ) to dhs . after reviewing the sva , the cfats program determines a facility's final tier assignment or that the facility is not high - risk . when the facility receives a final tier assignment , it must develop and submit a site security plan ( ssp ) to dhs . the infrastructure security compliance division ( iscd ) in the dhs national protection and programs directorate ( nppd ) reviews the ssp to preliminarily determine if it satisfies the applicable risk - based performance standards . this process typically involves discussions between iscd staff and the facility . it often requires the facility to submit additional information to iscd and revise the ssp before iscd can complete its initial review and issue the facility a letter of authorization for the ssp . after issuing a letter of authorization , iscd conducts a comprehensive and detailed authorization inspection . the iscd reviews the inspection results , as well as any further revisions that the facility may make to the ssp . it then makes a final determination as to whether the facility's ssp satisfies the applicable risk - based performance standards . if so , iscd issues a letter of approval , and the facility must implement the applicable provisions of the ssp . if iscd determines that the ssp does not satisfy the applicable risk - based performance standards , iscd may issue a notice of deficiency and require the facility to resubmit a sufficient ssp . if the facility fails to do so , iscd may disapprove the ssp . following the authorization inspection , facilities are generally granted an additional 45 days to make any necessary modifications to their ssp . iscd will then review the resubmitted ssp and make a final determination as to whether the ssp warrants the issuance of a letter of approval . in some cases , the facility may require a technical consultation and another opportunity to revise its ssp . over time , the dhs has attempted to develop a consistent nomenclature for its review and inspection process . the dhs authorizes an ssp ( issuing the facility a letter of authorization ) when the submitted ssp is satisfactory under cfats . the dhs conducts an authorization inspection of a facility with an authorized ssp to compare the authorized ssp to the conditions of the facility . if not , a significant backlog of activity seems likely given the current rates of inspection and approval . as stated above , to process all facilities within the time frame of resubmission , dhs would need to perform 108 inspections per month , higher than the current authorization inspection rate , to avoid developing a backlog relative to facility resubmissions .