the statutory debt limit applies to almost all federal debt . the limit applies to federal debt held by the public ( that is , debt held outside the federal government itself ) and to federal debt held by the government's own accounts . federal trust funds , such as social security , medicare , transportation , and civil service retirement accounts , hold most of this internally held debt . a goldman sachs analysis found , however , that some major categories of tax receipts had shown stronger growth . before 1917 congress typically controlled individual issues of debt . in september 1917 , while raising funds for the united states' entry into world war i , congress also imposed an aggregate limit on federal debt in addition to individual issuance limits . over time , congress granted treasury secretaries more leeway in debt management . in 1939 , congress agreed to impose an aggregate limit that gave the u.s. treasury authority to manage the structure of federal debt . for most federal trust funds , net inflows by law must be invested in special federal government securities . when holdings of those trust funds increase , federal debt subject to limit will therefore increase as well . the government's on - budget fiscal balance , which excludes the net surplus or deficit of the u.s . postal service and the social security program , does not directly affect debt held in government accounts . the change in debt held by the public is mostly determined by the government's surpluses or deficits . the net expansion of the federal government's balance sheet through loan programs also increases the government's borrowing requirements . under federal budgetary rules , however , only the net subsidy cost of those loans is included in the calculation of deficits . the 2011 debt limit episode attracted far more attention than other recent debt limit episodes . such estimates are subject to substantial uncertainty due to changes in economic conditions , federal revenue flows , changes in the amounts and timing of federal payments , and other factors . on march 8 , 2017 , treasury secretary mnuchin notified congress that he would invoke authorities to use extraordinary measures after march 15 , 2017 , to ensure continued payment of federal obligations . on march 16 , 2017 , secretary mnuchin notified congressional leaders that he had indeed exercised those authorities . the debt limit on that date was reset at $19,809 billion . in testimony before congress on may 24 , 2017 , administration officials urged congress to raise the debt limit before its summer recess . office of management and budget ( omb ) director mick mulvaney stated that the federal receipts were coming in more slowly than projected , which could imply that treasury's capacity to meet federal obligations could be exhausted sooner than previously projected . on july 28 , 2017 , treasury secretary mnuchin sent a letter to congress stating that extraordinary measures would be used until september 29 , 2017 . secretary mnuchin's letter did not state that treasury's cash reserves or borrowing capacity would be exhausted on that date , but he did describe the need for legislative action by that date as "critical.