, annual discretionary appropriations ) . the tables for ahrq , cdc , hrsa , and samhsa include non - add entries — italicized and in parentheses — to indicate the contribution of funding from sources other than the agency's discretionary appropriations to specific accounts . almost all of the cdc accounts are funded with discretionary appropriations plus amounts from multiple other sources ( see table 4 ) . the use of a dash in the funding tables generally means "not applicable. note that the funding tables show the post - sequestration amounts for the accounts that were subject to sequestration in fy2013-fy2015 . the amounts shown for the fy2016 request do not reflect sequestration . samhsa is the lead federal agency for increasing access to behavioral health services . it supports community - based mental health and substance abuse treatment and prevention services through formula grants to the states and u.s. territories and through competitive grant programs that fund states , territories , tribal organizations , local communities , and private entities . samhsa also engages in a range of other activities , such as technical assistance , data collection , and workforce development . samhsa and most of its programs and activities are authorized under title v of the phsa , which organizes samhsa in three centers: center for substance abuse treatment ( csat ) center for substance abuse prevention ( csap ) center for mental health services ( cmhs ) each center has general statutory authority , called programs of regional and national significance ( prns ) , under which it has established grant programs for states and communities to address their important substance abuse and mental health needs . phsa title v also authorizes a number of specific grant programs , referred to as categorical grants . samhsa's two largest grant programs are separately authorized under phsa title xix , part b . the community mental health services block grant falls within cmhs . the full amount of the substance abuse prevention and treatment block grant falls within csat , although no less than 20% of each state's block grant must be used for prevention . specific documents are listed in the source note under each table . the funding tables are formatted in a similar , though not identical , manner . since 2000 , congress has expanded some of samhsa's programs and activities without taking up comprehensive reauthorization . although authorizations of appropriations for most of samhsa's grant programs expired at the end of fy2003 , many of these programs continue to receive annual discretionary appropriations . from fy2010 through fy2015 , samhsa's program - level funding has generally hovered around $3.6 billion , dropping to $3.4 billion in fy2013 due to sequestration and rebounding to $3.6 billion in fy2014 ( see table 9 ) . the current ( fy2015 ) distribution of funding across cmhs ( 30% ) , csat ( 60% ) , csap ( 5% ) , and health surveillance and program support ( 5% ) overstates the amount allocated to substance abuse treatment and understates the amount allocated to substance abuse prevention because csat's funding reflects the entire amount of the substance abuse prevention and treatment block grant , including the 20% set - aside for prevention .