appendix b . acronyms and abbreviation . , the budget caps ) . in effect , appropriations to the nih innovation account as authorized by the cures act are not subject to discretionary spending limits . the nih director may transfer these amounts from the nih innovation account to other nih accounts , but only for the purposes specified in the cures act . those two bills provide nih discretionary budget authority . through lhhs appropriations , some funding is also transferred to nih pursuant to the phs evaluation set - aside or the "phs evaluation tap" transfer authority . authorized by section 241 of the public health service act , the evaluation tap allows the secretary of hhs , with the approval of appropriators , to redistribute a portion of eligible phs agency appropriations across hhs for program evaluation and implementation purposes . the phsa section limits the set - aside to not less than 0.2% and not more than 1% of eligible program appropriations . for fy2021 , $404 million is authorized to be appropriated . in addition , nih has received mandatory funding of $150 million annually that is provided in public health service act ( phsa ) section 330b , for a special program on type 1 diabetes research , most recently extended through fy2020 by the cares act ( p.l . 116-136 ) , with additional partial - year fy2021 funding of $25,068,493 for october 1 , 2020 , through november 30 , 2020 . about 10% of the agency's budget supports intramural research ( i.e. its mission also includes research training and health information collection and dissemination . more than 80% of the nih budget funds extramural research ( i.e. , external ) through grants , contracts , and other awards . this funding supports research performed by more than 300,000 individuals who work at over 2,500 hospitals , medical schools , universities , and other research institutions around the country . , internal ) conducted by nearly 6,000 nih physicians and scientists , most of whom are located on the nih campus in bethesda , maryland . funding for nih comes primarily from annual labor , hhs , and education ( lhhs ) appropriations acts , with an additional smaller amount for the superfund research program from the interior / environment appropriations act . however , lhhs appropriations acts have commonly established a higher maximum percentage for the set - aside and have distributed specific amounts of "tap" funding to selected hhs programs . since fy2010 , and including in fy2020 , this higher maximum set - aside level has been 2.5% of eligible appropriations . readers should note that totals in this report and nih source documents include amounts "transferred in" pursuant to phs tap but do not include any amounts "transferred out" under this same authority . nih also receives funding through lhhs appropriations , subject to different budget enforcement rules than the rest of the nih funding in the act—appropriations to the nih innovation account created by the 21 st century cures act ( "the cures act," p.l . 114-255 ) to fund programs authorized by the act .