the supply curve is horizontal . making the supply curve very elastic makes output effects in the economy larger because it leads to the full pass through of the price . however , the market is also characterized by a relatively inelastic demand which causes a small effect on output . the demand curve is almost vertical . ( these supply and demand relationships are discussed in the appendix ) . the relationship in figure 1 would occur after adjustment to the tax has taken place , and would represent the steady state . the following subsections discuss the evidence supporting a highly elastic supply curve and an inelastic demand curve . the medical device market has not previously been subject to an excise tax , thus there are no previous studies that indicate how the firms in the industry react to a tax . nevertheless , there is reason to believe that the supply curve for this industry is infinitely elastic or close to it in the long run , and therefore that the tax is passed forward into the price . there are several reasons to support this view . first , as discussed earlier , much of the market , producing ordinary items such as needles and catheters , is described as competitive by the s&p analysis . in the s&p report , which focuses on large publicly traded firms , there are 37 manufacturers of medical devices along with 11 additional firms that produce supplies , along with two other large firms that have a division producing these goods . irs tax return data show 9,300 firms producing medical supplies and equipment . as shown in table 1 , even though production is concentrated at the top , there are still 22 firms in the top asset category and 37 in the second ( see note ) . in a competitive market , firms earn no profit above the normal return necessary to attract capital ( if they did , other firms would enter to exploit it ) . economic theory indicates that the market supply curve is perfectly elastic . since these firms are price - takers , and are not influential enough to affect prices prevailing in the market , they will initially see their normal profits fall , and firms will begin to leave the industry . as quantity contracts , the price will rise ( and rise relatively quickly if demand is relatively inelastic ) , restoring normal profits and stemming the exit of firms . second , to the extent that firms have market power , which may be the case for the production of more technologically advanced products , there is not a supply curve per se but an optimization of profits by firms that lead to some or all of the tax being passed on in price . as discussed in the appendix , there are theoretical reasons that 100% of the tax could be passed on in price . the adjustment process could begin with raising prices or reducing quantity .