as contained in p.l . 113-76 , the expanded provision would not apply to dod - funded foreign disaster assistance and other humanitarian assistance , where the ultimate beneficiaries are foreign populations but where u.s. military personnel often work with or support foreign military or other security forces in delivering assistance . the state department and u.s. embassies worldwide have developed a system that seeks to ensure that no applicable state department assistance or dod - funded training is provided to units or individuals in foreign security forces who have committed any gross violations of human rights . this procedure , designed to comply with the leahy laws , is known as "vetting" or "leahy vetting. primarily a state department responsibility with input from other agencies , leahy vetting is a multi - step process that involves staff at u.s. embassies abroad ; the state department bureau for democracy , human rights , and labor ( drl ) in washington , dc , which is the lead state department bureau for vetting ; state department regional bureaus ; and other government agencies as required . the state department policy provides for two separate processes , one for training and one for equipment and other non - training assistance . for dod and state department - funded training ( and in some cases the provision of equipment related to training ) , the process has evolved from a "cable - based" system when the state department began to vet foreign security forces in 1997 to a computerized process through the international vetting and security tracking ( invest ) system . gradually put in place between april 2010 and february 2011 , invest is the current official system for leahy vetting for training . at some posts invest is also used for equipment provided in conjunction with training , but this is not mandatory . for state department - funded equipment and other non - training assistance , the state department generally approves potential recipients through a memorandum and clearance process generated by the bureau of political - military affairs at the time funding is allocated to beneficiary countries . ( the gao recommended in november 2011 that the state department vet individuals and units receiving equipment through the invest system , but the state department has not developed such a policy . in some cases , however , equipment and non - training assistance is vetted through invest even though this is not mandatory. ) under the invest system , the state department to date has vetted approximately 400,000 "candidates" for training , a figure that includes both individuals and units . will the united states be able to control down - range effects as it outsources military training through third - party nations ? competing perceptions of these overarching issues underlie perspectives on specific proposals for congressional action . in the 113 th congress , an illustration of the enduring debate surrounding the leahy laws is deliberation on a provision in the senate appropriations committee ( sac ) version of the fy2014 dod appropriations bill ( section 8057 of s. 1429 ) , a modified version of which is now contained in the consolidated appropriations act , 2014 ( division c , section 8057 , p.l .