as stated in federalist no . 78 and later echoed in marbury v. madison : "the interpretation of the law is the proper and peculiar province of the courts. nonetheless , as the supreme court had noted , the judicial branch is not the only branch that interprets the law , as president must necessarily interpret laws in executing them , and congress must necessarily engage in legal interpretation when enacting legislation . accordingly , there is a second aspect of article iii judicial power , and it centers on when a court exercises the power to say what the law means . specifically , a federal court exercises its authority in the context of certain "cases" or "controversies. the "cases" or "controversies" language of article iii connotes a source of authority for federal courts such that article iii courts are empowered to not "merely ... rule on cases , but to decide them , subject to review only by superior courts in the article iii hierarchy .. . put another way , the "judicial power" of article iii entails a power to render final , "dispositive judgments" in particular cases and controversies . third , the structural protections the constitution provides to courts suggest another distinct aspect regarding the federal judicial power . section one of article iii stipulates that all federal judges in "good behaviour" shall have lifetime tenure and that their salary cannot be diminished within their term of office . the purpose of these provisions is to ensure that federal courts operate free from interference from the political branches in order to , in the words of alexander hamilton , "secure a steady , upright , and impartial administration of the laws. while the constitution provides federal courts the "capacity" to exercise their power in certain cases , an act of congress is "require[d] ... to confer" authority to a given article iii court , meaning that statutory law is another source of a federal court's power . article i of the constitution provides congress with the discretion to create inferior tribunals to the supreme court . as a "necessary and proper" function of carrying into execution that power and the "[p]owers vested by [the] constitution" in the judiciary , congress can authorize the courts to "carry[] into execution all the judgments which the judicial department has the power to pronounce. in this vein , provisions codified in title 28 of the united states code empower the federal courts to do a host of activities , such as being able to hear disputes based on "federal questions" or assess certain fees to litigants . in addition to the powers bestowed on federal courts through article iii and certain statutory provisions , the supreme court has long recognized that the federal judiciary retains certain "inherent powers" or "implied powers" that are "necessary to the exercise of all others. a federal court's inherent powers are not governed by "rule or statute but by the control necessarily vested in the courts to manage their own affairs so as to achieve the orderly and expeditious disposition of case.