this is not an exhaustive list . because the term shadow banking is used to describe such a diversity of firms and practices , it would be incorrect to categorize luminated banking as regulated and shadow banking as unregulated . however , in many cases ( but not all ) , the kind of regulation applied to shadow banking activities is fundamentally different than banking regulation . banking regulation is typically risk based , and typically takes into account the linkages between banks through the payment system and the interbank lending market . securities regulation , which several categories of shadow banking involves , generally requires disclosure of material risks , but typically does not limit the risk that sophisticated securities market participants may take . simple banking , or luminated banking , has each of the following four elements . the first row of figure 1 illustrates the flow of funds connecting savers and borrowers in a luminated banking business model . luminated banks 1. gather funds in the form of deposits ( time and transaction ) 2. have special business charters identifying them as depositories 3. offer loans ( and screen applicants ) 4. hold the loans they originate . repayments of loans fund the interest for depositors . the term shadow banking has been used to describe a variety of firms and activities that have little in common . however , they each differ in an at least one respect from the simple conception of banking illustrated in the first row of figure 1 . in this illustration , the term luminated banking is being used to describe a simple form of the "originate - to - hold" model of depository banking . in figure 1 , each following row provides an illustrative example of an activity or firm that deviates from luminated banking in at least one respect , yet provides similar financial intermediation . adjusting the focal point of intermediation from left to right , the first shadow banking example in figure 1 illustrates a substitute for deposits ( in this case repos ) , the second shadow banking example illustrates a substitute for firms with special bank charters ( non - bank intermediaries ) , and the third row illustrates a substitute for holding loans ( in this case selling loans through securitization ) . the following five examples are a non - exhaustive list of shadow banking sectors . this list is included because each of these sectors will be addressed more fully in the policy analysis section of the report . the difference in the prices is functionally similar to interest on a loan . they are presented here to see how each fits into the general concept of financial intermediation and how each differs from , or can be incorporated in , simple banking . ( a ) the repo market — rather than gathering funds from depositors , some chartered banks ( and nonbanks ) borrow through repurchase agreements ( repos , discussed more fully below ) . in a repo , a firm sells a security today with a promise to repurchase the security at a later date for a specified price . the time span and price differences are analogous to a loan and interest .