funding source . under the federal credit reform act of 1990 , credit assistance by the bank would be supported by an appropriation that pays the subsidy and administrative costs . assuming a 10% subsidy cost , every $1 appropriated beyond the amount of administrative costs would enable the bank to lend $10 to projects . alternatively , a bank could operate as a revolving fund , such that credit assistance and administrative costs are limited to the size of the appropriation , but funds from repaid loans could be used to make new loans . institutional form and governance . most current proposals would create a wholly owned government corporation governed by political appointees . but other models exist , including placing the bank inside an existing government department and creating a government - sponsored enterprise with an independent board . in some formulations an infrastructure bank would raise its own capital through bond issuance . most proposals would allow the bank to offset some of its costs by charging fees . five infrastructure bank proposals have been introduced in the 114 th congress . each proposes a national infrastructure bank created as a wholly government - owned corporation , but with somewhat different governance , eligibility rules , and funding mechanisms ( table 7 ) . the green bank act is not discussed here , as it limits support to energy projects . the partnership to build america act of 2015 ( h.r . 413 ) would create the american infrastructure fund ( aif ) with $50 billion of repatriated foreign earnings . the companies repatriating the earnings would receive tax benefits in return for investing a certain share of the earnings in 50-year bonds paying 1% interest . infrastructure sectors eligible for loans and loan guarantees from the aif would include transportation , energy , water , communications , and education . in addition , h.r . 413 would permit the aif to make equity investments ( i.e. , an ownership stake ) up to a maximum of 20% of project costs . the national infrastructure development bank act ( h.r . 3337 ) proposes to create the national infrastructure development bank ( nidb ) as a wholly owned government corporation . the nidb would be authorized to aid transportation , energy , environmental , and telecommunications infrastructure projects . in addition to providing loans and loan guarantees , the nidb would be permitted to subsidize the interest on a new type of taxable bond called an american infrastructure bond ( aib ) . aibs could be issued by eligible infrastructure project sponsors . an amount equivalent to the federal taxes paid by aib holders would be credited to the ndib for assistance to other eligible infrastructure projects . the nidb also would be capitalized with $25 billion from the general fund . the building and renewing infrastructure for development and growth in employment ( bridge ) act ( s. 1589 ) proposes to create the infrastructure financing authority ( ifa ) as a wholly owned government corporation . the ifa would be authorized to provide loans and loan guarantees to sponsors of projects in transportation , energy , and water .