appendix a . legislative history of medicaid long - term services and supports ( ltss ) prior to the enactment of medicaid in 1965 , homes for the aged and other public institutions were financed by a combination of direct payments made by individuals from their old age assistance benefits , and vendor payments made by states with federal matching payments on behalf of individuals . the kerr - mills medical assistance to the aged program enacted in 1960 ( p.l . 86-778 ) allowed states to provide medical services , including skilled nursing care , to persons who were not eligible for old age assistance cash payments , thereby expanding the covered population . in 1965 , when kerr - mills was incorporated into the new federal - state medicaid program , congress created an entitlement to skilled nursing facility care for beneficiaries age 21 and older , requiring all states to offer this service under the expanded program . it also gave skilled nursing facility care the same priority status as hospital and physician services . subsequent amendments allowed states to provide care in "intermediate care facilities" for persons who did not need skilled nursing facility care , but needed assistance beyond room and board alone . in 1987 , congress eliminated the distinction between skilled nursing facilities and intermediate care facilities ( effective in 1990 ) in the medicaid program . medicaid law now refers collectively to these facilities as nursing facilities . these early legislative developments helped stimulate growth in the nursing home industry . a significant increase in the number of nursing homes was seen from 1960 to 1970 . over that time period the number of nursing homes more than doubled , from around 9,600 to almost 23,000 , and the number of beds more than tripled from 331,000 to more than 1 million . since 1970 , the count of nursing homes nationwide has declined , but the number of beds has increased . for example , in 2014 , the total number of nursing homes nationwide totaled 15,600 while the number of beds totaled about 1.7 million . home care services also received some congressional attention in medicaid's original authorizing statute . under the 1965 law , home health care was established as one of the optional services that states could provide . in 1968 , three years after medicaid was established , congress amended the law to require states to provide home health care to persons entitled to skilled nursing facility care as part of their state medicaid plans ( effective in 1970 ) . over time , states were authorized to cover other types of home and community - based services ( hcbs ) as optional benefits under the medicaid state plan . for example , the optional personal care benefit was first available in 1978 . to enable states to make improvements in the management of care for their ltss beneficiaries and other groups , congress added an optional case management benefit in 1986 . medicaid home and community - based waivers during the 1970s , the former department of health , education and welfare ( hew ) devoted increased attention to alternatives to nursing home care through a variety of federal research and demonstration efforts .