oil remains deeply tied to mexican nationalism . nevertheless , pemex continued to pursue service contracts with some u.s. oil companies until the practice was definitively outlawed by a 1958 regulatory law implementing article 27 of the constitution . from then on , pemex retained a monopoly over mexico's oil and natural gas sector and the mexican finance ministry kept tight control over the company's finances and management . in 2013 , 75 years after its founding , pemex found itself facing significant challenges . pemex had its heyday in the late 1970s following the discovery of the huge shallow water cantarell oil field , but the company's long - term performance had been hindered by a number of factors . for years , pemex sustained itself on the revenue produced from its relatively easy - to - exploit shallow water fields without investing the capital necessary to replace those reserves with new fields or even maintain its infrastructure . pemex had a high percentage of losses , low worker productivity , and facilities that are in significant need of repair ; 37 people were killed in january 2013 after an explosion occurred at one of the company's offices in mexico city . in part because of the mexican government's heavy tax demands , pemex had operated at a loss since 1998 and significantly increased its debt burden . until recently , the government had also prevented the company from reinvesting its profits into maintenance and new exploration . pemex's pension liabilities , negotiated by the company's powerful and , for some observers , corrupt workers union , had become an unsustainable drain on its finances . each year , pemex had been losing hundreds of millions of dollars due to criminal groups illegally tapping into its pipelines . pemex's inability to partner with other companies arguably inhibited it from benefitting from new expertise and techniques , particularly in deep water drilling and hydraulic fracturing ( fracking ) . the bilateral economic relationship with mexico is of key interest to the united states because of mexico's proximity , the high volume of trade with mexico , and the strong economic ties between the two countries . the united states is , by far , mexico's leading partner in merchandise trade , while mexico is the united states' third - largest trade partner in total trade after china and canada . mexico is the united states' second - largest export market after canada and ranks third as a supplier of u.s. imports . since nafta took effect in 1994 , the united states and mexico have become more economically integrated with strong trade and supply chain linkages . u.s. exports to mexico increased rapidly since nafta , increasing from $41.6 billion in 1993 to $240.3 billion in 2014 , an increase of 478% . u.s. imports from mexico increased from $39.9 billion in 1993 to $294.2 billion in 2014 , an increase of 637% . in most sectors , nafta removed significant trade and investment barriers , ensured basic protections for nafta investors , and provided a mechanism for the settlement of disputes between investors and a nafta country . the agreement , however , included explicit country - specific exceptions and reservations .