one example is the island nation of singapore . "the partnership between marine aviation and singapore air force is as solid as can be," trautman said . meanwhile , the service also has historic ties with the south korea's marine corps , which is closely modeled on its american counterpart . in a similar effort , the u.s. army is seeking to assert itself in the region , with some analysts suggesting that in a post iraq and afghanistan world — where few foresee the u.s. getting involved costly , long term land operations — the army is in search of a mission and has decided to make engagement in the asia - pacific region a priority . other than a significant presence in south korea , the army does not have the history or presence that marines enjoy in the pacific . one recent report suggests army efforts to reassert itself in the pacific are being undertaken to develop a strategic narrative and an argument to prevent future army personnel cuts . while some have asserted the army is trying to create a second marine corps in the pacific and building a force that the nation doesn't need , the army claims that it has a long , unbroken history in the pacific . this situation has evolved into what has been described as a "turf war" in the pacific , a not uncommon occurrence between the army and marines , particularly during post - war periods when forces are reduced and defense budgets decline . perhaps , instead of competing for missions in the pacific where the marines are currently established , the marines could be allocated the lead role in the pacific region and the army could be assigned the lead in another region better suited to the army's land - centric focus . such an allocation might help to avoid redundancy and associated costs and perhaps help the army reallocate resources that it would use to expand its pacific presence to other areas such as training and maintenance that are suffering due to decreased funding . assigning the leading role of crisis response to the marines could help to decrease redundancy and also achieve a level of cost savings for both the army and marine corps . as previously noted , in addition to meus stationed at sea around the world , the marines have created a spmagtf - cr for the usafricom region and could possibly create additional units to support other geographic combatant commanders . in a similar move , the chief of staff of the army has reportedly directed the creation of company - sized unit quick - response forces for each geographic combatant commander to perform essentially the same tasks as the marines spmagt - crs . these army units , formed around a conventional infantry company , would be required to respond within 18 to 24 hours , but such a response could prove to be difficult as the vast majority of the active army will be based in the continental united states after 2014 .