perkins act programs are administered by the department of education . there are approximately 2,500 ajc locations nationwide . the ajc / one - stop system was created by the workforce investment act of 1998 ( wia ; p.l . wia established that a group of federal funding streams ( "mandatory partner programs" ) would be coordinated through state and locally run centers . the workforce innovation and opportunity act of 2014 ( wioa ; p.l . 113-128 ) amended and reauthorized many wia programs and maintained the ajc / one - stop system . services include job search assistance , skill assessment , career planning , case management , and training ( including occupational skills training and on - the - job training ) . training is conducted through a voucher system that allows individuals to attend training at eligible training providers ( eg , community colleges ) . the wagner - peyser act established the employment service ( es ) as a system jointly operated by dol and the state employment security agencies . the central mission of the es is to facilitate the match between individuals seeking employment and employers seeking workers . es funds are allotted from dol to the states through a formula grant . typically , ui recipients must register with the es . jobseekers who are not eligible for ui may also register with the es . es offers an array of services to job seekers and employers , including career counseling , job search workshops , labor market information , job listings , applicant screening , and referrals to job openings . these offices monitor uc claimants to ensure that they are able to work , available for work , and actively seeking work . for the recently unemployed , the es processes uc income support claims while helping the individual find new employment . education activities under the adult education and family literacy act ( aefla ) are a mandatory ajc partner . aefla provides formula grants to states to fund basic educational services at the high school level and below , as well as english language courses . states typically subgrant federal funds to local providers ( such as school districts or community colleges ) that provide the actual classes . the programs discussed in this section are available to workers who are involuntarily separated from their jobs and meet other criteria . in some cases , workers who have been notified of a layoff but have not yet been separated from their jobs may also be eligible for these programs . this program provides formula grants to states for services to dislocated workers . to qualify as a dislocated worker , an individual must have been laid off from employment , sufficiently attached to the workforce ( eg , eligible for unemployment benefits ) , and unlikely to return to the occupation or industry from which the worker was laid off . services available under the dislocated worker program include job search assistance , skill assessment , career planning , case management , and training ( including occupational skills training and on - the - job training ) .