federal student loans . student loans and personal bankruptcy . the 113 th congress may explore various issues regarding the quality of educational programs and offerings at ihes , and especially how measures of educational quality factor into determinations of ihes' eligibility to participate in hea title iv federal student aid programs ( eg , pell grants , student loans ) . the hea , as amended , does not set specific educational quality standards for ihes ; however , it does contain requirements that may indirectly reflect an institution's ability to offer a quality education to students . given the increasing cost of postsecondary education and students' expanded use of title iv federal student aid to finance their education , there has been a recent focus on whether students are , in fact , receiving a quality education from the ihes they attend and whether the federal investment made in postsecondary education ( primarily through title iv aid ) is a prudent one . to participate in title iv federal student aid programs , individual ihes must meet several standards that may indirectly reflect educational quality . these standards include requirements related to institutional accreditation , the length of academic programs ( eg , credit hours ) , and the percentage of revenue a school may derive from title iv versus non - title iv funds ( i.e. , the 90 / 10 rule ) . some or all of these topics may be considered by the 113 th congress . under the hea , ihes must be accredited by an agency recognized by ed to be eligible to participate in title iv aid programs . schools not accredited by such ed - recognized agencies are unable to access billions of dollars in federal funds . institutional accreditation by an ed - recognized accrediting agency may be considered a measure of institutional quality , because it indicates that an ihe meets at least minimal performance standards and maintains financial stability , as determined by an accrediting agency's review . perennially , issues regarding whether accreditation is a true measure of institutional quality arise . a specific issue related to this that congress may wish to consider concerns whether to refocus the accreditation process on student achievement or student outcome measures , rather than on ihe administrative process reviews . additionally , should congress decide to help refocus accreditation on student outcome measures , which student outcome measures might be used ( eg , graduation or job placement rates ) ? with the increase in online education , congress may also address whether accrediting agencies should be required to establish separate standards for distance education . in general , three major issues related to accreditation of distance education have been identified: 1 . ihes' ability to identify and prevent student identity fraud ; 2. inconsistency in accreditation standards applicable to distance education programs ; and 3. a lack of sufficient resources for accrediting agencies to conduct reviews of distance education programs . in addition to agencies that accredit entire institutions , there are many programmatic accrediting agencies that accredit individual programs within ihes ( eg , law , nursing ) .