other options may also be possible . ensuring that this process is objective , fair , and unbiased would be a critical element for successful implementation of this approach . doing such a comparison is beyond the scope of this report . nevertheless , policy makers may be interested in understanding the history and background of u.s. energy tax incentives . this report is focused on production tax credits that are available for renewable electricity generation and potential options for eliminating , extending , or phasing out this financial incentive over a period of time . further , the scope of the discussion is about wind power generation because wind electricity has been the primary recipient of ptcs since the incentive was made available in 1992 . at the end of 2012 , approximately 60,007 megawatts ( mw ) of wind power capacity had been installed in the united states and puerto rico . in terms of cumulative installed wind power capacity , the u.s. wind market is the second largest of any country in the world ( china's is number one ) . federal incentives for wind electricity generation projects that use large turbines — greater than 100 kilowatts ( kw ) — are generally in the form of production tax credits ( ptc ) and accelerated depreciation . ptc incentives provide a tax credit for each kilowatt - hour of electricity generated by a wind project during its first 10 years of operation . the current value of the ptc incentive for wind projects , which is inflation - adjusted annually , is 2.3 cents ( $0.023 ) per kilowatt - hour . originally established in the energy policy act of 1992 ( p.l . 102-486 ) , the ptc , along with several other market and policy factors , has played a critical role in the evolution and growth of the u.s. wind industry . historically , ptc incentives for wind power projects have expired , and have been subsequently extended , multiple times since the incentive became available in 1992 . generally , annual wind project installations increase as the incentive expiration date approaches and then experience a decline after the expiration date . wind project development typically ramps back up following an extension of ptc incentive availability . in fact , 2012 was a record year for wind power installations , with over 13,000 mw of new capacity added during the calendar year . the large amount of wind power capacity coming online is generally attributed to project developers accelerating development plans in anticipation of ptc expiration on january 1 , 2013 . the american taxpayer relief act of 2012 ( p.l . 112-240 ) , which became law on january 2 , 2013 , extended the availability of ptcs by allowing wind projects that start construction before january 1 , 2014 , to be eligible for ptc incentives . however , due to a variety of factors ( i.e. , development timelines for new projects , over - subscribed state renewable policies , low electricity demand growth , and low natural gas prices ) , 2013 wind project installations are expected to be significantly less than installations in 2012 .