in addition to p.l . 113-4 , the 113 th congress enacted multiple immigration - related bills . enacted appropriations measures ( p.l . 113-164 ) variously include policy provisions on temporary nonagricultural workers , refugees , and special immigrants , among other immigration - related issues . 113-160 also contain provisions on special immigrants . 113-74 concerns international adoption . 113-100 concerns inadmissibility to the united states . this report discusses these and other immigration - related issues that received legislative action or have been of significant congressional interest in the 113 th congress . federal contractors would be required to participate in the evs in accordance with current regulatory requirements to participate in e - verify . beginning one year after implementing regulations are published , dhs could direct any employer involved in critical infrastructure to participate in the evs to the extent the secretary determines such participation would assist in critical infrastructure protection ; these employers could be required to participate in the evs with respect to newly hired employees as well as current workers . the phase - in of the evs participation requirements for other employers with respect to newly hired employees and employees with expiring employment authorization documents would begin no later than two years after the publication of implementing regulations ( for employers with more than 5,000 employees ) and would end no later than five years after the publication of implementing regulations ( for the last group , tribal government employers ) . agricultural employers would be required to participate in the evs no later than four years after regulations are published . dhs would be directed to develop procedures to provide individuals with direct access to their case histories in the evs , and to notify them of queries and evs responses . s. 744 would establish processes for an individual to seek administrative review and judicial review of a final nonconfirmation . the bill would enable individuals to limit the use of their social security numbers or other information for verification purposes . in addition , s. 744 would provide for regular privacy and accuracy audits and civil rights assessments of the evs . with respect to enforcement , s. 744 would direct dhs to establish procedures for the filing and investigation of unlawful employment - related complaints by individuals and entities . like h.r . 1772 , the senate bill would significantly increase existing civil and criminal penalties for violations of the revised ina section 274a prohibitions on unauthorized employment and for violations of requirements to conduct verification . an employer who hires a worker without using the electronic system when required to do so would be presumed to have violated the section 274a prohibitions on unauthorized employment . among the new penalties s. 744 would create , dhs would be authorized to establish an "enhanced civil penalty" in cases in which an employer both fails to use the evs and violates a federal , state , or local law on the payment of wages , work hours , or workplace health and safety . like h.r .