they are listed below . the state council . the state constitution describes it as "the highest organ of state administration" ; it oversees the state bureaucracy and manages day - to - day administration of the country . the state central military commission . the state constitution says it "directs the armed forces of the country. the supreme people's court . the state constitution calls it "the highest judicial organ. the supreme people's procuratorate . it is china's top prosecutor's office . this political power structure is illustrated in figure 1 . the communist party of china is not mentioned in chapter 3 of the state constitution , although communist party leadership is mentioned in passing five times in the state constitution's preamble . the communist party's own constitution provides more detail about party leadership of the political system , the economy , and society at large , stating that "the party commands the overall situation and coordinates the efforts of all quarters , and the party must play the role as the core of leadership among all other organizations at corresponding levels. the party constitution explicitly states that the communist party "persists in its leadership over the people's liberation army and other armed forces of the people. the party exercises that leadership through a party central military commission . it , rather than the state central military commission , commands china's armed forces ; the state military commission , which has identical membership to the party central military commission , is believed to exist in name only . in the party constitution , party leadership of the legislature , the state council , the courts , and the prosecutor's office is not explicitly stated , but is implied . in practice , the party nominates the leaders of all four bodies and operates party committees within each of them . the courts and prosecutors' offices , the police , and some ministries report directly to party central committee commissions and departments . figure 2 provides an approximate illustration of china's power structure as currently implemented , with the communist party in charge . with 85 million dues - paying members , just over 6% of china's population of 1.35 billion , the communist party of china ( cpc ) is the largest political party in the world . as noted above , it is china's dominant political institution , exercising leadership over the entire political system . the communist party constitution requires the party to hold a national congress every five years . the most recent congress , the 18th , was held in november 2012 . at each congress , delegates elect a new central committee in a modestly competitive process: the party leadership nominates approximately 10% more candidates than available positions . the current central committee is composed of 205 full members and 171 alternate members . they include 33 women ( 8.8% of the full 376-member central committee ) and 39 ethnic minorities ( 10.4% ) . each meeting of the central committee is known as a plenum .