the rfs is a program with ambitious objectives . , 8.08 billion gallons ) . 110-140 ; eisa ) . however , the statute does not list any specific purposes or objectives . some stakeholders argue that the rfs exists primarily to find another market for biomass feedstocks or to promote the economy of rural america ( eg , the construction of biofuel facilities that create jobs ) . to the extent the rfs was designed to reduce u.s. dependence on foreign oil , and to the extent that hydraulic fracturing and the growth of unconventional oil and gas production have contributed to achieving that objective , some stakeholders have questioned whether the rfs is still needed for energy security purposes . likewise , the environmental impact of the rfs could be challenged , as the advanced biofuel component of the rfs — set to yield greater greenhouse gas emission reduction benefits — has missed the statutory targets by a large margin . in examining whether the rfs is well designed to realize its general purpose , some have inquired about the challenges in achieving the ambitious rfs targets , given concerns about the slow development of some advanced biofuel supplies . additionally , past delays in announcing final annual standards by epa have led to uncertainty for biofuel producers , feedstock growers , and refiners . whether the rfs should be eliminated , amended to address the current challenges in the program , or maintained in its current form is an ongoing question for congress . a related question is whether the current provisions for epa to waive various portions of the rfs mandates and to reset the rfs are sufficient to address the current supply challenges or whether the use of these waivers runs counter to the goals of the program . the rfs mandate requires that transportation fuels sold or introduced into commerce in the united states contain an increasing volume of a predetermined suite of renewable fuels . the statute required 4.0 billion gallons of renewable fuel in 2006 , ascending to 36.0 billion gallons required in 2022 , with epa determining the volume amounts after 2022 in future rulemakings . some contend that the conventional biofuel segment of the biofuels industry is well established , so it should not require a use mandate . in addition , it has been argued that a demand for conventional biofuels exists regardless of congressional involvement . the statute centers on four renewable fuel categories — conventional biofuel , advanced biofuel , cellulosic biofuel , and biomass - based diesel — each with its own target volume . the total renewable fuel requirement under the rfs is met with the combination of fuels from two renewable fuel categories: conventional biofuel and advanced biofuel . the requirement for advanced biofuel , in general , can be met with the combination of three types of advanced biofuel: cellulosic biofuel , biomass - based diesel , and other advanced biofuels . to date , the total annual volumes required have been met mostly with conventional biofuel ( eg , corn starch ethanol ) . beginning in 2015 , the mandate capped the conventional biofuel volume amounts while increasing the requirement for advanced biofuels .