appendix a . history of funding for hea programs: fy2015-fy2019 table a - 1 of this appendix lists the sections of the hea that provide discretionary or mandatory authorization of appropriations or budget authority for hea programs and presents the funding amounts provided for these programs for fy2015 through fy2019 . the programs are presented in the order in which they appear in the hea . for each program , the section authorizing the appropriation of funds or providing budget authority is identified , as is the indicator of whether funding is considered discretionary ( d ) or mandatory ( m ) . appendix b . general education provisions act the general education provisions act ( gepa ) contains a broad array of statutory provisions that are applicable to the majority of federal education programs administered by the department of education ( ed ) , as well as provisions related to the powers and responsibilities of ed . these provisions cover topics as varied as appropriations , evaluations , privacy , and enforcement . this appendix briefly discusses several of the gepa provisions that apply to programs authorized by the higher education act ( hea ) . part a: functions of the department of education gepa , part a includes provisions related to the authority and responsibility of ed to administer education programs . it confers regulatory authority on the secretary of education and specifies that any regulation affecting an institution of higher education shall only become effective if the regulation is published in the federal register with an educational impact assessment statement . part b: appropriations and evaluations gepa , part b includes provisions that address , among other issues , authorizing forward funding for programs ( eg , appropriated funds that are to be obligated in fy2011 may be appropriated in the fy2010 appropriations act ) . section 422 of gepa provides that if congress , in the regular session that ends prior to the beginning of the terminal fiscal year of authorization of appropriations of an applicable program , does not pass legislation extending the program , the program is automatically extended for one additional fiscal year . this provision does not apply to the authorization of appropriations for commissions , councils , or committees that have statutorily specified termination dates . part c: general requirements and conditions concerning the operation and administration of education programs gepa , part c addresses the general authority of the secretary , administrative requirements and limitations , the administration of education programs and projects by states , and records and limitations on withholding federal funds . part c also contains the family educational rights and privacy act , which provides privacy protections for student records . part c clarifies that no provision of any applicable programs is intended to authorize federal control over educational curriculum , administration , or personnel of any educational institutions . part d: enforcement gepa , part d addresses the enforcement of laws and regulations administered by ed , including the establishment of ed's office of administrative law judges , procedures for recovering federal funds from recipients , and remedies for violations of ed laws and programs .