however , there are exceptions . first , congress re - vested indian tribes with inherent authority to exercise criminal jurisdiction over nonmember indians , as well as non - indians who commit dating and domestic violence against indians within the tribes' jurisdictions , provided the non - indian has certain enumerated ties to the tribes . second , under the first montana exception , tribes may exercise civil jurisdiction over nonmembers when the nonmembers have entered private consensual relationships with the tribe or its members , provided the conduct at issue relates to the consensual relationship . third , under the second montana exception , indian tribes may exercise civil jurisdiction over nonmembers when the nonmembers' conduct threatens the integrity of the tribe . express termination of a tribe's sovereign authority may be found in treaties and statutes . as to sovereign authority lost by virtue of the tribes' status , the supreme court has explained , "[t]he areas in which such implicit divestiture of sovereignty has been held to have occurred are those involving the relations between an indian tribe and nonmembers of the tribe. by virtue of their "dependent status," therefore , tribes have lost the sovereign authority to determine their relations with nonmembers . accordingly , in oliphant v. suquamish , the supreme court held that indian tribes do not have inherent sovereign authority to try non - indian criminal defendants , and in montana v. united states , the supreme court announced the general rule for civil jurisdiction that "the inherent sovereign powers of an indian tribe do not extend to the activities of nonmembers of the tribe. finally , it is unclear whether tribes generally have civil jurisdiction over indians who are not members of the tribe . immediately after announcing this rule for civil jurisdiction in montana , however , the court identified two exceptions , known as the montana exceptions: to be sure , indian tribes retain inherent sovereign power to exercise some forms of civil jurisdiction over non - indians on their reservations , even on non - indian fee lands . a tribe may regulate , through taxation , licensing , or other means , the activities of nonmembers who enter consensual relationships with the tribe or its members , through commercial dealing , contracts , leases , or other arrangements . a tribe may also retain inherent power to exercise civil authority over the conduct of non - indians on fee land within its reservation when that conduct threatens or has some direct effect on the political integrity , the economic security , or the health or welfare of the tribe . tribal civil jurisdiction over nonmembers is complicated for several reasons . first , the two montana exceptions to the general rule for consensual relationships and threats to the tribe do not provide bright line rules . in order to fit within one of these exceptions , nonmember conduct must somehow impinge on a tribe's inherent authority to govern itself and its members . the supreme court has identified the tribes' right as landowners to exclude nonmembers from tribal land as one of the bases for upholding tribal taxes against nonmembers' activities on tribal land .