b . designation authorities and blocking sanctions in addition , the united states retains a number of authorities that are directed toward , or have been used to address , u.s. concerns with respect to iran . generally , these authorities provide for the imposition of blocking sanctions on persons meeting certain criteria or engaging in specified conduct , as well as their support networks . designation authorities: the activities targeted by these authorities include the following: 1 . support for terrorism : e.o . 13224 ( blocking property and prohibiting transactions with persons who commit , threaten to commit , or support terrorism ) ; 2 . iran's human rights abuses : e.o.s 13553 and 13628 ( implementing sections 105 , 105a , and 105b of cisada ( related to persons who are responsible for or complicit in human rights abuses committed against the citizens of iran ; transfers of goods or technologies to iran that are likely to be used to commit serious human rights abuses against the people of iran ; and persons who engage in censorship or similar activities with respect to iran ) ) ; and e.o . 13606 ( relating to the provision of information technology used to further serious human rights abuses ) ; 3 . proliferation of wmd and their means of delivery , including ballistic missiles : e.o.s 12938 and 13382 ; 4 . support for persons involved in human rights abuses in syria or for the government of syria : e.o.s 13572 and 13582 ; 5 . support for persons threatening the peace , security , or stability of yemen : e.o . transactions or activities described in section 1244 ( c ) ( 1 ) ( a ) of ifca if the transaction involves any person on the sdn list ( other than an iranian financial institution whose property and interests in property are blocked solely pursuant to e.o . 13599 ) : section 1244 ( c ) ( 1 ) of ifca ; 7 . diversion of goods intended for the people of iran : cisada 105c , as added by section 1249 of ifca ( relating to the diversion of goods , including agricultural commodities , food , medicine , and medical devices , intended for the people of iran , or the misappropriation of proceeds from the sale or resale of such goods ) ; 8 . knowingly and directly providing specialized financial messaging services to , or knowingly enabling or facilitating direct or indirect access to such messaging services for a financial , institution whose property or interests in property are blocked in connection with iran's proliferation of wmd or their means of delivery , or iran 's support for international terrorism : section 220 of the tra [itrshra] ; 9 . officials , agents , and affiliates of the irgc : section 301 of the tra ( providing for the designation of officials , agents , or affiliates of the irgc ) ; and 10 . foreign sanctions evaders : e.o .