no two independent agencies have exactly the same structure . it might be impractical to assess the relative levels of independence among agencies on the basis of the number or type of characteristics of independence an agency has . an assessment of a financial regulator , like that of any independent regulatory agency , might examine not only the level of independence accorded to that organization , but also the responsibilities and authorities that have been vested in its leadership . that said , the fed has been given the most independence of any financial regulator on all the measures considered in this report ( where differences exist ) , presumably in deference to its monetary policy responsibilities . besides structural characteristics , the culture and traditions of an agency and the relationships between its leadership and the president can also influence the relative independence of the agency during a particular period . arguably , a more relevant assessment might evaluate the degree to which specific features of independence at particular agencies serve current policy contexts and preferences . congress might , as part of its oversight of federal regulators , choose to investigate the impact of these features on the relationships between the agency and the president , the agency and congress , and the agency and the regulated industry . it might also assess the character of the policymaking that such independence allows . recent congresses have considered legislation that would alter the structure and design of some of the federal financial regulators . arguably , the degree of autonomy and power together might have the greatest impact on the integrity of the policymaking process and policy outcomes , as well as the preservation of democratic accountability . agency independence is traditionally viewed relative to the president , but the structural features discussed in this report can also increase or decrease independence from congress . agencies that are more independent from the president can sometimes become more congressionally dependent for resources and power . in contrast , where congress is successful in limiting the president's authority over an agency , this might indirectly reduce the influence of members over that agency . some agency characteristics that more directly shield an agency from congressional control and presidential direction , such as funding the agency outside of the appropriations process , might further insulate the agency from partisan political influence . although the agency would be constrained by a statutory framework and institutionalized oversight mechanisms , such insulation from partisan influence might lead to more limited accountability by the agency to , as well as less control of agency activities by , elected officials . in short , decisions about the degree of independence to accord an agency might involve tradeoffs among various values and goals . the financial regulators were created between 1863 ( office of the comptroller of the currency [occ] ) and 2010 ( consumer financial protection bureau [cfpb] ) . financial regulators set policy , conduct rulemaking to implement law , and supervise financial institutions . some of these agencies have other responsibilities in addition to their regulatory responsibilities , and some features influencing their independence may have been motivated by those other responsibilities .