at present such a market does not exist . while various types of incentive programs can accelerate the development and deployment of co 2 capture technology , actions that significantly limit emissions of co 2 to the atmosphere ultimately would be needed to realize substantial and sustained reductions in the future cost of co 2 capture . that estimate is in line with the doe projects noted above . if achieved , it would represent a significant decrease from current costs — one that would bring the cost and efficiency of future power plants with co 2 capture close to that of current plants without capture . for reference , it took approximately 20 years following passage of the 1970 clean air act amendments to achieve a comparable level of technology deployment for so 2 capture systems at coal - fired power plants . uncertainty estimates for these projections , however , indicate that future cost reductions for co 2 capture also could be much smaller than indicated above . worldwide interest in ccs stems principally from three factors . first is a growing consensus that large reductions in global co 2 emissions are needed to avoid serious climate change impacts . because electric power plants are a major source of co 2 , curtailing their emissions has become a focus . second is the growing realization that large emission reductions cannot be achieved easily or quickly simply by using less energy or by replacing fossil fuels with alternative energy sources that emit little or no co 2 . the crs report reviews current activities at each of these stages for each of the three major capture routes . current r&d activities include development and testing of new or improved solvents that can lower the cost of current post - combustion and pre - combustion capture , as well as research on a variety of potential "breakthrough technologies" such as novel solvents , sorbents , membranes , and oxyfuel systems that hold promise for even lower - cost capture systems . most of the latter processes , however , are still in the early stages of research and development ( i.e. , conceptual designs and laboratory - or bench - scale processes ) , so that credible estimates of their performance and ( especially ) cost are lacking at this time . table 1 lists the major approaches being pursued for post - combustion capture , although many of these approaches apply to pre - combustion and oxy - combustion capture as well . processes under development at the more advanced pilot plant scale are , for the most part , new or improved solvent formulations ( such as ammonia and advanced amines ) that are undergoing testing and evaluation .