some notable provisions appear below . risk - based pricing is the practice of charging riskier borrowers higher rates to reflect their additional credit or default risk . billing practices , such as double - cycle billing , served as a form of risk - based pricing of credit to cardholders immediately if their behavior indicated greater default risk . if cardholders switched from using their cards simply for transaction purposes to revolving loan purposes or missed a payment , fees and higher finance charges were imposed almost immediately , often without any grace period . the card act eliminated various billing practices and limited the ability to raise rates without providing advance notice to customers ; however , there were no caps placed on credit card interest rates . consequently , while risk - based pricing of cardholders may have been more difficult via the use of fees , credit card issuers have other available options to manage default risk . card issuers could reduce lending risks by lowering credit limits and increasing credit card rates on all borrowers , both timely and delinquent . another response may be to increase rates and reduce limits for borrowers with greater delinquency and default risk . issuers could also decide to limit the availability of this product to riskier customers . subprime credit card lending , or lending to borrowers with impaired credit , still exists ; but identifying how the issuance of "fee harvester" cards has changed is difficult due to lack of available data . one alternative to unsecured revolving credit to risky borrowers is secured revolving credit . secured credit cards , which are offered to borrowers with missing or impaired credit histories , require either security deposits as collateral for the amount of the line of credit or links to checking or savings accounts , thereby allowing lenders to recover funds if payments are missed . the security deposit is refunded if borrowers do not miss payments . customer payment activity does get reported to credit bureaus . hence , secured credit card lending can help borrowers build or repair creditworthiness . secured credit cards would still be subject to fee limitations and disclosure regulations stemming from the card act . there is some evidence suggesting that the availability of secured credit card lending has subsequently risen in light of the regulation of subprime credit card lending , but locating official data sources that distinguish between unsecured and secured credit card lending is difficult . the federal reserve bank of new york ( frbny ) collected a nationally representative sample of credit report data to estimate the availability of revolving credit for consumers . revolving credit availability and usage has declined , but estimates of the size of the decline vary depending upon the chosen time interval . using the frbny data displayed in the first column of table 1 , household credit limits declined by 28.2% between 2008 and 2010 ; the decline is calculated to be 11.0% over the longer period 2006-2012 . the second column of table 1 shows the aggregate amount of revolving or credit card debt outstanding as reported by the federal reserve .