debate on h.r . 3370 and other measures , which would delay the removal of pre - firm premium subsidies and grandfathered rates , may lead congress to consider ways to balance fema's use of elevation rating for pre - firm and grandfathered rated properties against the program's statutory mandate for coverage to be reasonably priced and widely available . resolving the actuarial , financial , and social tensions surrounding the affordability of flood insurance coverage would arguably require a three - pronged approach to policy analysis . the first policy analysis approach is to determine the scope of the affordability problem associated with the transition toward full - risk rates . in other words , could existing and potential policyholders afford the higher actuarial rates ? the third policy analysis approach could be to explore alternative , innovative risk - financing options and ratemaking approaches with the aim of encouraging greater spatial and temporal ( over time ) spread of risk without the requirement to borrow from the u.s. treasury . but how do policy makers determine what is affordable and at what level of income ? to address these policy questions , policy makers might choose to consider best practices in quantifying and mapping flood risks , including risk that accounts for future conditions , where to assign the risk ( using "elevation rating" methods ) , and what behavior should be changed to reduce future flood losses and , thereby , strengthen the nfip's long - term financial solvency . the second policy analysis approach to addressing the affordability issue could be to find ways to reconcile the nfip's long - standing ratemaking procedures that distinguished between the full - risk rated actuarial premiums paid and the subsidy premium amounts that will be eliminated to address the long - term solvency of the nfip . given the expected increases in premium rates associated with pre - firm structures when elevation is used in the calculation , it is questionable whether means - tested vouchers designed to address the affordability concerns of low - to moderate - income households might be sufficient to make the insurance policies marketable . traditional principles of insurance suggest that for an insurance market to exist the policy must be marketable to policyholders — that is , people who want to purchase the coverage and have the financial means to do so . appendix a. nfip october 1 , 2013 rate table: zone ae , single family residential dwelling , non - elevated with no basement or crawl space appendix b. side - by - side of h.r . fema consults with local officials to determine bfes throughout the community . communities are required to submit pertinent data concerning flood hazards , flooding experience , mitigation plans to avoid potential flood hazards , and estimates of historical and prospective economic impacts on the community . the program collects about $3.5 billion in annual premium revenue . according to fema , the program saves the nation an estimated $1.6 billion annually in flood losses avoided because of the nfip's building and floodplain management regulations . flood insurance premium rates were initially set "based on consideration of the risk involved and accepted actuarial principles.