, presidents reagan to obama ) . this section discusses three proposals to shorten the amount of time , generally , from nomination to confirmation for u.s. circuit and district court nominees . these proposals are not mutually exclusive and any policy adopted by the senate to shorten the length of time from nomination to confirmation for judicial nominees might incorporate elements of more than one of the proposals . as the scope of this report includes only the time from nomination to confirmation , this section does not include proposals that have been offered to reform or change the pre - nomination stage of the judicial confirmation process . this section , furthermore , does not provide an exhaustive list or description of potential policies that might be adopted by the senate to shorten the time from nomination to confirmation for lower federal court nominees . the senate , if it determines that the lengthening judicial confirmation process is a problem , might consider various policy options to shorten the process . the senate , for example , could create time frames for one or more stages of the confirmation process by establishing deadlines for acting on a nomination . such time frames might have the effect of shortening the confirmation process for judicial nominees as well as standardizing ( as much as possible ) the process across presidencies . some potential drawbacks of using time frames include the issue of enforcement ( i.e. , what happens if a time frame is not followed ? ) as well as giving the president greater leverage or influence in the selection of judicial nominees . the senate might also fast - track certain nominations . some nominations , for example , might be classified as "privileged" nominations and , thus , be acted upon by the senate in a relatively expedited manner . such privileged nominations might include u.s. district court nominations for vacancies considered judicial emergencies and / or nominations considered uncontroversial . there might , however , be some drawbacks to fast - tracking some nominations , including the concern of some members in preserving the role of the judiciary committee in having its say on every judicial nomination submitted by the president . finally , the senate might treat district court nominations differently than circuit court nominations by streamlining the judiciary committee questionnaire for district court nominees , eliminating routine committee hearings for district court nominees , and expediting floor consideration of district court nominees by adopting an amendment to senate rules that would ensure a vote on such nominations shortly after being reported by the judiciary committee . while treating district court nominations differently than circuit court nominations might make sense given differences in the nature of the work done by trial judges versus appellate judges , senators might , for various reasons , be reluctant to change the process for district court nominees ( eg , senators might consider routine hearings for district court nominees as valuable in assessing nominees' professional competence or temperament ) . of related concern to the senate have been recent increases in the number and percentage of vacant judgeships in the federal judiciary and the effect of delays in the processing of judicial nominations on filling such vacancies .