appendix a . chart on the jcpoa appendix b . nuclear weapons development an effective nuclear weapons capability has three major elements: producing fissile material in sufficient quantity and quality for a nuclear explosive device ; designing and weaponizing a survivable nuclear warhead ; and producing an effective means for delivering the weapon , such as a ballistic missile . the u.s. government assesses that , although iran could eventually produce nuclear weapons , it has not yet decided to do so and has not mastered all of the necessary technologies for building a nuclear weapon . tehran had a nuclear weapons program but halted it in 2003 , according to u.s. government estimates . before the jcoa took effect , then - under secretary of state for political affairs wendy sherman explained during an october 3 , 2013 , senate foreign relations committee hearing that iran would have needed as much as one year to produce a nuclear weapon if the government made the decision to do so . this estimate took into account the amount of time that iran would have needed to produce a sufficient amount of weapons - grade highly enriched uranium ( heu ) , which is widely regarded as the most difficult task in building nuclear weapons , as well as to develop the other components necessary for a nuclear weapon . this estimate did not include the time that iran would need to be able to render a nuclear weapon deliverable by a ballistic missile . then - secretary of defense leon panetta stated in january 2012 that iran would have needed "possibly ... one to two years in order to put [a nuclear weapon] on a deliverable vehicle of some sort. a senior intelligence official explained during a december 2007 press briefing that the "acquisition of fissile material" was the "governing element in any timelines" regarding iran's production of a "nuclear device. however , the estimate articulated by sherman assumed that iran would need two to three months to produce enough weapons - grade heu for a nuclear weapon . this estimate also apparently assumed that iran would use its declared nuclear facilities to produce fissile material for a weapon . the other assumptions behind the estimate are not clear . tehran would probably use covert enrichment facilities to produce fissile material for nuclear weapons — a tactic that would require a longer period of time , according to testimony from then - director of national intelligence james clapper during an april 18 , 2013 , senate armed services committee hearing . in his february 2016 testimony to congress , director clapper said that we continue to assess that iran's overarching strategic goals of enhancing its security , prestige , and regional influence have led it to pursue capabilities to meet its nuclear energy and technology goals and give it the ability to build missile - deliverable nuclear weapons , if it chooses to do so . its pursuit of these goals will dictate its level of adherence to the jcpoa over time . we do not know whether iran will eventually decide to build nuclear weapons .