these include h.r . 1012 / s. 520 ( markey / begich ) in the 113 th congress , s. 50 ( inouye ) in the 112 th congress , and s. 3928 ( inouye ) in the 111 th congress . increased inspections of foreign seafood facilities were proposed in s. 2934 ( vitter ) in the 111 th congress . other previously introduced legislation would address fraudulent maple syrup ( for example , h.r . 3363 in the 112 th congress ) . among other legislation introduced in the 113 th congress is h.r . 2400 ( capps ) , which seeks to improve recordkeeping and authorize investigations and enforcement actions for violations of the organic products standards . previous congressional efforts have also highlighted concerns about fraudulently labeled "organic" products that might undermine the usda - certified organic food industry . in addition , both the house - passed and senate - passed versions of the 2013 farm bill ( h.r . 2642 / s. 954 ) include a provision to require usda to submit a report to fda that describes an appropriate federal standard for the identity of honey . it is not known conclusively how widespread food fraud is in the united states or worldwide . in part , this is because those who commit fraud do not intend to cause physical harm and want to avoid detection . most incidents go undetected since they usually do not result in a food safety risk and consumers often do not notice a quality problem . moreover , as the motivation to commit fraud is illicit monetary gain , the type of food that might be or become adulterated is a secondary consideration ( i.e. , it could be any type of food or food ingredient ) ; rather , it is the opportunity or feasibility of committing fraud that generally triggers the fraud . gao's recommendations involving food fraud addressed the need for improved cross - agency communication and coordination and enhanced information sharing and transparency . other recommendations called for the creation of an information clearinghouse and the need for increased oversight and inspections , and increased risk - based testing , in some cases . a 2013 report by the u.s. international trade commission ( usitc ) cited research indicating that current standards for extra virgin olive oil are widely unenforced and result in a wide range of olive oil qualities to be labeled as "extra virgin" oil . the study further concluded that this may lead to adulterated and mislabeled product , which could further weaken the competitiveness of u.s. - produced olive oil in the domestic market . in europe , in the wake of the horsemeat scandal , some countries have debated the need for tougher laws to protect consumers against food fraud . the european parliament released its draft report regarding food fraud in october 2013 , calling for increased enforcement and oversight regarding fraud prevention through the food supply chain . congress has introduced a number of bills intended to address concerns about food fraud , mostly with respect to concerns about a particular food or food ingredient , but has not introduced legislation that would specifically address fraud in a comprehensive manner .