the dod actuary projects a life expectancy of 84 for the average officer . they now reflect what would have happened had the or i ginal bba language remained in effect . this provision of the bipartisan budget act generated significant debate . some called for a reversal , arguing that retaining the full cola adjustment is part of a commitment to servicemembers to preserve benefits including future colas at the full cpi to offset inflation . some servicemembers and advocates also argued that retirement changes should be delayed until the april 2015 report of military compensation and retirement modernization commission provides a "holistic" solution . others defended the cola adjustments , arguing that the effect on most retirees would be small compared to their lifetime benefits . they also argued that the change would help restrain the growth in military compensation over the past decade . admiral winnefeld , vice - chair of the joint chiefs of staff , recently suggested that these increases have "more than closed previously existing gaps with the rest of our nation's workforce. some argued further that military retirement benefits are exceptional because servicemembers do not contribute to their basic retirement benefits , and that military personnel have also been insulated from one of the major expenses for older persons , higher health insurance premiums , because premiums for military personnel have been frozen since 1995 . note: t he following sections were largely written before the bba was revised by the fy2014 consolidated appropriations act and s. 25 . based on the profile of the 1.94 million military retirees collecting benefits as of fy2012 , about 40% or 750,000 would likely have been affected in some way by the lower colas that were adopted in the bba . to get a picture of the potential effect of reducing the cola by 1% , the demographic portrait in table 1 shows average age , years of service , and retirement benefits , with separate entries for officers and enlisted . while active - duty personnel are eligible for immediate retirement benefits after 20 years of service , reservists generally are not eligible for retirement until age 60 , and so would generally be affected by the bba's cola minus 1% provision for a year . excluding reservists , some 1.6 million military retirees currently receive benefits . for nondisabled military retirees as whole , about half are below the age of 62 , and most of those would face reduced colas for 1 to 10 years based on dod actuary statistics . if fy2012 retirees are representative of future retirees , and the original bba language had remained in effect , then those currently retired would have been less affected than future retirees because of the demographic characteristics described above . similarly , disabled retirees would have been more affected than nondisabled retirees had the original bba remained in effect . to estimate the effects of the original bba formula on both current and future retirees , crs used dod actuary data about average age , retirement income , and life expectancy for nondisabled and disabled military and cbo's projections of the cpi .