there are two types of estimates . some are from micro data studies that examine individual behavior over time . these elasticities tend to be small , on the whole , at least for men . there are also estimates from aggregate micro data , which tend to be large , usually above 1 or 2 . then the labor substitution elasticity would be 0.225 , the income elasticity would be - 0.15 , and there would be a slight positive elasticity of total labor supply . the frisch elasticity would be 0.23 ( using labor and leisure shares as proxies for shares of consumption and leisure ) , at the low end , but reasonable considering publication bias , and the elasticity of labor with response to price change would be 0.026 , small enough not to be very troubling . note that the cbo model is a model with uncertainty . generally , uncertainty should lead to precautionary savings that is not sensitive to the interest rate , and a lower savings response . economists were attracted to intertemporal models because they were dissatisfied with the ad hoc treatment of savings in solow models . however , intertemporal models are far less transparent , and modelers appear in some cases to make little attempt to connect the elasticities associated with labor supply to the ones found in empirical evidence . the jct model used in the past has come close but , as illustrated , it is possible to come even closer to matching the empirical evidence , while at the same time minimizing "shooting in the dark" with a labor supply response to the interest rate . jct also incorporates life - cycle elements in their meg model that do not involve labor supply responses to rates of return . nevertheless , the assumption of equal substitution elasticities between consumption across far apart periods means that these models still rest on unproven , and probably unreasonable assumptions about the elasticity of substitution between consumption amounts that are ten or twenty years apart . there is a question of whether intertemporal models do more harm than good , at least with respect to the feedback effects during the budget horizon , especially when parameter choices may induce a large labor supply response to the rate of return . intertemporal modelers presenting the background on their models sometimes report the first two values in table 4 but no measure of the leisure share of time , which makes it impossible to evaluate on the basis of their published work . sometimes even the minimal information on elasticities is not provided . ( jct and cbo report all their relevant assumptions. ) without the parameters to understand the models ( and particularly without information on the time endowment ) , these models become impossible to evaluate or compare .