§2533b , discussed below . however , it is important to note that un - codified provisions — such as might appear in annual appropriations measures — are not included . provisions are given in numerical order by the title of the u.s. code in which they appear . §110: directs that all furniture purchased for the use of the executive residence at the white house be , "as far as practicable," of domestic manufacture . §453b: prohibits the department of homeland security from using funds appropriated or otherwise available to it to procure covered items unless the item was grown , reprocessed , reused , or produced in the united states , with certain exceptions . covered items include ( 1 ) articles and items of clothing , and the materials and components thereof , other than sensors , electronics , or other items added to and not normally associated with clothing ; ( 2 ) tents , tarpaulins , covers , textile belts , bags , protective equipment , sleep systems , load carrying equipment , textile marine equipment , parachutes , and bandages ; ( 3 ) cotton and other natural fiber products , woven silk or silk blends , spun silk yarn for cartridge cloth , synthetic fabric or coated synthetic fabric , canvas products , and wool , and ( 4 ) any item of individual equipment manufactured from or containing such fibers , yarns , fabrics , or materials . §612c note: requires that community distribution programs receiving certain federal funds purchase , "whenever possible," only "food products that are produced in the united states," with certain exceptions . §903 note: mandates that , as a condition of certain loans made for purposes of rural electrification , "to the extent practicable and the cost of which is not unreasonable," borrowers agree to use , in connection with the expenditure of borrowed funds , only ( 1 ) unmanufactured articles , materials , and supplies that have been mined or produced in the united states or an "eligible country" ( i.e. , a country with which the united states has certain trade agreements ) , or ( 2 ) manufactured articles that have been manufactured in the united states or an eligible country from articles , materials , or supplies mined , produced , or manufactured in the united states or an eligible country . §1506 ( p ) : expresses the sense of congress that , "to the greatest extent practicable," all equipment and products purchased by the federal crop insurance corporation using funds available to the corporation should be "american - made" ; and that , in providing financial assistance to , or entering contracts with , entities for the purchase of equipment and products to carry out this subchapter , the corporation , "to the greatest extent practicable," shall notify the entity of this policy .