this bill was not enacted into law , however . the house did not consider any dream act bills in the 109 th or 110 th congresses . such measures would again be introduced in the 111 th and subsequent congresses . aliens granted cancellation of removal in removal proceedings are adjusted to lpr status . under the dream act bills utilizing the cancellation of removal mechanism , an individual could have applied affirmatively for this form of relief without first being placed in removal proceedings . dream act legislation was introduced in the house and the senate in the 109 th and 110 th congresses , as in earlier congresses . unauthorized immigrant children living in the united states are able to receive free public education through high school . attending college , however , may be more difficult for them because of their unlawful status . one reason for this is a provision enacted in 1996 as section 505 of the illegal immigration reform and immigrant responsibility act ( iirira ) , which discourages states and localities from granting resident unauthorized aliens certain "postsecondary education benefits," commonly interpreted to include in - state tuition rates . iirira§505 directs that an unauthorized alien shall not be eligible on the basis of residence within a state ( or a political subdivision ) for any postsecondary education benefit unless a citizen or national of the united states is eligible for such a benefit ( in no less an amount , duration , and scope ) without regard to whether the citizen or national is such a resident . another factor that may make it difficult for some unauthorized immigrants to attend college is that they are not eligible for federal student financial aid under the higher education act ( hea ) of 1965 , as amended . more broadly , as unauthorized aliens , they typically are unable to work legally and are subject to removal from the united states . dream act bills introduced in the 109 th and 110 th congresses sought to provide relief to unauthorized alien students with respect to both higher education and immigration status . these measures generally proposed to repeal the 1996 provision and to enable certain unauthorized students to adjust to legal permanent resident ( lpr ) status . adjustment of status is the process of becoming an lpr in the united states without having to go abroad to apply for a visa . for the most part , the dream act bills introduced in the 109 th and 110 th congresses would have enabled eligible unauthorized immigrants to adjust to lpr status through a mechanism in immigration law known as cancellation of removal . c ancellation of removal is a discretionary form of relief that an alien can apply for while in removal proceedings before an immigration judge . the senate considered dream act measures in both congresses and , in the 109 th congress , passed a comprehensive immigration reform bill ( s. 2611 ) that included a dream act title . the question of legalizing the status of unauthorized aliens in the united states is a key — and controversial — issue in immigration reform .