appendix a . detailed cbo cost estimates and all - sections summary detailed cbo cost estimates appendix b . comparison of the enacted 2014 farm bill ( p.l . should more snap participants be required to work ? should more snap participants be time - limited off assistance ? should snap and the farm bill nutrition programs further promote the purchase of fruits and vegetables , including from local sources ? should the farm bill include provisions to increase the funding and capacity of emergency feeding organizations ( eg , food banks and food pantries ) ? this report summarizes key snap and other nutrition provisions in the new law and in the 113 th congress's senate and house farm bills . for more general background on nutrition programs , more detail on certain snap issues , or reports that discuss the entire farm bill ( not only nutrition programs ) , please reference other crs products listed in the text box below . the law's conference report , h.rept . 113-333 , is also a resource . first , this report summarizes the enacted law's 113 th congress legislative history . next , it presents the congressional budget office ( cbo ) cost estimates of the new law's nutrition title as compared to those of the senate and house bills . finally , the report summarizes the new law and senate and house proposals related to snap ( specifically , length of authorization , eligibility rules [including work - related] , benefit calculation , retailers , and benefit redemption ) ; programs in lieu of snap ( that some territories and tribes operate ) ; commodity distribution programs ( tefap , csfp , and usda commodities in school meals ) ; as well as certain other nutrition - related programs . appendix a provides a more detailed cbo estimate comparison table , and appendix b includes a side - by - side table of every provision in the nutrition title conference proposals and enacted law . throughout this report , the portion of the farm bill that includes snap and the other nutrition programs is referred to interchangeably as "title iv" and the "nutrition title. the congressional budget office ( cbo ) estimates that over 10 years ( fy2014-fy2023 ) , the enacted 2014 farm bill will reduce spending by approximately $8.0 billion . during deliberations on the farm bill , cbo prepared estimates of the impact of proposed changes on program spending levels . table 1 compares cbo cost - estimates ( either increases or decreases in spending from the prior law baseline ) of provisions in the senate proposal , house proposal , and conference report ( now , current law ) . snap is an open - ended , appropriated mandatory program . this means that the statute does not specify a particular amount to be appropriated . instead , the amount required to be spent is determined by various provisions of the law , most notably those pertaining to eligibility rules and benefit calculations , coupled with economic conditions . the administration estimates the amount needed to be spent each year , and these estimated amounts are then appropriated .