u.s. congress . house of representatives . committee on energy and commerce . subcommittee on health and the environment . indian health care: an overview of the federal government's role , 98th cong. , 2nd sess . 98-y , april 1984 ( washington: gpo , 1984 ) . crs report r41630 , the indian health care improvement act reauthorization and extension as enacted by the aca: detailed summary and timeline . crs report r41152 , indian health care: impact of the affordable care act ( aca ) . uios and the services they provide are discussed separately below . ( see report section " urban indian health programs ." ihs health services are provided directly by ihs - funded facilities ( called direct services ) or are provided indirectly under contracts with outside providers ( called purchased / referred care services ) . this section provides an overview of services provided directly by ihs - funded facilities . this section also provides an overview of ihs's authority to collect reimbursements from federal health care programs and how these reimbursements are used to increase available health services . the section concludes with a discussion of services provided indirectly under contracts to ihs beneficiaries . in addition to the activities discussed above , ihs funds a number of activities related to its role as a provider of health services . these include efforts to recruit and retain a skilled health workforce and to support the overhead and expenses associated with contracts and compacts that the ihs enters into with its and tos to provide services . the indian health care improvement act ( ihcia , p.l . 94-437 , as amended ) is the major authorizing legislation for the ihs . it was preceded by several laws that included more general authorization for federal indian programs . this section briefly describes several of these laws beginning from oldest to the most recent . see also appendix b for a timeline of when these laws were enacted . a number of congressional committees exercise jurisdiction over legislation affecting the ihs , including its appropriations . these various committees are described in table 2 below . in general , legislation amending an existing statute is likely to be referred to the committees that exercised jurisdiction over the original legislation . ihcia included authorization for participation in medicare , medicaid , and chip . as such , the committees that have oversight over these programs have been involved in the ihcia reauthorization . in addition , these committees have oversight over legislation that affects ihs beneficiary participation in these programs and the ability of ihs - funded facilities to receive reimbursements from these programs . ihs provides health care to american indians and alaska natives who live on or near indian reservations or in alaska native villages . while ihs , census , and bia figures for indians , whether resident in urban areas or not , may not be definitive for the ihs - eligible population , they provide useful approximations of the population that ihs serves .