the house passed h.r . 5895 , which contained funding for the legislative branch , on june 8 , 2018 . the senate passed h.r . for a list of the laws that have previously contained provisions prohibiting the annual pay adjustments , see "table 3 . legislative vehicles used for pay prohibitions , enacted dates , and pay language" in crs report 97-1011 , salaries of members of congress: recent actions and historical tables , by ida a. brudnick . in contrast , the salaries and benefits for legislative branch employees are provided by the legislative branch appropriations acts , although they generally do not address pay adjustments . the house and senate both consider funding levels for the legislative branch agencies and joint entities . by long - standing tradition , however , the house bill does not propose funding levels for senate items , including the account that funds the senate and the senate office buildings account within the architect of the capitol . total budget authority includes both budget authority controlled by the annual appropriations acts and budget authority controlled by previous laws , including entitlements . the house , senate , and conference reports on legislative branch appropriations bills regularly contain language illustrating the deference of each chamber to the internal practices of the other . no , salaries for members of congress are neither funded nor increased in the legislative branch bill . member salaries have been included as mandatory spending since fy1983 , and the amount of potential member pay adjustments is calculated pursuant to the ethics reform act of 1989 , which established a formula based on changes in the employment cost index ( eci ) . the adjustment automatically takes effect unless ( 1 ) congress statutorily prohibits the adjustment ; ( 2 ) congress statutorily revises the adjustment ; or ( 3 ) the annual base pay adjustment of general schedule ( gs ) federal employees is established at a rate less than the scheduled increase for members , in which case the percentage adjustment for member pay is automatically lowered to match the percentage adjustment in gs base pay . members of congress last received a pay adjustment in january 2009 . since then , the compensation for most senators , representatives , delegates , and the resident commissioner from puerto rico has been $174,000 . the maximum potential january 2019 member pay adjustment was 2.3% , or $4,000 . the fy2019 act included a provision prohibiting this adjustment . as in prior years , the member pay adjustment prohibition was included in the legislation as introduced , and no separate votes were held on the pay issue . although discussion of member pay is often associated with appropriations bills , these bills do not contain language funding or increasing member pay , and a prohibition on the automatic annual member pay adjust ments could be included in any bill , or be introduced as a separate bill . similarly , the senate does not comment on house items , including the account that funds the house or the house office buildings account within the architect of the capitol .