the t - tip negotiations continue to evolve . such an outcome depends on a number of factors . the united states and the eu , like all economies , have offensive and defensive interests . these include recognition that some sectors are import - sensitive , which may constrain the level of ambition in the t - tip negotiations . both sides also have identified certain issues that they prefer not to address through trade agreement negotiations , such as financial services regulations on the u.s. side and audiovisual cultural exceptions on the eu side . the ability to negotiate a "comprehensive and high standard" t - tip also depends on the political momentum for the negotiations . some stakeholders have expressed concern that the negotiations have not advanced as quickly as hoped and that political momentum and public support for t - tip has waned . congress may consider the balance between , on one hand , ensuring confidentiality to engage effectively on issues in t - tip and , on the other hand , allowing for sufficient transparency for meaningful stakeholder input . as is its practice , the u.s. government has not released publicly any proposed or consolidated texts in the t - tip negotiations . in general , the administration tends to use existing ftas as the starting point for future negotiations . others argue the 2015 grant of tpa and the conclusion of the tpp negotiations inject new momentum into the t - tip negotiations . still others contend that u.s. policymakers' focus on t - tip may lessen , at least temporarily , as congress considers tpp and its potential implementing legislation . members of congress have a direct interest in the implications of t - tip for the u.s. economy as a whole , as well as their specific states and / or districts . among other things , the ustr shares negotiating texts with members of congress and cleared advisors , meets with the public during negotiating rounds , holds public hearings and posts t - tip resources such as issue - by - issue discussions on its website , among other things . nevertheless , some observers express distrust of t - tip negotiations because they say that trade officials have released general statements without any real detail with regard to specific negotiating positions . debate over transparency has grown in light of the european commission's initiative to publish some initial eu proposals for the t - tip , noting that the "actual text in the final agreement will be a result of negotiations" between both sides . while some have welcomed this initiative , calls continue from some stakeholders for increased transparency , such as through the publication of consolidated negotiating texts as available . congress may consider whether the potential t - tip should be expanded to include other countries . the economic challenges in both the united states and eu are a major incentive for the t - tip negotiation . many policymakers view the t - tip as a low - cost economic stimulus for supporting u.s. exports , employment , and economic growth . however , there is debate about how the economic effects of the t - tip may be borne by various stakeholders .