, the aca medicaid expansion ) . primary care case management ( pccm ) — states contract with primary care providers to provide case management services to medicaid enrollees . typically , under pccm , the primary care provider receives a monthly case management fee per enrollee for coordination of care , but the provider continues to receive fee - for - service payments for the medical care services utilized by medicaid enrollees . limited benefit plans — these plans look like mcos in that states usually contract with a plan and pay it on a capitated basis . the difference is that limited benefit plans provide only one or two medicaid services ( eg , behavioral health or dental services ) . while managed care has been used largely for healthier medicaid subgroups ( i.e. , children and parents ) , some states are turning to this type of service delivery model for the elderly and individuals with disabilities . in addition to these two main types of service delivery models , some states use alternative models , such as premium assistance and health savings accounts . some states are using these alternative models for their aca medicaid expansion . for example , arkansas uses premium assistance through the private option for the aca medicaid expansion and michigan uses health savings accounts . the federal government and the states jointly finance medicaid . the federal government reimburses states for a portion ( i.e. , the federal share ) of each state's medicaid program costs . because federal medicaid funding is an open - ended entitlement to states , there is no upper limit or cap on the amount of federal medicaid funds a state may receive . in fy2014 , medicaid expenditures totaled $498 billion . the federal share totaled $303 billion and the state share was $195 billion . for the most part , states establish their own payment rates for medicaid providers . federal statute requires that these rates be sufficient to enlist enough providers so that covered benefits will be available to medicaid enrollees at least to the same extent they are available to the general population in the same geographic area . low medicaid physician payment rates in many states and their impact on provider participation have been perennial concerns for policymakers . still , during the most recent recession , which ended in 2009 , many states reduced medicaid provider payment rates due to budget pressures . however , over the past couple years , more states have been enhancing rather than reducing provider rates overall due to improvements in state finances . the aca required that medicaid payment rates for certain primary care services be raised to what medicare pays for these services for cy2013 and cy2014 . the federal government picked up the entire cost of that increase in primary care rates ( i.e. , the difference between medicare payment rates and the existing medicaid payment rates as of july 1 , 2009 ) for those two years .