acronyms used in this crs repor . , applying one disability dropout year ) . if the worker had 10 years in covered employment , ssa would use the highest eight years of earnings ( i.e. the recency of work test does not apply to individuals who are blind . to qualify for benefits , a disabled worker must also be unable to engage in "substantial gainful activity" ( sga ) . during this period , most of these individuals ( 991 or 74.2% ) were credited with one cdy , whereas 339 ( 25.4% ) were credited with two cdys . as shown in figure a - 1 , the distribution of cdy credits is skewed toward beneficiaries with lower earnings . as presented in table a - 1 , an eligible individual may be credited with one cdy at three elapsed years . a minimum of six quarters is required to become fully insured . in 2014 , each quarter of coverage requires $1,200 in earnings , which is indexed annually to average wage growth . the ssdi benefit payment is based on a disabled worker's average indexed monthly earnings ( aime ) , which is used in the computation of the individual's primary insurance amount ( pia ) . for ssdi beneficiaries , the initial monthly benefit payment equals the pia . workers under the age of 31 need to have credit in one - half of the quarters during the period between when they attained age 21 and when they became disabled . in addition , a recency of work test requires the worker to have 20 quarters of coverage in the 40 quarters preceding the onset of disability ( generally five years of work in the last 10 ) . an exception applies to disabled workers under the age of 31 ; these individuals can meet the recency of work test by having credit in at least one - half of the calendar quarters during the period beginning with the quarter after the quarter the individual turned 21 and ending with the quarter that they became disabled . in 2014 , sga is the ability to earn $1,070 in a month . since july 1999 , the sga amount has been adjusted annually to reflect the growth in average wages . the aime is calculated as the sum of indexed earnings over the computation period , divided by the number of "computation years" ( in months ) . the aime is calculated based on an individual's earnings record by indexing — to national average wage growth — the worker's earnings during full calendar years after 1950 and up to the second year prior to the year ( the "indexing year" ) of ssdi eligibility . earnings in years after the indexing year are not indexed and are counted at their nominal value . this adjusts a beneficiary's earnings to be comparable to the earnings level in the year he or she became disabled . the number of computation years used in the aime determination is equal to the number of "elapsed years," minus any dropout years as discussed below .