mccutcheon does not affect these limits . the aggregate limits set overall caps on the amount an individual can contribute . for 2013-2014 , pre - mccutcheon , individual contributions could total no more than $123,200 . of that amount , $48,600 could go to candidates , with the remaining $74,600 to parties and pacs . the pac limits do not apply to super pacs or other political committees ( i.e. , carey committees ) that can accept unlimited contributions for use in independent expenditures . this report does not attempt to address all those arguments . it also does not address various arguments surrounding legal matters in the case , such as which level of constitutional scrutiny courts should apply or whether courts should defer to congress to establish contribution limits . this report will be updated to reflect major developments and as policy implications become clearer . mccutcheon v. fec involves a challenge to the aggregate amount ( discussed below ) that an individual can contribute to federal candidates , political parties , and political action committees ( pacs ) . during the 2012 election cycle , alabama donor shaun mccutcheon wished to contribute more than the existing aggregate limits to candidates and the republican national committee ( rnc ) . prohibited from making and receiving the contributions , mccutcheon and the rnc filed suit against the federal election commission ( fec ) , which enforces the federal election campaign act ( feca ) contribution limits . in september 2012 , a three - judge panel of the u.s. district court for the district of columbia upheld the aggregate limits . through a review process specified in the bipartisan campaign reform act ( bcra ) , the case was then appealed to the supreme court . on october 8 , 2013 , the court heard oral argument . on april 2 , 2014 , the court issued a plurality opinion striking down the aggregate limits on constitutional grounds . the decision does not affect base limits ( discussed below ) that individuals may contribute to particular candidates or parties . instead , mccutcheon permits individuals to give limited contributions to an unlimited number of candidates , political parties , and political action committees . for example , both before and after mccutcheon , an individual could give a total of $5,200 to a congressional candidate during the 2014 election cycle . after mccutcheon , that individual contributor can contribute to up to $5,200 to as many candidates as he or she chooses . before the decision , the aggregate limits would have functionally capped the number of candidates , parties , or pacs a contributor could support . feca , as amended , specifies two different kinds of contribution limits . the first are individual limits . these limits , sometimes also called base limits , place a ceiling on the amount that an individual , party , or pac can contribute to a single candidate , party , or pac during a single election . second , feca limits the aggregate amount an individual can contribute to all candidates , parties , or pacs . the aggregate limit on individual contributions appears to be most relevant for mccutcheon .