c ) . international terrorism . national security concerns have loomed large in immigration policy in the years since the 2001 al qaeda attacks against the united states ( the 9 / 11 attacks ) . all 19 of the 9 / 11 hijackers entered the united states legally through poes , and constraining terrorist travel is now recognized as a critical defense against terrorist attacks within the united states . yet while most people would agree that terrorists , criminals , and immigration violators are appropriate enforcement targets , no consensus exists about how to prioritize these threats because the likelihood of each type of illegal entry is unknown , and because the potential consequences of these threats are subjective and difficult to measure . the likelihood of each of these threats occurring also varies by geography and mode of entry . low - risk travelers may be eligible for expedited admissions processing through the visa waiver program and / or trusted traveler programs , while higher - risk travelers may be subject to more extensive secondary inspections . unauthorized migrants at poes may be subject to expedited removal and other types of immigration enforcement ( see "the immigration inspections process" ) . travelers seeking to enter the united states go through one to three steps in the immigration inspection process . in the first step , prior to travel , most travelers who are not u.s. citizens or legal permanent residents ( lprs ) must apply for permission to enter the united states , by obtaining a visa at a u.s. consulate abroad or through the visa waiver program . air travelers are subject to additional screening prior to arrival ( see "pre - travel screening" ) . transnational crime . third , some passengers also may be selected through risk - based screening or at random for more intensive scrutiny ( see "secondary inspections and immigration enforcement" ) . participants in cbp's trusted traveler programs volunteer for additional screening in advance and thereby become eligible for expedited processing at poes ( see "trusted traveler programs" ) . at certain land ports on the southern border , travelers may be subject to screening and potential inspection as they depart the united states . outbound enforcement is managed by the outbound programs division within the office of field operations . the division's mandate focuses on addressing violence in mexico and the mexico - united states drug trade by interdicting illegal currency , arms , and ammunition outflows . dhs reports that about 700 cbp officers participate in the outbound enforcement program . table 5 describes annual seizures by the outbound programs division for fy2009-fy2013 . as table 5 indicates , outbound enforcement seized a total of about 5,100 kilograms of illegal drugs during this period in 3,442 separate seizure incidents ; $221 million worth of illegal currency exports ; 8,210 illegal weapons , and about 12.1 million rounds of ammunition . some experts view the number of southbound drug seizures — almost 3 per day in fy2013 — as an indicator of the global nature of the market for illegal drugs , and of the united states' emerging role as a transshipment country for illegal drugs .