, ttb's revenue reports ) . this section of the report analyzes each of these issues in detail . most of the legislation introduced in the 114 th congress , described above , would reduce tax rates on alcoholic beverages . however , if either raising revenue or reducing negative externalities is the main policy goal , then potential approaches to increase alcohol excise tax rates could be proposed . this is not meant to be an exhaustive list of approaches and multiple options could also be combined . this section of the report discusses these approaches in descending order , based on their respective magnitude of increases to current rates . policymakers could also increase the tax rate commensurate with the estimated costs of alcohol consumption to society , and possibly increase economic efficiency . based on estimates of the combined government tax rates at the federal , state , and local level are less than the level that could account for all external economic costs of alcohol consumption . after adjusting for inflation and assuming that these costs remain constant over time , manning's 1986 estimate of 48 cents per ounce of alcohol would equal $1.02 in 2013 dollars . a rough estimate in the appendix of this report measures the combined federal , state , and local taxes between 25 cents and 28 cents per ounce ( in 2013 dollars ) of alcohol compared with manning's inflation - adjusted rate of $1.02 per ounce ( in 2013 dollars ) . in other words , current combined taxes on alcohol are roughly one - quarter of the manning study's calculations of the external costs of alcohol consumption ( adjusted for inflation ) . as one option to raise revenue and address concerns over horizontal equity , the congressional budget office ( cbo ) has regularly included an option to equalize alcohol tax rates in its periodically - published report on deficit reduction . cbo estimated in 2013 that increasing all taxes on alcoholic beverages to a $16 per proof gallon equivalent ( or 25 cents per ounce of alcohol ) would raise $64 billion in revenue over 10 years . table 5 illustrates how this option would affect per - unit prices , based on the type of alcoholic beverage . the differences in tax rates on beer and wine under this option would be quite large , in percentage terms . however , consumers could interpret these excise tax increases differently based on the product . although there are bottles of wine that are priced comparatively to a six - pack of beer , many bottles of wine are priced much higher than a six - pack of beer . put differently , a 48 cent - price increase ( 33 cents to 81 cents ) is generally a larger price markup on a six - pack of beer than a 49 cent - price increase ( 21 cents to 70 cents ) is on a bottle of wine .