the security situation in much of the country is volatile . the operational environment for aid agencies is deteriorating . without security improvements as the dry season approaches , "the situation could rapidly become catastrophic," according to the u.n. food and agriculture organization ( fao ) . some households in northern bahr el ghazal are already classified as in "catastrophe" — the most severe stage of food insecurity , with starvation evident . the u.n. documented 217 cases of sexual violence , some by government soldiers , in july 2016 in juba alone . by many accounts , there has been little accountability for serious abuses committed during the conflict , despite a rhetorical commitment by both sides to justice . in april 2016 , the u.n. secretary - general reiterated that there was "no evidence of any genuine effort by the parties to investigate , prosecute and punish serious human rights violations and abuses relating to the conflict , some of which amount to war crimes. at the onset of the conflict , the african union mandated the establishment of a commission of inquiry on south sudan ( auciss ) to investigate human rights violations and other abuses committed during the conflict and to make recommendations on how best to ensure accountability , reconciliation , and healing . led by former nigerian president olusegun obasanjo , the auciss publicly released its final report in october 2015 . it found that human rights violations were committed "in a systematic manner and in most cases with extreme brutality. its investigations corroborated other reports that government security forces killed nuer soldiers and civilians and committed acts of torture and rape in juba in the first days of the conflict . a separate opinion written by one of the commissioners stated that "of the nuer who remained in juba , few survived the killing spree of december 16-18 , 2013. . the auciss documented subsequent atrocities by both sides , often targeting civilians from rival ethnic communities , as well as the use of hate speech and incitement to violence , and described gang rape as a common feature of the abuses committed . the auciss report was prepared prior to a wave of atrocities that reportedly occurred in mid - 2015 , during a sharp escalation in violence as the warring sides struggled to gain and hold territory to improve their position in peace negotiations . the abuses , in the states of unity and upper nile , included the torture , rape , and killing of hundreds of women and children , some of whom were reportedly burned alive . the u.n. secretary - general specifically criticized government forces , stating that he was "appalled by the reports of human rights violations committed by the spla [the army] and their allied forces , including the burning of villages , and the killing and rape of civilians , in the course of their military operations in unity state. the government offensive in southern unity , against opposition forces in predominately nuer areas , displaced or otherwise affected hundreds of thousands and forced many relief agencies to suspend operations . u.n. officials have repeatedly reported that the army has denied u.n. peacekeepers and human rights monitors access to various sites in the state .