in october 2015 , a new u.s . ambassador , jeffrey hawkins , took up his position in bangui , marking a return to full embassy operations . spoilers remain a potent threat . the national government remains largely confined to the capital , while ex - seleka and anti - balaka factions remain active across swathes of the country . despite shared ties to bozizé , powerful anti - balaka leaders in bangui have criticized touadéra's leadership since his inauguration , and are increasingly involved in fomenting violent anti - u.n. sentiment . meanwhile , some ex - seleka leaders have engaged in an apparent effort to reconstitute the movement in the northeast . some armed factions have rejected negotiations entirely . a fractious parliament , comprising representatives from 17 parties in addition to 57 independent delegates , may further impede momentum and complicate decision - making . given the scale of challenges , experts question whether the new government will have the political will and capacity to achieve meaningful progress on stabilization . a constitutional referendum held in december 2015 was marred by violence , although the draft constitution was , in the end , backed by a majority of voters and thus adopted . the text of the new constitution appears designed to increase checks on presidential power ( including via the creation of a new upper legislative chamber , the senate ) , introduce firmer wording on presidential term limits , and improve legislative oversight of natural resource extraction deals signed by the government . it also prohibits from public service anyone found to have been complicit in a coup d'état , rebellion , or mutiny . the u.n security council authorized the u.n. multidimensional integrated stabilization mission in car ( minusca ) in 2014 . it replaced and largely absorbed an existing african union ( au ) stabilization force , along with a preexisting u.n. political mission . u.n. security council resolution 2212 ( 2015 ) increased minusca's troop ceiling from 11,820 total uniformed personnel to 12,870 , including 10,750 military personnel and 2,080 police . resolution 2301 ( 2016 ) subsequently extended the operation's mandate through november 2017 . since its inception , minusca's effectiveness and conduct have been in question . although it reached over 95% of its authorized military strength and 84% of its authorized police strength as of august 2016 , the mission's ability to deploy effectively in remote areas has been hindered by logistical hurdles ( including a lack of national transportation infrastructure and car's long rainy season ) as well as troop contributor equipment and capacity shortfalls . according to a 2016 u.n. strategic review , air transport to eastern and northern zones is further constrained by "strong winds and high levels of dust , as well as the scarcity of properly refurbished airstrips , [which] make the majority of airports not fully functional after sunset. under its mandate to protect civilians , minusca has declared "weapons - free zones" in key conflict - affected areas , including bambari and kaga - bandoro , two heavily contested towns in central car . the implementation of such initiatives remains in question , as anecdotal evidence suggests that armed actors continue to enter such zones unobstructed .