appendix a . legislative history of federal grants - in - aid to airports prior to world war ii the federal government viewed airports as a local responsibility . during the 1930s , it spent about $150 million a year on airports through work relief agencies such as the works progress administration ( wpa ) . the first federal support for airport construction was granted during world war ii . after the war , the federal airport act of 1946 ( p.l . 79-377 ) created the federal aid to airports program , using funds appropriated annually from the general fund . initially much of this spending supported conversion of military airports to civilian use . in the 1960s substantial funding went to upgrade and extend runways for use by commercial jets . by the end of the 1960s , congestion , both in the air and on the ground at u.s. airports , was seen as evidence that airport capacity was inadequate . airport and airway development and revenue acts of 1970 ( p.l . 91-258 ) in 1970 , congress responded to the capacity concerns by passing two acts . the first , the airport and airway development act ( title i of p.l . 91-258 ) , established the airport development aid program ( adap ) and the planning grant program ( pgp ) , and set forth the programs' grant criteria , distribution guidelines , and authorization of grant - in - aid funding for the first five years of the program . the second , the airport and airway revenue act of 1970 ( title ii of p.l . 91-258 ) , established the airport and airway trust fund . revenues from levies on aviation users and fuel were dedicated to the fund . under the 1970 acts the trust fund could pay capital costs and , when excess funds existed , could also help cover faa's administrative and operations costs . airport and airway development and revenue acts amendments of 1971 ( p.l . 92-174 ) the nixon administration's faa budget requests for fy1971 and fy1972 under the new trust fund system brought it into immediate conflict with congress over the budgetary treatment of trust fund revenues . the administration treated the new financing system as a user - pay system , whereas many members of congress viewed the trust fund as primarily a capital fund . the 1971 amendments act made the trust fund a capital - only account ( although only through fy1976 ) , disallowing the use of trust fund revenues for faa operations . airport and airway development amendments act of 1976 ( p.l . 94-353 ) the 1976 act made a number of adjustments to the adap and reauthorized the airport and airway trust fund through fy1980 . the act again allowed the use of trust fund resources for the costs of air navigation services ( a part of operations and maintenance ) . however , in an attempt to assure adequate funding of airport grants , the act included "cap and penalty" provisions which placed an annual cap on spending for costs of air navigation systems and a penalty that reduced these caps if airport grants were not funded each year at the airport program's authorized levels .