emission standards u.s . s elective mutual recognition . this approach would identify certain major standards for which ttip could provide mutual recognition , rather than providing mutual recognition of all standards . u.s. and european automakers have identified occupant crash protection , side impact protection , child restraint systems , and some emissions standards as priorities for selective mutual recognition . f orward - looking rules . a fourth option would be to forge an agreement on emerging regulations , such as those dealing with electric and fuel cell vehicles , rather than focusing on existing regulations . under this approach , the united states and the eu would commit to jointly develop standards covering new issues or technologies . the pending free trade agreement between the eu and canada may influence the direction of ttip . the full text of the agreement has not been released , but according to an eu statement , "canada will recognise a list of eu car standards and will examine the recognition of further standards . this will make it much easier to export cars to canada. the agreement is also said to allow canadian vehicles to be certified in canada for the eu market . convergence of vehicle standards has potential drawbacks . one aspect pertains to the lack of speed with which governmental agencies — whether in the united states or europe — can address new technologies and vehicle innovations . the rule - making process is already lengthy , and the need for international coordination could make it even longer . this raises the prospect that technologies that could reduce accidents — such as new types of headlamps that can illuminate the road better without blinding oncoming drivers — may be delayed in reaching the market . additionally , the eu acknowledges that if vehicle standards become international , there could be less room for legislative scrutiny and for involvement by regional and national interest groups . u.s. consumer advocacy groups have raised similar concerns , writing u.s. and eu leaders in july 2013 that ttip "must not limit the united states or the eu ( or its member states ) from adopting and enforcing standards that provide higher levels of consumer , worker , and environmental protection. congress could play an important role if a ttip agreement contains significant provisions related to auto safety , emissions , and fuel economy regulations . congress established the u.s. government agencies whose regulations are the focus of the negotiations on automobile standards , and it has retained a strong oversight interest in vehicle safety and emissions . if the ttip effort to obtain mutual recognition or harmonization affects agencies' authority or changes the ways in which automotive regulations are developed and implemented , congress may well be asked to modify the underlying statutes that govern motor vehicle safety , emissions , and fuel efficiency . vehicle emission standards and implementation the clean air act amendments ( caaa ) of 1990 ( p.l . 101-549 ) established standards to limit tailpipe emissions from new motor vehicles effective in 1994 .