companies. noting the objections raised in other cases regarding the inherent trade - offs of incorporation , the d.c . circuit reasoned that shareholders generally forgo certain rights in exchange for the benefits of incorporation because the company has the authority to exercise those rights on the shareholders behalf . if the corporation cannot exercise a particular right , it would be unjust , according to the court , to refuse the owner's analogous right . otherwise , "the price of incorporation [would be] not only the loss of rfra's statutory free - exercise right , but the constitutional one as well . and that would create a risk of an unconstitutional condition in future cases. the court therefore refused to hold that a person's statutory rights under rfra depended on the form by which an individual chooses to operate his business . of the five circuit courts that have considered contraceptive coverage cases , the third and sixth circuits rejected the ability of the parties — either as corporations or their owners in their individual capacity — to challenge free exercise rights , and therefore did not address the likelihood on the parties' success on the merits . the remaining three circuits that found at least one party had standing to pursue the claim held that the claim was likely to succeed on the merits and granted a preliminary injunction preventing enforcement of the mandate with respect to those companies and individuals . those courts considered the three elements of rfra claims: whether the mandate imposed a substantial burden on religious exercise of the claimants ; whether the government demonstrated a compelling interest in such a burden ; and whether the government used the least restrictive means . courts generally have recognized the burden imposed by the contraceptive mandate on the companies as substantial , explaining that the significance of the penalties assessed for noncompliance with the contraceptive mandate — $100 per employee , per day of noncompliance — constituted substantial pressure on the company . however , in its defense of the mandate , the government has alleged that the coverage requirements should not be considered to burden objecting employers' religious exercise . according to the government's arguments , the contraceptive requirement is not a direct burden . that is , it does not require any employer or employee who has an objection to the use of contraceptives to use or to encourage the use of such devices . the government instead has argued that the required insurance coverage is analogous to compensation , an issue on which the various challenging corporations do not have religious objections . however , the courts have emphasized the deference due to religious objectors regarding the nature of their beliefs and related objections , citing the supreme court's long history of recognizing that it is not the role of the courts to determine the reasonableness of religious beliefs . in response to arguments that the mandate does not burden employers "because an employee's decision to use her insurance coverage to purchase contraception or sterilization services 'cannot be attributed to' the [owners of the corporations]," the seventh circuit elaborated on the deference owed to the corporations . echoing the d.c .