however , the foregoing seven issues would appear to be common regardless of the context . this report provides an overview of key policy and legal issues pertaining to ppps for purposes of federal real property management . it begins by discussing the current processes whereby federal agencies maintain and dispose of real property , as these processes help explain the appeal of ppps . the report then discusses how ppps are commonly structured , agencies' authority to enter ppps , and the legal requirements to which ppps may be subject . it concludes with considerations for congress , such as agencies' capabilities to enter into and oversee performance of these arguably complicated arrangements . other crs reports address the use of ppps in other contexts , including crs report r43410 , highway and public transportation infrastructure provision using public - private partnerships ( p3s ) , by [author name scrubbed] ; crs report r43308 , infrastructure banks and debt finance to support surface transportation investment , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] ; and crs report r41880 , foreign assistance: public - private partnerships ( ppps ) , by [author name scrubbed] . current interest in ppps arises , in part , as a result of the "standard" processes agencies use to dispose of real property that they no longer need due to changes in their functions and missions . as a general rule , when agencies no longer need particular properties , they must dispose of these properties through statutorily prescribed processes , described below , that can be cumbersome and costly . agencies frequently must spend appropriated funds to operate and maintain properties they no longer need , and pay costs associated with their disposal . ppps potentially enable federal agencies to rely upon nonfederal entities to finance the operation and maintenance of such properties , or to exchange these properties for other real property or services . ppps can be structured in many ways , depending , in part , upon the legal authorities under which agencies enter and perform such agreements . however , despite this variability , ppps — and particularly ppps formed pursuant to agencies' authority to enter long - term leases of real property — generally share certain key elements . these elements , and examples of common ppp structures , are discussed below , as a way of illustrating the types of actions that agencies may wish to take in entering or performing a ppp and , thus , paving the way for a discussion of the " legal framework as to ppps . while many ppps share the same key elements , discussed above ( see " key elements of a ppp " ) , there is considerable variation in the legal authorities under which federal agencies enter and perform ppps . this is largely because federal law is generally silent as to ppps , per se , particularly ppps for purposes of improving or disposing of federal real property .