two principles address discrimination . principle 4 notes that "[t]he practice of sport is a human right . president putin's goals for holding the games in sochi include bolstering economic development in the north caucasus , in order to reduce social unrest and inducements to terrorism . in the near - term , however , it appears that bringing the games to sochi has been a rallying call for some terrorists and may have increased the terrorist threat faced by russians ( as well as possibly placing olympic athletes and visitors at risk ) . some russian officials and others have warned that the terrorist threat may be further exacerbated by the return of some chechens and other russian citizens from syria , where they have honed their terrorist combat skills . if terrorists are able to launch attacks during the games , they may thereafter be able to attract more recruits , funding , and sympathy for their calls for secession of the region from russia , some observers warn . some critics doubt whether the prestige and putative economic benefits of the games will bolster regime loyalty in the north caucasus . they point out that security precautions have inconvenienced residents of the north caucasus and caution that the opening ceremonies of the games reportedly emphasize russian nationalist themes . these critics also argue that while the sochi area may benefit from plans by the federal government to own and subsidize many facilities after the games , it is uncertain whether hotels and other infrastructure created for the games can be sustained by tourism , as putin suggests . even if sochi does prosper after the games , the federal government's development plan for other areas of the north caucasus — including for building more sports facilities — does not include similar high levels of investment , some critics argue . besides the issue of whether the games will boost the regional economy , concerns have been raised about the burden of the games on the federal budget . russian authorities have given various estimates of total costs , including expenses for olympic facilities and costs for regional infrastructure such as power plants and roads . on january 22 , 2014 , prime minister medvedev reported that total costs amounted to about $50 billion , of which about $6 billion ( other officials have specified $6.2 billion ) was spent on olympic facilities and the rest on infrastructure in sochi and the wider region . of the amount spent on olympic facilities , private investment accounts for $3.3 billion , according to deputy prime minister dmitriy kozak , but mostly involves loans to entrepreneurs that are guaranteed by the state . he has rejected comparisons of these costs to those incurred by other countries that have held olympic games , arguing that most of the expense in sochi involves building necessary infrastructure that london or vancouver did not need . however , critics such as oppositionist aleksey navalny have alleged that large - scale corruption has inflated costs . in january 2014 , president putin dismissed such allegations , stating that irregularities have been minor and attributable to the vast scale of the construction effort .