all of these bills involve the treatment of farms in the spcc regulations . in general , the bills would alter the aggregate oil storage threshold that triggers compliance with spcc regulations . such an approach has some precedent in federal environmental law and policy . these parties may have contributed only very small quantities of waste ( or less toxic wastes ) to a contaminated site , or conducted activities , such as recycling , that congress did not wish to discourage . legislation identified in table 1 similarly would exclude farms from spcc requirements based on oil storage capacity . the argument in support of such legislation often concerns the financial impact of the spcc regulations . for example , a 2012 house report stated that the "mandated infrastructure improvements — along with the necessary inspection and certification by a specially licensed professional engineer will cost many farmers tens of thousands of dollars. however , others have argued that epa has considered the costs and benefits of its spcc regulations during multiple rulemaking processes . most of this interest has involved the spcc program's applicability to farms . because farms may store oil onsite for agricultural equipment use , they may be subject to the spcc regulations . for example , congress modified the scope of the liability scheme of the comprehensive environmental response , compensation , and liability act of 1980 ( cercla ; p.l . 96-510 ) on several occasions to exclude particular parties . recent legislation would alter the scope and applicability of spcc regulations to exclude farms that store and use oil below specific volumes or thresholds . the first section of this report provides background information on epa's spcc regulations . the second section identifies legislation in the 113 th congress that has addressed and would address provisions in the spcc regulations . spcc regulations have garnered considerable attention in the 113 th congress . some members have offered multiple proposals that would alter the scope and applicability of the regulations . table 1 identifies legislation that has been enacted , passed either the senate or the house , or been reported out of committee . in recent years , the spcc program has received considerable interest from congress . requirements include secondary containment ( eg , dikes or berms ) for certain storage units and the need for a licensed professional engineer to certify a facility's spcc plan . the environmental protection agency ( epa ) spill prevention , control , and countermeasure ( spcc ) regulations include requirements for facilities subject to the regulations to prevent , prepare , and respond to oil discharges that may reach u.s. navigable waters or adjoining shorelines .