although h.r . 7225 passed overwhelmingly in the house , the bill faced marked opposition in the senate . one of the main concerns among members who opposed the bill was the uncertainty over its potential cost . some lawmakers worried that economic downturns would impel unemployed workers to apply to the disability insurance program , affecting the solvency of the oasi trust fund . given these concerns , the senate committee on finance removed the disability insurance provisions from h.r . the senate report accompanying the 1956 amendments stated , difficulties in determining eligibility , and other factors , lead to uncertainty as to the future costs of a cash disability program . cost estimates in the field of disability benefits , as pointed out by the chief actuary of the social security administration , are subject to a wider range of variation than are estimates for other types of benefits . the basic cost estimates which have been presented to the committee were based on high employment conditions ; under low employment conditions , the cost would be significantly higher . the old - age and survivors insurance system is on a sound financial basis ; your committee strongly believes that it must be kept so and should not be altered by adding a benefit feature that could involve substantially higher costs than can be estimated . during senate floor debate on h.r . 7225 , senator walter f. george ( d - ga ) offered an amendment reinstating the disability insurance program along with the tax increase to finance it . to address concerns that a disability insurance program would pose a risk to the solvency of the oasi trust fund , the george amendment provided for a separate trust fund from which disability benefits would be paid . supporters of the george amendment argued that a separate di trust fund would isolate the oasi trust fund from any cost increases stemming from the new disability insurance program . for instance , during floor debate , senator thomas c. hennings , jr. ( d - mo ) remarked , the pending proposal , which the senior senator from georgia has submitted for himself ... proposes to set aside a separate trust fund for disability , and consequently does not go so far as to include it within the social - security framework . i believe this to be an extremely workable compromise — one which will eliminate any fear that the old - age and survivors insurance fund will be endangered , although i for one never shared this concern . opponents of the george amendment argued that the creation of a separate di trust fund would not sufficiently address their concerns about the potential cost of the program . senator wallace f. bennett ( r - ut ) noted , the supporters of this amendment tell us that by setting up a separate trust fund they are not going to jeopardize the actuarial balance of the program of social security . i think it is rather obvious that once this amendment is enacted , there is small chance that the program would be discontinued because of lack of funds .