they do not deal directly with fhwa . as state departments of transportation normally deal with fhwa division office staff on many matters , they typically have working relationships that facilitate a quick coordinated response to disasters . in 2007 , the government accountability office ( gao ) expressed concern about the financial sustainability of the er program . its report found that the "scope of eligible activities funded by the er program has expanded in recent years with congressional or fhwa waivers of eligibility or changes in definitions," and also that fhwa was not recapturing all unused program funds allocated to states , so that states with immediate disaster needs had to wait for funding , while states with no current disaster needs retained their allocations . a 2011 gao report acknowledged that fhwa had made progress in withdrawing some of the unobligated funds , but found that fhwa lacked information to verify whether additional unused allocations were still needed . the report noted that some er projects "have grown in scope beyond the program's goal of restoring damaged facilities to predisaster conditions," and that missing or incomplete documentation in project files left the basis on which fhwa made eligibility determinations unclear . more recently , a 2013 gao report found that fhwa officials in some states were reluctant to recoup funds from inactive er highway projects over concerns about "harming their partnership with the state. in addition , "fhwa has shown a lack of independence in decisions , putting its partners' interests above federal interests," gao said . since the release of the report , legal and procedural changes have mitigated some of gao's concerns . states' applications for er funding must now include a comprehensive list of all eligible project sites and repair costs by not later than two years after the event . the definition of "comparable facility" has broadened and clarified the nonbetterment repairs that are eligible for er funding . fhwa has updated the emergency relief manual to clarify eligibility and procedural issues . the implementation of these changes may be of oversight interest to congress . the fhwa emergency relief manual describes the "quick release" method for developing and processing a state request for er funding as a method that "provides limited , initial er funds for large disasters quickly . quick release funds are intended as a 'down payment' to immediately provide funds for emergency operations until the standard application may be submitted and approved. for example , on may 19 , 2017 , $1.25 million was released to provide for repairs to flood - damaged roads in idaho , and on may 9 , 2017 , $3 million was released for emergency repairs to flood - damaged roads and bridges in missouri . on april 6 , 2017 , fhwa allocated $768 million of er funds nationwide . this includes $670 million to the states and $98 million to the office of federal lands highways . the state of colorado received the most , $124 million , including the largest single allocation , of $112 million , for road damage caused by the september 11 , 2013 , flooding . california was allocated $92.5 million for a variety of weather and fire disasters .