for example , h.r . 1710 in the 114 th congress proposed to make an exception from the limitation on use of tax - exempt bonds for wifia loans made to finance water infrastructure projects in states in which the governor has issued a state of drought emergency declaration . more generally , in july 2015 , the senate passed h.r . each applicant will be scored independently . the wifia program provides capital at a low cost to the borrower , because even though the interest on 30-year treasury securities is taxable , treasury rates can be less expensive than rates on traditional tax - exempt municipal debt . moreover , wifia financing may be characterized as patient capital , because loan repayment does not need to begin until five years after substantial completion of a project , the loan can be for up to 35 years from substantial completion , and the amortization schedule can be flexible . in addition , there is less perceived investment risk , because the project has been determined to be creditworthy ( i.e. , there is a revenue stream for repayment ) . additionally , the wifia program has the potential to limit the federal government's exposure to default by relying on market discipline through creditworthiness standards and encouraging private capital investment . on the other hand , the congressional budget office ( cbo ) has argued that the federal government underestimates the cost of providing credit assistance under such programs because it excludes the cost of market risk — the compensation that investors require for the uncertainty of expected but risky cash flows . the reason is that the [federal credit reform act] requires analysts to calculate present values by discounting expected cash flows at the interest rate on risk - free treasury securities ( the rate at which the government borrows money ) . in contrast , private financial institutions use risk - adjusted discount rates to calculate present values . in an effort to encourage nonfederal and private sector financing , wifia funding assistance generally cannot exceed 49% of project costs . in addition , wifia limits all sources of federal assistance to no more than 80% of a project's cost . in general , the wifia program is designed to support larger infrastructure projects with eligible costs exceeding $20 million . for this reason , some have argued that the wifia program complements existing water infrastructure financing tools — srf programs under the clean water act and safe drinking water act — which are often used for smaller - scale projects . policymakers set a lower minimum threshold for project costs ( $5 million ) for wifia projects in communities with populations less than 25,000 . one of 12 projects selected in the fy2017 funding round is located in a less populous community ( morro bay , ca ) . two of the 39 projects in the fy2018 funding round are located in less populous communities ( frontenac , ks , and cortland , ny ) . generally , the level of interest from less populous communities in wifia financing is uncertain , particularly considering the other financing options that may be available .