the mode of operation ( i.e. , base load vs. cyclical ) also has a large effect on efficiency and fuel use . the options most often considered for increasing the efficiency of cfpps include equipment refurbishment , plant upgrades , and improved o&m schedules . a second factor is how the boiler is used . the relationship between the heat rate and utilization is nonlinear , as efficiency tends to be lower at very low and very high levels of utilization ... units with lower utilization may be ramped up and down more frequently , which requires additional fuel input as temperature in the boiler fluctuates . the result could involve efficiency losses at least partly outside the control of plant decision makers . plant managers control several other factors that affect heat rates . techniques , management , or technology may improve the efficiency of the plant by targeting the major components of the coal combustion process: oxygen , temperature , and pressure . federal legislation could tie incentives for efficiency improvements to such studies and direct states to meet individual or regional goals for ghg reduction . excessive deviations in any of these areas may decrease efficiency through waste or shortfalls ...maintenance and performance testing are also critical for identifying and preventing losses . therefore , in practical terms , a power plant's heat rate can be affected by a number of factors and power plants systems . heat rate may present one measure of efficiency , but when considering power plant ghg emissions , measuring carbon dioxide emissions per unit of energy output ( i.e. , per kwh or per mwh of generation ) may provide a more useful measure . each power plant thus presents a unique opportunity when looking at the issue of increasing efficiency , and reducing emissions . figure 5 illustrates a relationship between efficiency improvement and co 2 emissions ( for cfpps using bituminous coal ) highlighting the lower emissions of higher pressure cfpps . upgrading from subcritical operation to supercritical steam conditions ( with required pollution technology ) could add at least 20 years to a plant's service life , depending on the regulatory and environmental regime in place . a subcritical plant could achieve at best 40% efficiency ( on an lhv basis ) , while a supercritical steam plant could potentially achieve an efficiency two points higher and emit 4% less co 2 . advancing the technology from a supercritical to an advanced ultra - supercritical cfpp could see an efficiency of 46% to 48% , which could mean as much as 18% to 22% less co 2 per mwh generated than an equivalent - sized subcritical pc unit . netl conceded that barriers existed to achieving a higher average fleet efficiency level , citing the power generation industry's focus on availability ( focused on the profitability of coal - fired generating units ) , inconsistent cost pass through possibilities ( some deregulated areas have cost pass through clauses , and zero or negative incentives in many areas for reduced fuel use ) , fear of triggering new source review , and uncertainty about ghg regulations ( which could lead to very short payback periods for improvements ) .