, not as a fleet average ) . pm standards also differ by vehicle class and test cycle ( see table a - 2 for more detail ) . refiners argue that it will be difficult and costly overall to meet the standards and that some independent and / or smaller refineries will find it more difficult than others to comply . under the tier 3 fuel program , gasoline is required to contain no more than 10 parts per million ( ppm ) sulfur on an annual average basis beginning january 1 , 2017 , down from 30 ppm under the tier 2 program ( similar reductions have already been phased in for highway diesel fuels beginning in 2006 ) . the new gasoline sulfur standards aim to make emission control systems more effective for both existing and new vehicles , and thus enable more stringent vehicle emissions and fuel economy standards ( i.e. , since removing sulfur allows the vehicle's catalytic converter to work more efficiently and facilitates the development of lower cost technologies to improve fuel economy and reduce ghg emissions ) . there is an averaging , banking , and trading ( abt ) program that allows refiners and importers to spread out their investments through an early credit program and rely on ongoing nationwide averaging to meet the standard . further , there is a three - year delay for small refiners and "small volume refineries" ( refiners processing less than or equal to 75,000 barrels per calendar day ) . tier 3 also updates the federal emissions test fuel specifications to better match current in - use gasoline and look forward to future ethanol and sulfur content . the new fuel specifications apply to new vehicle certification , assembly line , and in - use testing . key changes include moving to a test fuel containing 10% ethanol by volume , lowering octane , and lowering the existing sulfur specification to be consistent with tier 3 requirements . epa anticipates that the implementation of the tier 3 vehicle and fuel standards will reduce emissions of no x , voc , pm 2.5 , and air toxics . the fuel standards alone , which would take effect in 2017 , are projected to provide an immediate 56% reduction in sulfur dioxide ( so 2 ) emissions as the ultra - low sulfur gasoline is deployed in existing vehicles and engines . further , epa projects that no x emissions will be reduced by about 260,000 tons by 2018 ( about 10% of the current emissions from on - highway vehicles ) , and by about 330,000 tons by 2030 ( about 25% of the current emissions from on - highway vehicles ) as covered vehicles become a larger percentage of the fleet . voc and co emissions are projected to be reduced by about 170,000 tons and 3.5 million tons respectively by 2030 ( 16% and 24% of the current emissions from on - highway vehicles ) . emissions of many air toxics , including benzene , 1,3-butadiene , acetaldehyde , formaldehyde , acrolein , and ethanol , are projected to be reduced in the range of 10% to 30% .