privately owned wells are not eligible . grants may cover 100% of project costs . grants for projects where a significant decline in quantity or quality of water occurred within the last two years may not exceed $500,000 and grants for emergency repairs and replacement of facilities on existing systems may not exceed $150,000 . required approvals and application and selection provision grants are only given for communities facing actual or imminent drinking water shortages . applicants must submit an application , which then enters a nationally competitive process that evaluates the severity of the actual or imminent decline . the secretary of agriculture will act on all applications within 60 days of their submission to the extent practicable . authority and appropriations assistance can be provided under the authority of section 306a of the consolidated farm and rural development act of 1972 ( 7 u.s.c . at least 50% of funds provided annually must benefit rural communities with populations less than 3,000 . the program is authorized for appropriations of $35 million annually in fy2014 through fy2018 . for fy2014 , the program was appropriated no funds . in february 2014 , it was announced that the program would receive $3 million in reprogrammed funds in fy2013 to be made available for california's rural communities ( less than 10,000 residents with a median household income less than $62,883 ) . additional funds often become available through reprogramming and may become available through supplemental appropriations . rural utilities service: household water well system grants form of assistance , condition of assistance , and eligibility requirements rus provides grants to nonprofit organizations for lending programs to refurbish household water well systems in rural areas ; loans are to be made to individuals with low or moderate incomes . eligible individuals include members of households in which members have a combined income at or below the median non - metropolitan household income for the state or territory in which the individual resides , according to the most recent united states census . the explanatory report accompanying p.l . 113-76 directed the corps to work with communities to increase water storage in winter months , without significantly increasing flood risk , to assist those facing drought conditions . the federal government is also a significant provider of drought information . congress enacted the national integrated drought information system ( nidis ) act of 2006 ( p.l . 109-430 ) , which established nidis within the national oceanic and atmospheric administration ( noaa ) to improve drought monitoring and forecasting abilities . nidis coordinates the collaborative drought monitor and other drought forecasting information , which are used by a variety of stakeholders to plan their actions and investments . the u.s. geological survey also provides drought - related water information through its hydrologic monitoring network . this information is used by communities and states to plan water withdrawals and diversions , assess needs for water - use restrictions , and anticipate or respond to drought - related environmental stresses ( eg , fish kills , saltwater intrusion into aquifers , and habitat degradation from high water temperatures ) .