there were no anomalies in this cr . no cbo cost estimate was issued while the measure was under consideration . the second cr for fy2014 was the department of defense survivor benefits continuing appropriations resolution , 2014 ( h.j.res . other anomalies affected the purpose for which funds could be spent with reference to the fy2013 appropriations acts , or the duration of the authority to spend such funds . for example , the cr provides , notwithstanding any other provision of this joint resolution , the district of columbia may expend local funds under the heading "district of columbia funds" for such programs and activities under title iv of h.r . 2786 ( 113 th congress ) , as reported by the committee on appropriations of the house of representatives , at the rate set forth under "district of columbia funds — summary of expenses" as included in the fiscal year 2014 budget request act of 2013 ( d.c. act 20-127 ) , as modified as of the date of the enactment of this joint resolution . in effect , this provision allowed for the district of columbia to spend local funds for an alternative set of purposes ( and amounts ) than what would have been provided under section 101 , as well as to spend those funds beyond the expiration date in section 106 . provisions in the cr also extended expiring statutory authorities . for example , the cr provided , the authority provided by sections 1205 and 1206 of the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2012 ( p.l . 112-81 ) shall continue in effect , notwithstanding subsection ( h ) of section 1206 , through the earlier of the date specified in section 106 ( 3 ) of this joint resolution or the date of the enactment of an act authorizing appropriations for fiscal year 2014 for military activities of the department of defense . c overage relates to the purposes for which funds are provided . according to cbo , the total amount of annualized budget authority for regular appropriations subject to the bca limits ( including projects and activities funded at the rate for operations and anomalies ) was $986.3 billion . when spending was included in the cbo estimate that was designated under section 251 ( b ) of the bbedca for oco / gwot , continuing disability reviews and redeterminations , health care fraud abuse control , or disaster relief , the total amount of annualized budget authority in the cr was $1.088 trillion . the projects and activities funded by a cr are typically specified with reference to regular and supplemental appropriations acts from the previous fiscal year . when a cr refers to one of those appropriations acts and provides funds for the projects and activities included in such an act , the cr is often referred to as "covering" that act . the duration of a cr refers to the period of time for which budget authority is provided for covered activities . in the interim , the bipartisan budget act ( p.l . 113-67 ) amended the fy2014 limits to be $520.5 billion in defense spending , and $491.8 billion in nondefense spending ( about $1.012 trillion total ) .