sixth , h.r . 4024 directs epa to survey and report on state programs and regulations developed to implement the requirements of the legislation . multiple responses followed . first , as noted above , the purpose of the program in h.r . 4024 is to protect navigable waters that states have designated for use as domestic water sources . the use of the phrase "navigable waters" in the bill derives from the basic jurisdictional reach of the cwa , which is "navigable waters" — defined in the act to mean "the waters of the united states , including the territorial seas. 4024 applies to a release from a chemical storage facility that poses a risk to "a navigable water that is designated for use as a domestic water supply. under the cwa , states adopt water quality standards , which include designated use or uses for water bodies in the states ( such as public water supply , recreation , or industrial water supply ) and criteria to support the designated uses by setting acceptable upper limits on pollutants in the waterbody . the bill is thus concerned with protecting waters designated by states for use as public water supply — typically the highest and most protective use that a state adopts — but not other waters that also could affect public health and welfare . for example , many state standards designate waters for fish consumption , or water contact recreation ( swimming and fish ) , uses that can result in public exposure to and consumption of water that could be affected by a chemical facility release just as easily as a water designated for domestic water supply . second , while both bills call for the new program to be carried out by epa or by a state that exercises primary enforcement responsibility for the underlying act , that means different things under the sdwa and cwa . 4024 would require that the new chemical storage facility program be carried out by states that have been delegated primary authority to issue cwa discharge permits . federal , state , and local emergency response , public health , and environmental officials assembled resources to sample and test for the chemical at the treatment plant and in the water distribution system . officials sought to obtain and evaluate information about toxicity and potential hazards in order to understand the impact of the chemical contamination . emergency officials delivered and made water supply available to affected citizens . as discussed above , s. 1961 would apply to states that have primary enforcement authority for public water systems under the sdwa: epa would implement programs in wyoming , the district of columbia , and most indian lands . third , only s. 1961 would direct epa to implement a program in a primacy state that refrains from establishing one . 4024 includes no similar requirement or explicit authority . fourth , the bills use different terms and definitions for "storage tank.