what would be the cost ? what are the pros , cons , and costs of pu - 238 options ? there are two sources of demand for ac capacity . is main use is to power space probes . buildings with less than this quantity are "radiological facilities. the basis for the following options is that pf - 4 is the only u.s. building able to produce pits , as it has high security , a high mar allowance , and pit production equipment . increasing its capacity to 80 ppy would entail more production equipment and more mar . thus higher capacity requires making mar and space available . rocky flats ceased pit production in 1989 . since then , the united states has made at most 11 ppy despite several failed attempts to build a facility able to produce pits at a higher rate . yet the department of defense ( dod ) requires the national nuclear security administration ( nnsa ) , the separately organized component of the department of energy ( doe ) in charge of the u.s. nuclear weapons program , to have the capacity to make 50-80 ppy by 2030 . u.s. policy is to "not develop new nuclear warheads … or provide for new military capabilities. however , weapon components age , so life extension programs ( leps ) are underway or planned for each existing weapon type in sequence . some leps will use a weapon's original pit , and other leps may use retired pits from other weapon types . still other leps may use newly manufactured pits , such as to replace original pits that have deteriorated or to incorporate new safety and security features . some experts argue that additional pit manufacturing capacity is needed to replace pits that encounter problems out of sequence or to hedge against unanticipated geopolitical developments . others reply that a capacity much less than 80 ppy would suffice . while there is debate over what capacity is needed , this report has a different focus: how to achieve a capacity of 80 ppy . this report summarizes the much more detailed crs report r43406 , u.s. nuclear weapon "pit" production options for congress , by [author name scrubbed] . pit production involves precisely shaping plutonium , a hazardous , radioactive , physically quirky metal . production also requires supporting tasks , notably analytical chemistry ( ac , defined below ) . currently , los alamos national laboratory ( lanl ) ( nm ) produces pits at its pf - 4 building , and conducts ac and other supporting tasks at its chemistry and metallurgy research ( cmr ) building . cmr , most of which was built in 1952 , does most ac for pit production , but is scheduled to halt operations around 2019 ; its work would have to be moved elsewhere . higher capacity also requires more ac , as the two increase in tandem . pf - 4 is not suitable for most ac work . thus increased pit production would also require finding one or more sites for ac .