appropriations and budget analysis . for crs products on appropriations status , jurisdictions , processes , current appropriations bills , and other budget - related resources , members and congressional staff can access the crs website http: / / www.crs.gov / iap / appropriations . details on these publications are included in this report . the site includes a status of appropriations legislation for the current year and several previous fiscal years , which include links to bills , committee and conference reports , and votes for the 12 regular , and any supplemental , appropriations bills . the congress.gov status table of appropriations is available at https: / / www.congress.gov / resources / display / content / appropriations+and+budget . both omb and the government publishing office ( gpo ) provide internet access to the main and supporting budget documents , spreadsheet files , the public budget database , and budget amendments and supplementals proposed by the president ; see http: / / www.whitehouse.gov / omb / budget and https: / / www.govinfo.gov / app / collection / budget , respectively . omb provides additional summary table information on agency budgets and key issues in the form of fact sheets , available at https: / / www.whitehouse.gov / omb / fact - sheets / . information on purchasing print copies of these documents appears below , along with a brief description of the contents of each document . this year's annual economic report of the president was submitted by the council of economic advisers and transmitted to congress in march 2019 . it presents the administration's economic policies and contains the annual report of the council of economic advisers . it also presents an overview of the nation's economic progress using text and extensive data appendices . appendix b of the economic report includes current and historical statistics on major aspects of economic activity ( pp . statistics include national income and expenditures , government finance , population , employment , wages , productivity , prices , debt measures , corporate finance , and international statistics . the report is also available from the gpo website at https: / / www.govinfo.gov / app / collection / erp / . a searchable database of the economic report of the president for each year from 1995 to the present is also available at this site . spreadsheet files from appendix b of the report can be accessed at the link above . ( gpo stock number and ordering information not yet available ) . after the president's budget documents are released , congress begins to hold hearings on agency budget requests . agencies must submit their budget justifications to the appropriations subcommittees holding the hearings . budget justifications generally contain more detailed descriptions of an agency's proposals and programs than are provided in the president's budget documents . as mandated by omb in section 22.6 of the 2006 edition of circular a - 11 and subsequent editions , executive agencies are required to post their congressional budget justification materials on the internet within two weeks of transmittal to congress . typically , administration budget requests appear along with actual numbers for the previous fiscal year .