these actions are discussed in more detail below . the obama administration released its fy2015 budget in two parts — the first on march 4 , 2014 , and the second on march 10 , 2014 . the president's budget lays out for congress the administration's views on national priorities and policy initiatives . congress has also begun its consideration of the fy2015 budget . ongoing budgetary challenges remain , which may result in congressional action . in the short term , issues related to deficit reduction and the slow economic recovery may continue to dominate the policy debate . over the long term , increased spending on entitlement programs , as currently structured , will likely contribute to rising deficits and debt , placing ever - increasing focus on how to achieve fiscal sustainability . various budget issues may feature prominently in the congressional debate in the near - term . ongoing discussions over the budget resolution , fy2015 appropriations levels , and the budget control act and related legislation may highlight the agenda . as discussed above , the bipartisan budget act of 2013 ( bba ) put into place new discretionary spending caps for fy2014 and fy2015 . as the fy2015 budget and appropriations process continues , the bba levels were intended to serve as an agreement on the amount of discretionary spending to be provided for these fiscal years . beyond that however , discretionary spending levels for fy2016 to fy2021 remain as prescribed in the bca . therefore , it is possible that congress and the president may work to change discretionary spending levels in future years . on september 19 , 2014 , the president signed a continuing resolution into law ( p.l . 113-164 ) providing appropriations for fy2015 through december 11 , 2014 . further appropriations will need to be enacted on or before that date to avoid a funding lapse . though discussions may continue over spending levels , the debate over the debt limit is not expected to resume until spring 2015 . this is a result of legislation to suspend the debt limit , which was enacted on february 15 , 2014 , and suspends the debt limit through march 15 , 2015 ( p.l . this is the third consecutive measure suspending the debt limit . the economy is still recovering from the most recent recession , which lasted from december 2007 to june 2009 . growth remains moderate , primarily due to slack in the labor and capital markets . most economists expect unemployment rates to remain elevated for the medium term . during the recession and for several subsequent years , the budget deficit grew largely as a result of government actions taken to combat the economic downturn as well as significantly lower revenue and higher spending levels directly attributable to the economic conditions . cbo's projections , however , assume steady economic growth over the next 10 years , taking into account that changes in economic conditions will average out over the period . a recession over the budget window is likely and , if it should actually occur , would temporarily worsen the deficit relative to the baseline . in other years , an expansion could result in a lower deficit relative to the baseline .