, hundredweight or cwt. ) according to the 2014 farm bill , usda shall establish and administer a dairy product donation program ( dpdp ) to ( 1 ) address low dairy operating margins , and ( 2 ) provide nutrition assistance to individuals in low - income groups . a result from the dairy policy debate that preceded the final 2014 farm bill ( see appendix ) was as follows . it is generally agreed that dairy operating margins are low when the equilibrium between milk supply and demand is out of balance with supply exceeding demand . the original proponents of the dairy margin program had argued that an additional policy feature — a supply disincentive component — should be added that would work to reduce supply and bring the milk supply - demand equation back into balance at a higher margin . opponents of this concept argued that the government should not manage supplies , but should instead work to enhance demand to rebalance the milk supply and demand . this latter argument won out in conference when conferees proposed an entirely new "demand enhancing" program — dpdp . usda outlays for the major dairy support programs have trended downward since the 1980 farm bill period ( table 3 ) . an outlook for strong dairy product prices for the next several years in the cbo may 2013 baseline accounts for the relatively small net outlay projections of $161 million over 5 years ( fy2014-fy2018 ) and $250 million over 10 years ( fy2014-fy2023 ) for the major dairy programs , assuming an extension of dairy policy as it existed under the 2008 farm bill . according to cbo , replacing current dairy policy with the new dairy programs of the 2014 farm bill will result in projected additional budgetary outlays above baseline over the 5-year ( fy2014-fy2018 ) and 10-year ( fy2014-fy2023 ) periods of $241 million and $912 million , respectively , under the agricultural act of 2014 ( p.l . in other words , the total 5-year and 10-year outlays projected by cbo under the new dairy programs are $402 million and $1.162 billion , respectively , thus continuing the downward trend in program outlays per farm bill period . because the mpp and dpdp are new programs that differ notably from previous support programs , several questions have been raised concerning their implementation and potential cost , as well as their effect on u.s. and international dairy markets and consumers . history provides some indications but solid evidence will likely only emerge with implementation . some of the more noteworthy related issues are briefly discussed here . the answers to these questions may emerge only slowly . the new mpp and dpdp programs are likely to be implemented during a period of sustained strong milk prices , moderate to weak feed costs , and sustained large margins that , if realized , would minimize the impact of the new dairy programs ( figure 3 ) . as mentioned earlier in the text ( " origins of the new dairy policy " ) , a version of the national milk producers federation's ( nmpf's ) feed the future ( ftf ) proposal was introduced in the 112 th congress as h.r .