this could lead to higher prices for the government . like the fca , it allows for the imposition of civil penalties on violators for false claims or statements , as well as an assessment on violators when the government has paid the claim . as with the fca , liability under the pfcra requires no specific intent to defraud , and thus a party may violate the fca when it acts with reckless disregard of a claim or statement's truth or falsity . however , unlike the fca , the pfcra establishes a mostly administrative process for recovery of civil remedies rather than a judicial one . the pfcra provides for agency officials to investigate and review allegations of false claims or statements and ultimately requires the approval of a certain official from doj for the case to be referred to an administrative law judge or other hearing officer . the act provides the person alleged to be liable with notice and the opportunity for a hearing on the record . the agency must prove its allegations by a preponderance of the evidence . for example , courts disagree about whether fraud sufficient for forfeiture may involve fraud in connection with the execution or performance of the contract in addition to fraud related to submission of a claim . the federal circuit appears to have recently held that the government may establish a violation of the ffca only when the alleged fraud relates to the submission of a claim , stating that the "neighboring provisions illustrate that the forfeiture statute is best understood as a companion requirement of claims procedure rather than a catch - all anti - fraud provision. courts also disagree over whether the ffca is subject to the general statute of limitations for claims over which the cofc has jurisdiction . preventing contractor fraud without deterring contractors' willingness to compete for government contracts poses a challenge for the federal government because fraud takes a variety of forms and can be difficult to detect and prosecute with limited resources . several federal statutes allow the federal government — and in some instances , private parties — to recover damages , civil penalties , or forfeitures for false or fraudulent claims for payment and other misconduct . some members of congress , courts , and others have continued to debate the proper scope of liability under these civil fraud statutes . congress may enact laws that alter the scope of these statutes and , at least with respect to the fca , has done so many times . a few recent examples of cases in which the government has sought forfeiture of a contractor's claims because of purported fraudulent conduct include allegations that the contractor submitted "several inconsistent explanations for its added costs" and knowingly claimed unrecoverable lost profits ; used amounts in purchase orders as actual costs in its claim when related invoices showed lower costs ; and asserted that it was an approved source to obtain two purchase orders . the program fraud civil remedies act ( pfcra ) provides an administrative process under which certain federal agencies may obtain civil remedies and assessments from "persons" who knowingly make false , fraudulent , or fictitious claims or statements to the agencies .