it is not liberal or conservative . it should belong to no party . it ought to become part of the american creed . expansions of the eitc have been seen as both substitutes for raising the minimum wage , as well as a means to reduce welfare dependency by making work pay . the increase in income from the eitc — and the addition of the refundable portion of the child tax credit — significantly reduces poverty among children and their families . this is shown not only in the illustrations of this report , but also based on a congressional research service ( crs ) analysis of household and family income data . in 2010 , three tax credits — the eitc , the child credit , and a temporary "make work pay" tax credit in effect in that year — reduced the child poverty rate by about 30% . however , there are a number of considerations that could be raised: ( 1 ) the federal budget cost of earnings supplements , and their potential increases ; ( 2 ) potential work incentives and disincentives ; ( 3 ) the annual nature of eitc benefits compared to ongoing income support through wages ; and ( 4 ) potential effects on the wages and returns to work for those who do not receive earnings supplements . since 1981 , the minimum wage has been raised through legislation enacted in 1990 , 1996 , and 2007 . these increases have been insufficient to compensate for price increases , with the real value of the minimum wage declining over that period . however , government earnings subsidies , particularly credits through the tax code that benefit mostly families with children , have been expanded over this period . the expansion of earnings subsidies was an important component of the "welfare reforms" of the 1990s and is credited with part of the increase in single mothers' work that was a goal of those reforms . however , this has come at a budget cost , and has not benefitted all groups , particularly those without children . the pending minimum wage legislation raises issues of whether government should intervene to address poverty among low wage workers , and if so , the best means to address it . in the past , minimum wages and earnings supplements have been viewed as alternative policies to address these issues . both types of policies would raise incomes , but both types of policies also have potential drawbacks . both types of policies also affect workers in different types of families differently . the recent literature not only discusses a weighing of the pros - and cons - of each approach , but suggest that policymakers consider how minimum wage and earnings - supplement policies interact with one another . this could also lead to a consideration of whether minimum wage and earnings supplements are alternative policies , or can be crafted as complementary policies , to address poverty . lower - income workers may not only face explicit taxes , such as fica payroll taxes , but implicit taxes as well , if they are receiving need - tested assistance .