housing assistance programs . these programs are unlike the other tarp programs in that they do not result in income - generating assets with resale value in return for the tarp funding and thus will not be a focus of this report . automobile industry support . this program initially provided loans to support general motors ( gm ) and chrysler and later included preferred share purchases from the auto financing company gmac ( since renamed ally financial ) and a loan for chrysler financial . the program ultimately resulted in majority government ownership of gm ( 60.8% ) and gmac / ally financial ( 74% ) , and minority government ownership of chrysler ( 9.9% ) . the u.s. government's ownership stake in gm was sold to gm itself and to the public between december 2010 and december 2013 . the ownership stake in chrysler was sold to fiat in may 2011 . the government's stake in gmac / ally financial was sold to the public in 2014 . no outstanding amount is left of the $79.7 billion total in disbursed funds . the automobile industry support program combined resulted in $16.6 billion in recognized losses and $7.4 billion in income received . a total of $28.4 billion has been disbursed out of $33.4 billion obligated . as of august 1 , 2018 , treasury reported obligations under tarp totaling $450.5 billion authorized , with $440.1 billion disbursed . of that total , $376.4 billion of funds paid out have been returned to the treasury and $35.3 billion have been written off or recognized as lost . $0.1 billion is still outstanding . tarp was originally authorized to outlay up to $700 billion ; however , this amount was reduced to $475 billion by congress in july 2010 . authorization to take on new commitments under tarp expired on october 3 , 2010 ; however , outlays can continue under then - existing commitments and treasury has indefinite authority to continue to hold and manage assets acquired under tarp . setting aside the housing assistance , tarp overall generated positive net income , as income received ( $48.7 billion ) exceeds recognized losses ( $35.3 billion ) and remaining outstanding funds ( $0.1 billion ) . as noted above , this outcome was not anticipated when the legislation authorizing tarp was debated . table 5 provides a breakdown of the overall tarp results . programs consisting solely of tarp funds are discussed immediately below , and those involving other agencies , such as the federal reserve and fdic , are discussed under the heading " joint interventions . beginning in december 2007 , the federal reserve introduced a number of emergency credit facilities to provide liquidity to various segments of the financial system . most , but not all , of these facilities made short - term loans backed by collateral that exceeds the value of the loan , with recourse to the borrower's other assets if the borrower defaults . these facilities were widely available to all qualified participants . ( fed assistance to individual companies is discussed separately below. ) since the fed's creation 100 years ago , the fed has always made short - term collateralized loans to banks through its discount window .