the house agreed to h.con.res . 96 on april 10 , 2014 , by a vote of 219-205 . a budget resolution , if agreed to by both the house and senate , sets enforceable budgetary parameters . among other things , h.con.res . 96 expresses the desired levels of spending for government health programs over 10 years ( fy2015-fy2024 ) , creates four health care - related reserve funds , and presents policy statements regarding assumptions about future medicare reforms and replacing the patient protection and affordable care act as amended ( aca , p.l . 96 does not include instructions for reconciliation . a budget resolution is not intended to establish details of spending or revenue policy and does not provide levels of spending for specific agencies or programs . it is not a law and is not signed by the president . rather , a budget resolution provides the framework for the consideration of subsequent legislation . while the house budget resolution suggests and assumes certain health care - related policy changes , separate legislation would need to be developed by the committees of jurisdiction , passed by congress , and signed by the president in order for such changes to be made to the affected federally funded health care programs . in general , the budget proposal , as outlined in chairman ryan's path to prosperity report and in the committee report , suggests a change in the structure of the medicare and medicaid programs ; the repeal of many ( or all ) of the provisions in the aca , including those that establish insurance exchanges ; and changes to tort law governing medical malpractice . this crs report provides a synopsis of the health care - related changes in the house fy2015 budget proposal . this summary is based on the text of the concurrent resolution , the committee report , the fy2015 path to prosperity report , and the budget committee's frequently asked question document entitled setting the record straight . crs provided similar summaries of the health care changes suggested in the fy2012 , fy2013 , and fy2014 house budget proposals . reserve funds provide the chair of the budget committee the authority to adjust the budgetary levels in the budget resolution in the future , if certain conditions are met . typically such conditions consist of legislation dealing with a particular policy being considered on the floor . once this action has taken place , the budget committee chairman submits the revised levels to his respective chamber . generally , the goal of such a reserve fund is to allow certain policies to be considered on the floor without triggering a point of order for violating levels in the budget resolution . often , but not always , reserve funds require that the underlying legislative language be deficit - neutral . typically , such deficit - neutral reserve funds allow for a committee to report specific policy legislation that violates the committee's spending allocation , as long as the excess amount is "offset" by equivalent amounts . 96 contains four reserve funds related to federal health care programs . section 301 of h.con.res .