work requirements . this approach makes the engagement in work or work activities ( such as training or job search ) a condition of eligibility for , or ongoing receipt of , benefits . a time limit alone does not necessarily directly help participants enter or re - enter the labor market , but it may provide incentive for them to do so . whether these same policies , in the absence of new income supplement policies and in a less robust economy , would have the same effect for the subpopulation of snap and housing assistance recipients who are not working and are expected to work , is an outstanding question . additional research , either as a part of any reforms or in advance of any reforms , might prove helpful in answering that question . tanf limits federally - funded cash assistance to five years . snap has a time limit for able - bodied adults without dependents ; these participants are limited to three months of snap benefits in a 36-month period if they are not working or engaged in work activities for 20-hours per week . the law governing federal housing assistance contains no time limit policy . in the case of housing assistance , which is only funded at levels sufficient to serve a portion of the caseload , a time limit or work requirement policy could allow the program to serve more families , albeit for shorter periods of time . further , it appears that the enactment of tanf policies , along with other income supplement policies and the strong economy of the 1990s , led to increased work for a population ( single mothers ) who were not previously engaged in the labor force . benefit amounts are a fraction of poverty - level income in all states . the work - related policies in tanf , snap and federal housing assistance fall into three categories: 1 . its work requirements generally apply only to those who receive "assistance" ( on - going , monthly cash aid ) . snap and housing assistance are programs designed to help individuals and households afford economic necessities ( food and housing , respectively ) . their premise is that low - income households should not have to spend more than a specified percentage of their income for their food or for their housing ( 30% in each case ) . these programs serve low - income households who do not work , as well as those who do and they serve a more heterogeneous population than tanf , including elderly and disabled individuals , singles and couples without children , as well as families with children . additionally , the income eligibility thresholds for these programs are generally higher than those for tanf . a number of factors have combined to heighten congress's interest in this topic . tanf requires state governments to engage participants in work and requires states to sanction — reduce or end benefits — families that fail to comply with work requirements . federal law requires most able - bodied adults receiving snap benefits to engage in work activities ( eg , register for work ) .