there is no perfect security. 127 , an amendment to the fy2014 dhs appropriations measure which sought to eliminate funding for the program , failed to pass a floor vote . congress also has not taken specific action to revamp the program , despite the concerns raised by gao and the dhs office of inspector general . the questions served for years as rudimentary security screening measures , primarily to target elevated - risk checked baggage , but were often criticized because their intent seemed so obvious and they were typically posed by airline ticket agents with little or no security training . nonetheless , they served to heighten passenger awareness of potential security threats and reflected the real threat posed by bombers who may try to dupe an unwitting individual into carrying a device aboard an aircraft ( see text box ) . although several other countries and some foreign airlines continue to use these or similar questions , usually as part of more in - depth interviews or questioning conducted by security screeners , tsa eliminated use of the questions in 2006 . following the december 21 , 1988 , bombing of pan am flight 103 over lockerbie , scotland , faa and the airlines developed the computer - assisted passenger pre - screening ( capps ) system , which was implemented in the late 1990s . capps resides on airline reservation systems and relies on patterns in flight reservation data to identify passengers considered to pose potential security threats . while the specific algorithms used by capps , which is now overseen by tsa , are security sensitive , it has been reported that indicators may include purchasing a one - way ticket or paying with cash . separately , faa , in coordination with the federal bureau of investigation ( fbi ) , developed a list of known terrorists who were to be denied boarding: the "no - fly" list . however , on the day of the 9 / 11 attacks only 12 names were on the list , none of them the 9 / 11 hijackers , even though other government terrorist watchlists contained tens of thousands of names . after the 9 / 11 attacks , atsa directed tsa to establish requirements for trusted traveler programs and to use available technologies to expedite screening for participating passengers , thereby allowing screening personnel to focus on those passengers who should be subject to more extensive screening . the act , along with the subsequent intelligence reform and terrorism prevention act of 2004 ( p.l . 108-458 ) , directed tsa to ensure that capps or any successor system be used to evaluate all passengers prior to boarding , and to assure adequate screening of passengers selected by such systems as well as their carry - on and checked baggage . this emphasis on risk - based screening reflected recommendations made by the department of transportation airport security rapid response team , formed in response to the 9 / 11 attacks . specifically , the team found an urgent need to establish a nationwide program for voluntarily submitting information for vetting passengers in order to expedite processing of the vast majority of travelers , thus allowing aviation security resources to be focused more effectively .