both agencies estimate that nearly all of their lands are open to these activities . fws is required to report the number of refuges open to hunting and fishing as well as the acreage available for hunting on an annual basis . how should current uses be balanced with future resources and opportunities ? should current uses , management , and protection programs be replaced with alternatives ? who decides how federal land resources should be managed , and how are the decisions made ? some stakeholders seek to maintain or enhance the federal estate , while others seek to divest the federal estate to state or private ownership . some issues , such as forest management and fire protection , involve both federal and nonfederal ( state , local , or privately owned ) land . in many cases , policy positions on federal land issues do not divide along clear party lines . instead , they may be split along the lines of rural - urban , eastern - western , and coastal - interior interests . several committees in the house and senate have jurisdiction over federal land issues . for example , issues involving the management of the national forests cross multiple committee jurisdictions , including the committee on agriculture and the committee on natural resources in the house , and the committee on agriculture , nutrition and forestry and committee on energy and natural resources in the senate . in addition , federal land issues are often addressed during consideration of annual appropriations for the flmas' programs and activities . these agencies and programs typically receive appropriations through annual interior , environment , and related agencies appropriations laws . this report introduces selected federal land issues , many of which are complex and interrelated . the discussions are broad and aim to introduce the range of issues regarding federal land management , while providing references to more detailed and specific crs products . the issues are grouped into these broad categories federal estate ownership , funding issues related to federal lands , climate policy and federal land management , energy and minerals resources , forest management , range management , recreation , other land designations , species management , and wildfire management . this report generally contains the most recent available data and estimates . federal land ownership began when the original 13 states ceded title of some of their land to the newly formed central government . the early federal policy was to dispose of federal land to generate revenue and encourage western settlement and development . however , congress began to withdraw , reserve , and protect federal land through the creation of national parks and forest reserves starting in the late 1800s . this "reservation era" laid the foundation for the current federal agencies , whose primary purpose is to manage natural resources on federal lands . the four flmas and boem were created at different times , with different missions and purposes , as discussed below . the ownership and use of federal lands has generated controversy since the late 1800s . one key area of debate is the extent of the federal estate , or , in other words , how much land the federal government should own .