projects can include both constructing and operating new facilities. among other things , cmaq funds may be used to provide fare subsides . not all streetcar lines have succeeded in stimulating property development . the city planning literature suggests that if a streetcar is to spur development , the host locality needs to at least provide supportive land use laws , such as permitting higher - density , mixed - use developments along a corridor . these changes include the creation of the tiger program in fy2009 and its continued funding through fy2014 , and reforms to the evaluation of projects in the new starts and small starts program that favor streetcars . increased funding of these programs may lead to even greater federal support for building new streetcar lines , although this would depend on the competition for funds from other types of projects . another way to increase federal support for streetcar construction would be to direct more existing funding to these types of projects . one way for congress to accomplish this would be to reinstitute the set - aside of new starts and small starts funding for small starts projects , those requesting $75 million or less in federal assistance and costing $250 million or less in total . prior to map - 21 , $200 million of the program's funding was reserved for small starts projects . this again would not guarantee the funding of streetcars because small starts grants also go to other types of projects , such as brt , but it would limit the competition for these funds . congress might also consider supporting streetcar systems by allowing the use of federal transit funds to pay for operating costs . the federal government generally prohibits the use of federal transit funds for operating expenses in urbanized areas over 200,000 . however , small bus operators in these larger urbanized areas were provided support in map - 21 . operators of small fixed - guideway systems , such as streetcars , might be afforded the same opportunity . in some circumstances , cmaq funds can be used to support the operating expenses of streetcars . this could be accomplished by reducing or eliminating funding for the tiger program , the new starts and small starts program , and flexible highway programs , or by prohibiting the use of program funds for streetcars . in the case of the new starts and small starts program it might be easier to reinstitute evaluation criteria that are unfavorable to streetcar projects . this might entail requiring the use of time savings or passenger miles , not passenger trips , as a measure of mobility benefits . as the federal highway administration ( fhwa ) notes , "projects designed to attract new riders , typically by providing new transit facilities or services , are eligible for cmaq funds .. . however , fhwa also notes that cmaq funds typically provide short - term help to launch new or expanded service . relatively recent changes in federal programs , should they be maintained , are likely to lead to greater support for streetcars in the coming years . alternatively , congress might decide to reduce or eliminate the use of federal funds for streetcar construction and operation .