what follows is a discussion of these cases . some copyright holders , particularly those who create and distribute music , television programs , and movies , have publicly expressed frustration with what they consider to be an "outdated" § 512 and would like congress to require service providers to have more responsibility in preventing infringing activity . in the 113 th congress , the house judiciary committee , subcommittee on courts , intellectual property , and the internet , held a hearing on march 13 , 2014 , specifically regarding § 512 of the copyright act , in which it heard testimony from witnesses about the degree to which the safe harbor is , or is not , operating well . house judiciary committee chairman goodlatte expressed concern about what he referred to as a "whack - a - mole game by copyright owners" who have to deal with repeated unauthorized postings of their content . he explained the issue as follows: by most accounts , good faith service providers have acted expeditiously in responding to section 512 notices by removing or disabling links to infringing content . however , copyright owners are increasingly facing a scenario that simply wasn't anticipated during the enactment of 512 – the need of copyright owners to send a voluminous amount of notices seeking removal of infringing content followed by the almost immediate reappearance of the same infringing content . at the hearing , content owners argued that § 512 , as currently written and interpreted by the courts , places too much burden on copyright owners to police infringing activity online , whereas service providers urged congress to keep the current dmca framework unchanged and instead rely upon voluntary industry agreements and private industry solutions ( such as content filtering systems ) to address any infringement problems . thus the safe harbors have been essential to the growth of the internet as an engine for innovation and free expression . limitations on liability , often called "safe harbors," shelter service providers from copyright infringement suits . the dmca's safe harbor provisions , codified at 17 u.s.c . § 512 , do not confer absolute immunity , but they do significantly limit service providers' liability based on the specific functions they perform . the safe harbors correspond to four functional operations of a service provider: ( 1 ) transitory digital network communications , ( 2 ) system caching , ( 3 ) storage of information on systems or networks at direction of users , and ( 4 ) information location tools . since the enactment of the dmca , many online service providers have been the target of infringement lawsuits by large companies that own copyrighted content , particularly recorded music , television shows , and motion pictures . these lawsuits typically accuse the service provider of direct , vicarious , and contributory copyright infringement , as well as inducement of infringement . the cases often begin by the service provider asserting a dmca safe harbor as an affirmative defense that limits its infringement liability ; as an affirmative defense , the service provider has the burden of establishing that it meets the safe harbor's eligibility requirements . if this burden is satisfied , courts often find for the defendant on summary judgment .