when they do , they are unlikely to be challenged legally in a wto dispute . many u.s. agricultural and food organizations contend the precautionary principle undermines "sound science" and results in "unjustifiable restrictions" on u.s. exports . the stated policy of the u.s. chamber of commerce also is to support a "science - based approach to risk management , where risk is assessed based on scientifically sound and technically rigorous standards," and "oppose the domestic and international adoption of the precautionary principle as a basis for regulatory decision making. foreign countries also have objected to various u.s. trade measures . a 2005 study by the united nations university recognizes that despite "fundamental differences in perception as to the appropriate role of science and technology in society , ... there must be a mutually acceptable , rational basis for concern that is based on available information when invoking precaution. this report describes formal challenges involving sps / tbt that the united states has brought against some u.s. trading partners , which have resulted in trade disputes that have been , or continue to be , reviewed by the wto . not all u.s. trade concerns regarding sps / tbt measures rise to the level of a formal wto trade dispute . a full summary of ongoing sps / tbt trade concerns based on the most recent annual compilation by the office of the u.s. trade representative ( ustr ) is provided in appendix a at the end of this report . the sps agreement and the tbt agreement both encourage the international harmonization of food standards . specifically , the sps agreement recognizes three international standard setting organizations for "facilitating international trade and protecting public health. these include the codex alimentarius commission ( codex ) ; the world organisation for animal health ( oie ) ; and the international plant protection convention ( ippc ) . these organizations are often referred to as the "three sister" organizations of the wto . this can happen when , for example , a wto dispute settlement panel questions the scientific underpinnings of a u.s. safeguard , and / or the united states agrees to an effectively lower standard to bring negotiations with another country to a successful conclusion . others counter that the current trade agreements explicitly recognize the right of individual nations , as well as states and localities , to enact stronger protections than international guidelines if they believe they are appropriate . the united states is especially well - positioned against challenges , because its health and safety policies are scientifically defensible , u.s. officials have argued . many believe that the sps and tbt agreements provide the foundation for developing transparent , science - based trade guidelines , as well as an effective framework for resolving disputes in these areas . others have argued that ongoing free trade agreements , such as the tpp and ttip , should revisit aspects of these agreements more closely . the effectiveness and flexibility of the sps and tbt rules also continues to be tested by rapidly emerging changes in food production technology , such as biotechnology and nanotechnology , which were not imminent concerns when the agreements were finalized in 1994 .