syria does not appear to be producing fissile material . the program must produce an effective and reliable means of delivering a nuclear weapon , such as a ballistic missile . both iran and north korea have medium - range ballistic missiles , which have been assessed as capable of delivering a nuclear warhead should such a warhead capability be developed and deployed . moreover , both countries have demonstrated the capability to launch an object into space orbit , but neither country currently has an intercontinental ballistic missile ( icbm ) capability . syria possesses only short - range ballistic missiles ( srbms ) . the program must produce a nuclear warhead that can be delivered to its intended target , especially at long range . the ic does not assess that any of the three countries discussed in this report has produced such a warhead , although north korea has conducted several nuclear tests . according to official sources , iran , north korea , and syria have engaged in various forms of clandestine nuclear cooperation possibly related to nuclear weapons . north korea and iran obtained designs and materials related to uranium enrichment from a clandestine procurement network run by former pakistani nuclear official abdul qadeer khan . the cia expressed concern in 2004 that the network could also have transferred nuclear "expertise or technology" to syria , but there appears to be no public official evidence that this potential transfer is still a matter of concern . syrian president bashar al asad stated in a 2007 newspaper interview that his government had been approached by the khan network but had conducted no transactions with it . congress has passed legislation providing for sanctions on countries whose entities assist iran , north korea , and syria to obtain weapons of mass destruction ( wmd ) and missile delivery systems . for example , the iran , north korea and syria nonproliferation act ( inksna , p.l . 106-178 ) imposes penalties on countries whose companies assist the efforts of iran , north korea , and syria to acquire wmd and missile delivery systems . each of these elements must work together to create an operational and effective system . the program must produce fissile material in sufficient quantity and quality for a nuclear device . plutonium and weapons - grade highly enriched uranium ( heu ) are the two types of fissile material used in nuclear weapons . plutonium is obtained by separating it from spent nuclear reactor fuel — a procedure called "reprocessing. weapons - grade heu is produced by enriching uranium — a process that increases the concentration of uranium - 235 ( the relevant fissile isotope ) . both iran and north korea are in various stages of pursuing and producing different kinds of nuclear material . congress originally targeted only iran's proliferation activities , but amended the law in 2005 to address syria ( p.l . 109-112 , the iran nonproliferation amendments act ) . in 2006 , congress added north korea ( p.l . inksna requires a biannual report from the president to congress on any transfers of controlled items from any foreign person to iran , north korea , or syria .