detainers were then issued for some of these aliens . dhs emphasized that it prioritized "criminal aliens," those who posed a threat to public safety , and repeat immigration violators for removal through secure communities , and the former director of ice further instructed that , among "criminal aliens," the focus was to be upon those convicted of "aggravated felonies," as defined in the ina ; those convicted of other felonies ; and those convicted of three or more misdemeanors . however , there were reports of detainers issued for persons who were not convicted of any offense , or whose sole offense was a misdemeanor . 104-208 , div . some states and localities have sought to restrict police cooperation with federal immigration authorities' efforts to apprehend removable aliens . other measures have gone further , and attempted to shield certain aliens from detection by federal authorities . still other measures have sought to ensure that state convictions for certain criminal offenses do not carry immigration consequences for a convicted alien . the following sections discuss some of the notable state and local restrictions upon law enforcement activity in the field of immigration enforcement , including the relationship between these restrictions and current federal law . a number of states and municipalities have adopted formal or informal policies which prohibit or substantially restrict police cooperation with federal immigration enforcement efforts . entities that have adopted such policies are sometimes referred to as "sanctuary" jurisdictions , though there is not necessarily a consensus as to the meaning of this term . in some instances , jurisdictions have self - identified as "sanctuary" sites . in other cases , there might be disagreement regarding the accuracy of such a designation , particularly if state or local law enforcement cooperates with federal immigration authorities in some areas but not others . any reference by this report to a policy of a particular jurisdiction is intended only to provide an illustrative example of the type of measure occasionally referenced in discussions of "sanctuary" policies . these references should not be taken to indicate crs is of the view that a particular jurisdiction is a "sanctuary" for unlawfully present aliens . while state or local measures limiting police participation in immigration enforcement existed beforehand , many of the recent "sanctuary" - type initiatives trace their lineage back to actions by u.s. churches that provided refuge to unauthorized central american aliens fleeing civil unrest in the 1980s . a number of states and municipalities issued declarations in support of these churches' actions . others went further and enacted more substantive measures intended to limit police involvement in federal immigration enforcement activities . these have included , among other things , restricting state and local police from arresting persons for immigration violations ; limiting the sharing of immigration - related information with federal authorities , and barring police from questioning a person about his or her immigration status . the city of new york sought to appeal the decision to the supreme court , but its petition for certiorari was denied .