appendix a . recent funding by program table a - 1 shows the funding amounts appropriated ( or obligated ) based on the part of the social security act in which they are authorized ( title iv - b or title iv - e ) or their location outside of the social security act ( other programs ) . this mirrors the broad categories included in table 1 . for more detail on funding for programs for which the amount shown below is a total of multiple activities or program components , see table 3 and table 4 ( promoting safe and stable families program ) ; table 7 ( title iv - e foster care , adoption assistance , and kinship guardianship assistance ) ; table 9 ( chafee foster care independence program , including education and training vouchers ) ; table 11 ( child abuse prevention and treatment act , or capta , including state grants , discretionary activities , and community - based grants ) ; and table 13 ( victims of child abuse act , or vcaa , including children's advocacy centers , court - appointed special advocates , and child abuse training for judicial personnel ) . appendix b . child welfare programs by type of funding authority and sequestration status the budget control act of 2011 ( bca , p.l . 112-25 ) included a combination of measures affecting discretionary and mandatory spending that are designed to reduce the federal deficit by a certain amount . with regard to discretionary spending , the bca established certain spending caps for fy2012-fy2021 . the caps provide limits on the total dollar amount of federal spending congress may appropriate on a discretionary basis . if those caps are exceeded , automatic spending cuts called sequestration must be applied . the bca has been amended several times . the center is now closed . survey data from the mid - 2000s suggest that the number of infants who remain in hospital care beyond their date of medical discharge , as well as the number of infants in hospitals who are not yet medically cleared to leave the hospital but who are considered unlikely to do so with their biological parent ( s ) , has declined . in 2006 , the combined national estimate of such infants was a little less than 12,900 . this was substantially fewer than the estimates of more than 30,600 such infants in 1998 , and 21,600 in 1991 . however , the 2006 survey found that while these infants used to be concentrated in urban area hospitals , they were now more widely dispersed across the nation , appearing in hospitals serving suburban and rural counties as well as those in urban areas . the 2006 survey concluded that positive trends it identified , including a decline in the number of infants "boarded" in the hospital and reduced lengths of stay for those who did stay beyond their medical need to do so , might be attributable to hospitals and child welfare agencies becoming more responsive to needs of these infants , including through better interagency coordination . several legislative efforts were cited as possible contributors .