the legislative process has the potential to be complicated . this overview explains only the most common ways legislation is considered on the house floor , and it describes the types of propositions most likely to be voted on and the opportunities for legislative debate most frequently available to and used by members . for a more comprehensive introduction to the fundamental principles and procedures that apply in multiple situations on the house floor , see crs report 95-563 , the legislative process on the house floor: an introduction . references to other more comprehensive crs reports on specific subjects are provided in footnotes throughout this overview . although the house has a number of possible procedures from which to choose , the most frequently used method to approve bills and resolutions in the house is known as "suspension," short for suspension of the rules . this method has evolved as a way for measures that enjoy widespread support to be quickly processed by the house . the decision as to what measures will be taken up under this procedure normally begins in the committee with jurisdiction over the legislation . if there is bipartisan agreement in the committee that a measure is a good candidate for suspension , committee leaders make that recommendation to party leaders . the speaker has authority under house rules to determine which measures will be considered under suspension of the rules , and when . members are notified of measures to be considered by suspension procedures through daily and weekly leadership announcements and whip notices . especially for measures on which the consideration of amendments may be desired or that are unlikely to garner the necessary two - thirds support to pass under suspension , the house relies on "special rules. they are "special" in that they are an adaptation of house rules for consideration of particular measures . a special rule is a procedural proposal reported by the committee on rules ( in the form of a house resolution ) that sets the terms for debating and amending a measure . the committee on rules , which is made up of nine majority party members and four minority party members , drafts and reports these resolutions , although they have effect only if agreed to by a majority of house members voting . under this method of proceeding , the house first approves a special rule and then it considers a bill under the terms of that rule . this is the second most common method , after suspension of the rules , used to consider bills . special rules allow the house to customize procedures for considering each bill . the versatility of special rules is their strength , but it is still possible to generalize about their contents . first , it is common for the special rule to propose that a text other than the text of a bill as introduced be the basis for house consideration . for example , a special rule might state that a complete substitute amendment recommended by the committee with jurisdiction over the bill be considered the base text subject to further amendment .