appendix a . brief history of forestry provisions in previous farm bills past farm bills also have included forestry provisions , primarily addressing the forestry assistance programs . the first to contain a separate forestry title was the 1990 farm bill ( the food , agriculture , conservation , and trade act of 1990 ) , which: created four new forestry assistance programs ; revised two existing forestry assistance programs ; amended two forestry assistance programs ; revised the administrative provisions for forestry assistance ; created five special forestry research programs ; amended three existing forestry research programs ; authorized a private , nonprofit tree planting foundation ; and created a new fs branch: international forestry . the 1996 farm bill ( the federal agriculture improvement and reform act of 1996 ) included only a few forestry provisions — extending the authorization for the one expiring assistance program and adding a new funding option within an existing program . the 2002 farm bill ( the farm security and rural investment act of 2002 ) contained a separate forestry title . the conference could not resolve many of the differences between the house - and senate - passed forestry provisions , and thus the conference report contained fewer provisions than either bill . ( some of the disputed provisions were enacted one year later in hfra. ) the 2008 farm bill ( the food , conservation , and energy act of 2008 ) included a forestry title and several forestry provisions in other titles . the forestry title: established national priorities for private forest management and assistance ; required statewide forest assessments and strategies for assistance ; provided for competitive funding for certain programs ; created new programs for open space conservation and for emergency reforestation ; established a fs tribal relations program for cultural and heritage cooperation and a competitive grants program for hispanic - serving institutions ; reauthorized four existing programs , but did not reauthorize several other programs , including the forest land enhancement program ; amended the lacey act amendments to prohibit imports of illegally logged wood products ; and modified three national forest boundaries and certain timber contract provisions . in addition , the 2008 farm bill conservation title revised the definition of conservation actions to include forestry activities for several conservation programs . the statute required special reporting on softwood lumber imports , to assure implementation of the 2006 u.s. - canada softwood lumber agreement . three provisions altered tax treatments for forests and landowners . finally , the energy title of the 2008 farm bill included two new woody biomass energy programs . appendix b . enacted forestry provisions of the 2014 farm bill forestry titl . both laws were originally referred to and reported by the agriculture committees . for nearly three years , congress considered an omnibus farm bill — which included a forestry title — to establish the direction of agriculture and food policy for the next several years . many provisions of the food , conservation , and energy act of 2008 ( the 2008 farm bill ) expired in fy2012 , but were extended for an additional year in the american taxpayer relief act of 2012 .