yes . congress has passed , and the president has enacted , restrictions on presidential powers to close military installations using the annual appropriation and defense authorization bills . yes , some are . principal among them are 10 u.s.c . ยง2687 ( base closures and realignments ) , enacted in 1977 , and 10 u.s.c . 993 ( notification of permanent reduction of sizable numbers of members of the armed forces ) , enacted in 2011 . these sections impose a "notify , evaluate , and wait" process on the secretary of defense and the secretaries of the military departments before they may take actions to close or realign any military installation that meets certain criteria . ยง2687 , for military installations at which at least 300 civilian personnel are authorized to be employed , the secretary of defense or a secretary of a military department may take no action to carry out a closure until he submits to the committees on armed services of the house and senate 1. notification of the closure as part of the department's annual request for appropriations ; 2. an evaluation of the fiscal , local economic , budgetary , environmental , strategic , and operational consequences of the closure ; 3. the criteria used to consider and recommend the military installation for closure ; and 4. a period of 30 legislative days or 60 calendar days , whichever is longer , expires following the day on which the notice and evaluation is submitted to the committees . the statute defines a realignment as any action that both reduces and relocates functions and civilian personnel positions . exempted from the definition of a realignment is a reduction in force resulting from workload adjustments , reduced personnel or funding levels , skill imbalances , or other similar causes . for realignments at installations of at least 300 authorized civilian positions , it imposes the same restrictions on the secretaries as a closure if the realignment involves a reduction by more than 1,000 , or by more than 50% , in the number of civilian personnel authorized to be employed there . the section also bans the preparation of any facility at another military installation intended to accept employees relocated by the closure or realignment until the four conditions listed above have been fulfilled . while section 2687 is predicated on the predicted reduction of civilian employees at an installation , 10 u.s.c . ยง993 lays out a similar , though slightly different , process where a reduction in uniformed military personnel is involved . section 993 prevents the secretaries concerned from taking any irrevocable action to implement a reduction of more than 1,000 members of the armed forces at an installation until they 1. notify the committees on armed services of the reduction ( there is no restriction on when such notification may be given ) ; 2. justify the reduction and evaluate its local strategic and operational impact ; 3. wait for a period of 21 days after the notification is submitted ( 14 days if submitted in electronic format ) . both statutes state that they do not apply in cases where the actions are being taken for reasons of national security or a military emergenc .