first , p.l . 85-804 allows the president to authorize an agency that acts in connection with the national defense to enter , amend , modify , or make advance payments on contracts without regard to other provisions of law relating to the making , performance , amendment , or modification of contracts , including the anti - deficiency act , whenever he believes that such agency action would facilitate the national defense . the government's increased reliance on contractors in recent years , particularly in the military arena , has led to an increased number of tort suits against contractors . the government will likely continue its widespread use of contractors well into the future , which will include the use of contractors in military operations . as such , tort litigation against contractors will likely continue . to date , there do not appear to have been any congressional attempts to address the defenses that contractors have relied upon , successfully and unsuccessfully , to defend against tort liability . there further do not appear to have been any attempts by congress to otherwise clarify when contractors may escape liability for torts that occur during government contract performance . negligence indicates culpable carelessness or unintentional injury . to successfully establish a claim for negligence , a plaintiff must generally prove , by a preponderance of the evidence , that ( 1 ) the defendant owed the plaintiff a legal duty ; ( 2 ) the defendant breached this duty , which generally requires the plaintiff to show that the defendant failed to exercise the care that a reasonably prudent person would have exercised in a similar situation ; ( 3 ) the defendant's action or failure to act actually or proximately caused the plaintiff's injuries ; and ( 4 ) the plaintiff suffered harm as a result of the defendant's action or inaction . many tort claims against contractors allege negligence on the part of contractor employees in either performing their obligations under a service contract or producing goods pursuant to a contract for goods , though some also allege intentional torts . furthermore , under the theory of respondeat superior , contractors may be held liable for the wrongful acts of their employees that are committed within the scope of employment . contractors often raise the ftca , the political question doctrine , and / or derivative immunities when defending against tort claims , particularly claims arising from their involvement in military operations . these defenses often implicate fundamental legal issues , such as the interaction of federal and state law , separation of powers and which branches of government are best equipped to consider particular types of questions , and protection of the federal government's monetary interests . unlike the defenses discussed previously in this report , indemnification does not allow a contractor to avoid tort liability . instead , through an indemnity agreement , one party agrees to compensate another for a loss that the other party incurs , often to a third party . in the context of tort suits against contractors , when the government has agreed to indemnify a contractor , the government may be obligated to compensate the contractor for certain damages paid to third parties .