appendix a . history of dividend taxation when first established in 1909 as part of the payne - aldrich tariff act the modern corporate income tax included dividends paid to shareholders in the definition of net income . hence , dividend payments to shareholders were not deductible . the tax on corporations was set at 1% of net income over $5,000 . the modern individual income tax came into being in 1913 as section ii of the underwood - simmons tariff act . are holders of corporate stock treated unfairly compared to holders of corporate bonds or other investments ? tax rates on dividends were reduced in 2003 with the goal of reducing economic distortions , which congress believed would promote economic growth . there are two distortions of note . equity - financed investments are generally taxed more heavily than debt - financed investments , since interest payments on debt are deductible . equity - financed corporate investments are also generally taxed more heavily than non - corporate investments . recall that non - corporate investments are subject to a single layer of taxation . differentials in tax burdens create distortions that favor non - corporate investment over corporate investment and debt - financed investment over equity - financed investment . the department of the treasury's 1992 study on tax integration found that full integration , and the associated reduction in economic distortions , could result in substantial efficiency gains . at the time of the treasury study , however , dividends were taxed as ordinary income at the individual level . given that dividends are currently taxed at a reduced rate , there is less potential for efficiency gains to be had through integration . potential efficiency gains are also complicated by issues of how revenue is to be replaced if the tax is repealed . assuming a fixed level of revenue , the overall efficiency effects depend on how the distortions arising from capital compare to other distortions that may be larger under different tax systems . while eliminating "double taxation" of dividends may enhance economic efficiency , promoting economic efficiency does not necessarily lead to economic growth . economic growth is the result of increased savings , investment , or labor supply . while many economists believe that taxes on dividends discourage investment and distort the allocation of capital in the economy , there is an alternative view in which changes in dividend tax policy do not affect investment incentives . dividend tax policy may be designed to balance various economic , equity , and revenue objectives . various policy options , including dividend relief as provided in the current system , several forms of integration , and increasing taxes on dividends , are briefly discussed in the following sections . under the current system , capital used in the corporate sector is taxed twice — once at the corporate level and again at the individual level . debt - financing also tends to be tax - favored , as interest payments are deductible . integrating the corporate and individual income tax systems would increase economic efficiency , removing existing distortions between debt versus equity financing and corporate versus non - corporate businesses . there are various policy options for achieving integration , in some form .