so we are detailing all of that . we are in agreement with our partners in the p5+1 and the eu [european union] and with iran that any sanctions relief , should we get to a comprehensive agreement , will be phased in and will be in response to actions that iran takes . that lifting some sanctions would require congressional action raises the issue of congressional responses to any comprehensive deal that is reached . a letter to president obama , signed by 82 senators , sets out parameters for what the signers would consider an "acceptable" comprehensive settlement , and states that the administration will need congressional action to enact "implementing legislation to provide longer - term sanctions relief beyond existing waiver authorities — either through suspension , repeal or amendment of statutory sanctions. the letter , and similar statements by members of congress , suggests that there is potential for congress to demand requirements of iran in any comprehensive settlement beyond those sought by the administration . congress could also refuse outright to enact legislation to lift sanctions , or could lift only certain sanctions and leave in place others . for example , some members might argue that sanctions enacted primarily to address iran's support of terrorist organizations or its human rights practices be left in place , whether or not the administration requests termination . there are potential consequences should congress not lift nuclear - related sanctions after a comprehensive deal . it is possible that some p5+1 countries , such as russia and china , could accuse the united states of failing to fulfill promises to iran that were to form a key part of a comprehensive nuclear settlement . some speculate that russia and china might refuse , in the future , to cooperate with u.s. efforts to use multilateral sanctions to address the actions of countries of concern . that outcome could , in turn , reduce the utility of multinational sanctions generally , relating not only to iran but also to other global hotspots . if congress declines to lift sanctions , the administration might decide to offer iran , as an alternative fulfillment of the u.s. commitment , the indefinite suspension of sanctions . most of the iran sanctions laws provide waiver and other authorities that would avoid applying sanctions to iran , even if not terminating them outright . it is not clear whether iran would accept that alternative or would instead hold out for termination or repeal . a further consideration is whether u.s. sanctions that prohibit american companies from doing business with iran would be lifted if there were a comprehensive settlement . the administration might opt to keep in place the ban on u.s. trade with iran as a means of exerting some leverage over iran in any potential discussions about restoring u.s. - iran relations . the administration has not indicated that any sanctions that apply to u.s. - iran commerce would be lifted as part of a comprehensive nuclear deal with iran . however , it is likely that american firms would argue that they should be held to the same standards as are companies in partner countries so as not to be deprived of significant business opportunities .