the second ( i.e. , 2015 ) open enrollment period that closed on february 15 , 2015 , experienced far fewer administrative and technical problems . other administrative actions largely focused on the aca's tax provisions . the 2014 tax filing season ( deadline april 15 , 2015 ) was the first one in which individuals were required to indicate on their tax return whether they had health insurance coverage that meets the aca's standards . those without coverage risked being penalized unless they could claim an exemption . in addition , everyone who enrolled in coverage for 2014 through an exchange and received advance payments of the premium tax credit had to file a federal tax return in which they reconciled those payments with the actual tax credit to which they were entitled . in compiling the table , crs made decisions about which administrative actions to include , and which ones to leave out . generally , crs included the more significant actions that had been the subject of debate among health policy analysts and , in many instances , the target of criticism by opponents of the aca . it is important to keep in mind that the table is not — nor was it intended to be — a comprehensive list of aca - related administrative actions . these actions were not the result of a single policy decision . each entry includes a brief summary of the action and some accompanying explanatory material and comments to help provide additional context . where available , links are provided to relevant regulatory and guidance documents online . readers are encouraged to review these documents for more details about each action , including the motivation and legal authority for taking it . a companion crs report summarizes all the legislative actions taken by the 112 th , 113 th , and 114 th congresses to repeal , defund , delay , or otherwise amend the aca . perhaps the most controversial administrative action taken by the administration was its decision to delay enforcement of the aca's "employer mandate. on july 9 , 2013 , the irs announced that it would not take any enforcement action against employers who fail to comply with the law's employer mandate until the beginning of 2015 ( see table 1 ) . this aca provision , which took effect on january 1 , 2014 , requires employers with 50 or more full - time equivalent employees ( ftes ) to offer their full - time workers health coverage that meets certain standards of affordability and minimum value . those employers who do not provide such coverage risk having to pay a penalty if one or more of their employees obtain subsidized coverage through an exchange . the irs subsequently announced that employers with at least 50 but fewer than 100 ftes will have an additional year to comply with the employer mandate ( see table 1 ) . according to the administration , these actions were taken after it was concluded that the aca's employer mandate could not be enforced until the related requirement that employers report the coverage they offer to their employees had been fully implemented .