the provisions addressing retransmission consent are administered by the fcc . while the communications act has provisions related to satellite operators' carriage of distant television signals , it does not have similar provisions for cable operators . the senate committee on the judiciary and the house committee on the judiciary oversee the copyright act provisions in title 17 . through a series of laws , beginning with the 1988 satellite home viewer act ( shva ; p.l . 100-667 ) and most recently amended by the 2014 satellite television extension and localism act reauthorization act ( 2014 stela reauthorization act ; p.l . 113-200 ) , congress created new sections or modified existing sections of the copyright act and the communications act to regulate the satellite retransmission of broadcast television and to encourage competition between satellite and cable operators ( table 2 ) . in order to retransmit a broadcaster's signals to subscribers , a satellite operator , with certain exceptions , must have the legal rights to retransmit the copyrighted content contained in the broadcast , and must obtain the consent of the broadcaster for retransmission of the broadcast signal . the law specifies distinct copyright license and retransmission requirements for signals transmitted by various categories of broadcast television stations , including local commercial and noncommercial stations , distant network - affiliated and noncommercial stations , non - network stations , nationally distributed superstations , and "significantly viewed" stations . the law governing satellite transmission makes a fundamental distinction between local signals and distant signals . local signals are transmitted over the air by local broadcasters to households within the local market of the subscriber ( "local - into - local service" ) . the fcc uses designated market areas ( dmas ) constructed by the nielsen company to define local television markets for the purposes of retransmission consent . distant signals are broadcast signals imported by the dbs operator from outside a subscriber's local area . a satellite operator is allowed , but not required , to retransmit the signals of up to two distant stations affiliated with a network ( abc , cbs , fox , nbc , or pbs ) , to that subset of subscribing households that are deemed "unserved" with respect to that network ; the signals of significantly viewed stations to subscribers located in the markets for which those stations qualify as significantly viewed ; and the signals of superstations and other independent stations to all of its subscribers . nielsen has constructed 210 dmas by assigning each county in the united states to a specific dma , based on the predominance of viewing of broadcast television stations licensed to operate in a given standard metropolitan statistical area . some households that subscribe to satellite television service in rural or remote areas may not be able to receive over - the - air local broadcast signals and therefore rely on dbs to watch local broadcast channels . dbs operators are allowed , but not required , to provide local - into - local service . if they choose to provide any local signal they must also carry the signals of all other full - power television broadcast stations located within the local area that request carriage .