appendix a . supplemental figures appendix b . acronym . improper payments are composed of both overpayments and underpayments . an overpayment is a payment that is higher than it should have been ; an underpayment is a payment that is lower than it should have been . improper payments stem from errors and other instances of waste , fraud , and abuse ( not all improper payments are due to fraud ) . according to gao , "the risk of improper payments increases in programs with … complex criteria for computing payments. over the years , gao and ssa's oig have both highlighted complexity as a factor in improper payments associated with the wc / pdb offset . for example , in 2011 , ssa's oig estimated that 12% of the wc offset cases it examined had payment errors , with about half stemming from overpayments and the other half from underpayments . the oig noted that the overpayments linked to the wc offset were due to a variety of factors , including verification errors , inaccurate wc payment data , and incorrect calculations . under any of the proposals discussed in this report , improper payments could occur should ssa fail to verify receipt of ui for ssdi applicants and beneficiaries . overpayments would occur when ssa improperly pays ssdi benefits to individuals in receipt of ui ; underpayments would occur when individuals who are mistakenly deemed to be in receipt of ui by ssa are denied their full ssdi benefits . in fy2013 , verification and local administration errors , which include errors related to non - verification of other income , accounted for 26% of the improper payments in the social security ( oasdi ) program . the dollar - for - dollar offset proposal would further complicate administrating ssdi because the offset would require ssa to not only verify receipt of ui but also determine the amount of ui payments for each month of concurrent entitlement . any change in a disabled - worker beneficiary's ui payments would require ssa to re - compute the individual's monthly ssdi benefit . problems with the timeliness or reliability of ui payment data or a miscalculation of the ssdi benefit amount could result in underpayments or overpayments . administrative and documentation errors , which include errors related to incorrect computations , accounted for 66% of the improper payments in the social security program in fy2013 . ssa's inability to verify wc payment data independently contributes to its problems in administering the wc offset . according to gao , "ssa relies heavily on individuals to report their wc benefits and this has caused significant payment errors in the di program. although ssa has undertaken several initiatives over the years to obtain wc / pdb data from states , local governments , and private insurers , such efforts have resulted in limited access to the necessary data . to limit improper payments related to the implementation of the proposals discussed in this report , ssa would need to develop a method of reliably and accurately verifying the state ui payment information of ssdi applicants and beneficiaries .