the government may appeal a denial of an application to the fisa court of review . in light of the sensitive national security concerns respecting its docket , the fisa courts operate largely in secret and in a non - adversarial fashion . court sessions are conducted in secret , are generally held ex parte with the government as the only party presenting arguments to the court , and the court's opinions are rarely released . as noted by the fisc , whereas "[o]ther courts operate primarily in public , with secrecy the exception[,] the fisc operates primarily in secret , with public access the exception. however , recipients of production orders under section 215 of the usa patriot act and directives under section 702 of fisa may challenge the legality of orders by petitioning the court . in the event of a contested hearing , fisa permits in camera review — private review by a court without the challenging party receiving access — of classified information upon motion by the government . the executive branch classifies most filings made to the fisc as secret or top secret before they are sent to the court , and the fisc's opinions and orders in the possession of the executive branch are similarly classified . the executive branch can choose to declassify portions of opinions , or entire opinions and release them to the public . it has done so a number of times since the disclosure of the nsa data collection programs . some critics of the fisa process have noted the infrequency of fisc rejections of the government's surveillance requests and suggested that the lack of an adversarial process prevents the court from adequately scrutinizing the government's position . accordingly , a number of legislative proposals seek to allow another attorney to challenge the government's fisa requests in order to protect civil liberty interests . these proposals have varied according to nomenclature , the structural placement of a potential advocate , and the appointing authority . nonetheless , most proposals embody three unifying themes . first , an advocate would oppose the government's request for fisa orders on behalf of the privacy and civil liberties interests of the public . second , an advocate would take on a robust role in fisa court proceedings . while the various proposals differ at the margins , public advocate measures generally envision the advocate having a range of responsibilities , such as being able to intervene in ongoing cases , brief the fisc on relevant matters , conduct some forms of discovery , file motions seeking discrete forms of relief from the court , move the court to reconsider past orders , or even appeal an adverse ruling . finally , proposals envision giving the advocate a measure of independence from the president so as to enjoy unfettered discretion to oppose the government's applications . aside from altering the procedures of the fisa courts , some have suggested modifying how its judges are chosen . currently , the fisc is composed of 11 district court judges from at least seven of the regional judicial circuits . while judges of traditional article iii courts are "appointed" by the president with senate confirmation , fisa court judges are "designated" to their position by the chief justice .