in gross weight on rail . however , the associate administrator for safety , federal railroad administration ( fra ) can approve a non - pressure tank car loaded up to 286,000 lbs . in gross weight on rail , if it does not contain "poisonous - by - inhalation" material , and operates under controlled interchange conditions agreed to by participating railroads . a tank car becomes overloaded when it exceeds either the maximum gross weight on rail or maximum filling limit . an overloaded rail car can cause its axles to break , or cause the car to exceed the maximum time a car can take to achieve maximum braking . a crude oil shipper has two options in meeting the weight agreement with the rail carrier: provide either a weight from a certified scale , or a weight estimate based on calculations . to calculate the weight limit , the shipper must consider the "light weight" of the tank car ( the unloaded or tare weight ) and consider the density ( api gravity ) of the crude oil to be loaded . for illustrative purposes , figure 2 shows how increasingly heavier api gravity reduces the volume of crude oil that can be loaded into a tank car in order to not exceed the gross rail weight limit . higher api gravity corresponds with lighter density . light crude oils generally exceed 38" api , intermediate crudes fall in the range of 22 to 38" api gravity , and heavy crudes fall below 22" api gravity . bakken crude ranges from 39.7 to 42.2 " api gravity . light sweet crude has less than 0.5% sulfur . crude oil futures contracts traded on the new york mercantile exchange ( nymex ) are based on west texas intermediate ( wti ) , a particular grade of light sweet crude oil . wti ranges from 37 to 42" api gravity , has sulfur less than 0.42% by weight , and tan of 0.28 mgkoh / g . bakken is comparable to wti in terms of "api gravity and sulfur ( see table 1 ) . its sulfur content is less than 0.25% by weight , making it a sweet crude oil . its tan is less than 0.1 mgkoh / g , making it relatively non - corrosive and comparable to wti . figure 1 displays various crude oils produced in the united states by api gravity , and sulfur . bakken ( north dakota light sweet ) represents the lighter range of crude oil currently produced in the united states , but by no means the lightest . that title belongs to texas eagle ford crude oil . as shown in table 2 , bakken's api gravity is slightly higher than wti , 2% higher in condensates ( light end hydrocarbons ) , but lower than wti's upper rvp limit ( leaving comparative volatilities open to interpretation ) . however , bakken does fall within the upper and lower range of eagle ford rvp , which is the lightest crude oil produced in the united states . dot - 111 type tanks cars are "non - pressure" tank cars designed to carry a wide range of products including hazardous and non - hazardous materials .