( see t extbox . ) the philippines has experienced steady economic growth during the past decade , averaging annual growth rates of about 5% . the country has a robust civil society and a lively press . however , the state often has been unable to stand above or control competing interests . patterns of patronage and cronyism ; entrenched socioeconomic elites ; the influence of local clans and power holders ; the lack of civilian control over the security forces ; muslim and communist insurgencies ; and a weak judicial system have allowed corruption to thrive , undermined governmental effectiveness , and led to human rights abuses . in 2013 , the economist intelligence unit ( eiu ) ranked the philippines 69 th out of 167 countries in terms of its level of democracy ( up from 75 th in 2012 ) , placing it in the "flawed democracy" category , along with other asian countries such as indonesia , thailand , and malaysia . although the eiu ranked the philippines high on the electoral process and civil liberties , the country received a relatively low score on political culture . the ability of the philippine government to carry out policies effectively is often further frustrated by the fragmented nature of the country's politics . the legislature acts as a "watchdog" against the executive branch , but historically has had difficulty articulating and carrying out broad policy objectives and programs . political parties and groupings tend to be tenuous and shifting , driven more by individual personalities and interests than by unifying ideologies , policy platforms , and goals . president benigno aquino iii retains high public approval ratings four years into his presidency , deriving from his reputation for eschewing corruption and his family's lasting popularity . the former senator and son of former president corazon aquino and democratic leader benigno aquino jr. was elected president in 2010 by a large margin . to many observers , aquino's presidency has represented a political and cultural shift in the philippines — a move toward cleaner government , greater sensitivity to political and economic grievances , and less emphasis upon eradicating muslim and communist insurgencies through military means . in may 2013 , aquino's liberal party performed strongly in mid - term parliamentary and local elections , giving the president a stronger political mandate . philippine presidents serve a single six - year term and are barred from seeking re - election , so aquino cannot seek the presidency when the next polls take place in 2016 . analysts note that while he has retained his personal popularity much longer into his term than have many philippine presidents , he now is nearly two - thirds of the way through his presidency , and aspirants for the next presidential elections are likely to begin campaigning in the months ahead . given the highly personalized character of philippine politics , many experts believe it may become more difficult for aquino to pursue new legislative initiatives or to undertake deeper anti - corruption measures than he has thus far in his presidency .