with the enactment of p.l . 114-113 , the expiration date for the ptc for wind is different than the expiration date for the ptc for other technologies . thus , congress may choose to extend the ptc for nonwind technologies . the extension could be made retroactive for 2018 . if the ptc for nonwind technologies were extended , the phaseout that currently applies to wind could be applied to other technologies . another alternative would be to extend the ptc for nonwind technologies , and remove the phaseout for wind , such that all ptc - eligible technologies qualified for the ptc at the same rate . in 2014 , house ways and means committee chairman dave camp proposed a form of ptc phaseout as part his tax reform proposal introduced in the 113 th congress , the tax reform act of 2014 ( h.r . under this proposal , the ptc inflation adjustment factor would have been eliminated . this would reduce the value of the ptc for renewable electricity to 1.5 cents per kwh , for all ptc - eligible properties still within the 10-year eligibility window . thus , facilities that had received a 2.3 cent per kwh ptc in 2014 , and were still within their 10-year ptc window in 2015 , would have seen the value of the ptc fall to 1.5 cents per kwh for 2015 and beyond . under chairman camp's proposal , the ptc would have been fully repealed after 2024 . because the value of the ptc would be reduced for existing facilities , the jct estimates that this proposal would have raised $9.6 billion in additional federal revenues between 2014 and 2023 , relative to current law at the time . a similar proposal was introduced in the 114 th congress as the ptc elimination act ( h.r . president obama's fy2017 budget proposed a permanent extension of the ptc . additionally , under president obama's proposal , the ptc would be made refundable , solar facilities would be added as qualifying property , and the credit would be modified such that renewable electricity consumed by the producer could qualify for tax credits . solar property that currently qualifies for the residential energy efficient property credit would also be eligible for the ptc . additionally , the investment tax credit ( itc ) for renewable energy would be made permanent . in analysis of president obama's fy2017 budget , the jct estimated that making permanent the ptc and itc , along with these other changes , would cost $19.8 billion between 2016 and 2026 . the second section provides a legislative history . the third section presents data on ptc claims and discusses the revenue consequences of the credit . the fourth section briefly considers some of the economic and policy considerations related to the credit . the report concludes by briefly noting policy options related to the ptc . the renewable electricity ptc is a per - kilowatt - hour tax ( kwh ) credit for electricity generated using qualified energy resources . to qualify for the credit , the electricity must be sold by the taxpayer to an unrelated person . the credit can be claimed for a 10-year period once a qualifying facility is placed in service .