it also examines the costs to the party breached . ultimately private contracts among the various parties in the payment system and lawsuits can reallocate these costs . the cost of reversing fraudulent transactions follows the entire chain of processing a payment card transaction , but — assuming that the funds can be recovered — this cost is likely to be relatively small . because of the shared responsibility for cybersecurity over consumers' data , however , it may not be easy to determine which parties are in fact in the best position to minimize the threat of cybercrime and protect consumers . this is because customers' data are necessarily shared by retailers , payment card companies , payment processors , and financial institutions . because breaches may occur at any point along this chain , deciding who should bear the cost of cybersecurity may not be straightforward . to date , congressional hearings on the target breaches have tended to focus more on policy solutions , such as notifying consumers that data breaches have occurred , and increasing or clarifying the ftc's authority to sanction lax data security practices . they have not focused on whether or how to allocate shared responsibility to the parties best positioned to protect against cyber breaches . this section discusses selected policy options that have been raised in congressional hearings held on data security and breaches following the target breach . crs's reports on cybersecurity issues are in issues before congress: homeland security and terrorism , cybersecurity at http: / / www.crs.gov / pages / subissue.aspx ? crs report r42619 , cybersecurity: crs experts , by [author name scrubbed] , lists crs's experts in various aspects of cybersecurity . for example , a data breach at t.j. maxx was discovered in late 2006 and involved about 45 million debit and credit cards . to cover the eventual expenses of the breach , t.j. maxx set aside $5 million in fy2007 and $198 million in fy2008 , for a total of $203 million . the crime can be profitable and those involved are thought to have relatively little risk of arrest . for a group with an inclination toward crime , using the internet to steal financial data would appear to offer large rewards , little cost , and relatively little risk of arrest . obtaining cardholder information has been profitable , and obtaining the information on thousands or millions of cardholders has been even more profitable . although law enforcement authorities try to identify , arrest , and prosecute those responsible , international cooperation can be less than what might be desired , which reduces the risks to those responsible for the breaches . merchants , banks , and payment cards share costs and benefits , but the desire to minimize costs , including the cost of a new technology to deter payment card breaches , may involve shifting the expense to someone else . cyber technology and business efficiencies for merchants , banks , payment cards , payment processors , and cybercriminals are constantly evolving . many types of costs affect merchants , banks , payment cards , payment processors , consumers , and the party whose information is compromised .