appendix a . findings . the house of representatives finds as follows: ( 1 ) stem ( science , technology , engineering , and mathematics ) fields and knowledge have been integral to the development of civilization over the centuries . ( 2 ) stem fields have been , and continue to be , vital to a healthy and thriving united states . ( 3 ) stem fields are even more important in a world and nation of continuous and rapid technological advancements and needs . ( 4 ) stem fields are necessary to ensure a qualified national workforce and growing american economy , and a recent study predicted that one - half of all stem jobs in 2020 will be related to the field of computer science . ( 5 ) a recent study found that less than one - third of eighth graders in the united states showed proficiency in mathematics and science . ( 7 ) a recent study found that only one - third of the bachelor's degrees earned in the united states are in a stem field . ( 8 ) a recent study found that more than one - half of the science and engineering graduate students in institutions of higher education in the united states are from outside the united states . ( 9 ) efforts to encourage students to work in stem fields will enhance collaborative efforts between our secondary education systems and stem - related fields and industries . ( 10 ) the global economy demands that the united states continue to lead the world in innovation , creativity , and stem - related research . ( 11 ) bringing together members of congress and their younger constituents to participate in activities that will result in a deeper appreciation for stem fields will foster enthusiasm for education in the sciences . ( 12 ) the support which students will gain through congressional recognition of their work on stem - related projects will encourage them to pursue career paths in stem studies and research . ( 13 ) it is appropriate for the house of representatives to institute a new and worthwhile competition to encourage students to participate in stem studies and research . ( 14 ) rapid technological change means the competition will evolve over time and will challenge students in specialized areas of science , technology , engineering and math to ensure maximum participation . because of the importance of computer science it would be appropriate to initially challenge students to develop so - called ''apps'' for mobile , tablet , and computer platforms . sec . congressional competition in science , technology , engineering , and mathematics . ( a ) establishment of competition. — there is hereby established an academic competition in the fields of science , technology , engineering , and mathematics which shall be held each year among students in each congressional district . ( b ) regulations.