appendix a . use of psychotropics among children in families investigated for abuse or neglect the national survey of child and adolescent wellbeing ( nscaw ) ii looked at rates of psychotropic medication use among a sample of children ( 5,873 ) who came into contact with the child welfare agency because of an investigation of child abuse or neglect in their families . initial ( baseline ) survey data were collected in 2008-2009 approximately four to six months after that investigation . with regard to use of psychotropic medication , data cover children who at the time of the initial survey were at least 18 months of age and up to 17 years old . a follow - up survey looked at psychotropic medication use among these same children at approximately 18 months after the investigation of abuse or neglect , and a third survey looked at those children at 36 months following the investigation . ( some of the children followed had reached age 18 or older by the second or third collection of data. ) table a - 1 shows psychotropic medication use by age , and whether or not the child was in a foster care setting for the initial survey and for the follow - up at 18 months and 36 months . for purposes of this analysis , a foster care setting includes children who were placed in a non - relative foster family home , children placed with kin on a formal basis , and children placed in a group or residential setting . by contrast , children included in the "in home" category includes children living with their biological or adoptive parents , as well as children who were in informal kinship care settings . statistical significance the percentage differences shown by the initial survey in use of psychotropic medication ( between children in foster care and those who were not in foster care ) were not statistically significant overall or for any specific age group shown in table a - 1 . however , the differences shown for these groups at the 18-month and 36-month follow - up were statistically significant , with children in foster care more likely to be using psychotropic medications . for children under age 6 , there was no statistical significance found in the percentage differences shown for children in foster care versus those living at home in any of the surveys ( initial , 18-month or 36-month ) . for children ages 6 to 10 , the percentage difference shown between the in - home and foster care groups at the 18-month follow - up was found to be statistically significant but not those shown at the initial survey or at the 36-month follow - up . for children ages 11 through 17 years , there was not statistical significance found between the in - home and foster care groups at the initial survey but the differences shown at the 18-month and 36-month follow - up were significant . he also testified that a therapist that he saw with his adoptive parents was most helpful to him .