for example , h.r . 10 would give priority in awards to states that do not have caps on the number or percentage of charter schools ; provide equitable financing ; use best practices to improve struggling schools and leas ; partner with an organization that has a track record of success in developing management organizations ( nonprofit or for - profit ) to support the development of charter schools ; support charter schools that support at - risk students ; and take steps to ensure all authorized public chartering agencies implement best practices for authorizing schools . with respect to local uses of funds , h.r . the amended version of h.r . 5 was passed on july 19 , 2013 , by a vote of 221-207 . it is unclear whether s. 1094 will be considered on the senate floor . 5 and s. 1094 would amend and reauthorize the charter schools program as part of a comprehensive esea reauthorization bill . similar to the 112 th congress , the house education and workforce committee has also acted in the 113 th congress to move a stand - alone bill to amend and reauthorize the charter school programs . on april 1 , 2014 , representatives kline and miller introduced the success and opportunity through quality charter schools act ( h.r . 10 was considered by the house education and workforce committee on april 8 , 2014 . the bill was ordered reported by a vote of 36-3 . 10 would make several changes to current law provisions , while incorporating provisions that are somewhat similar to those that have been included in recent appropriations bills . key changes include the following . structurally , h.r . 10 would put all provisions related to the charter school programs under title v - b - 1 of the esea rather than having provisions in both title v - b - 1 and v - b - 2 . more specifically , all provisions related specifically to the charter schools program would be included in section 5203 . all provisions related specifically to the two charter school facilities programs would be included in section 5204 . section 5205 would continue to include provisions related to national programs . 10 would modify the authorization of appropriations . there would be a single authorization of appropriations for all programs . for fy2015 through fy2020 , the authorization level would be $300 million . overall appropriations for charter school programs have not exceeded $257 million annually since the enactment of the programs . the bill would also specify the percentage of funds provided through the annual appropriations process that should be used for each program and national activities . the bill would alter the purposes of the charter school programs including , for example , a new focus on improving student services to increase opportunities for students with disabilities , limited english proficient students , and other traditionally underserved students to attend charter schools ; supporting efforts to strengthen the charter school authorizing process ; and supporting quality accountability and transparency in the operational performance of authorized public chartering agencies .