section 4005 of p.l . ยง2014 ( e ) ( 5 ) ( c ) ) instructs the secretary of agriculture to promulgate rules to ensure that the costs of medical marijuana are not treated as a deduction in that calculation . section 7606 of p.l . or any tetrahydrocannabinols derivative for recreational purposes. some argue that this provision bars d.c. employees from using fy2015 appropriated funds to implement initiative 71 and that any employee who takes official acts to implement the law could be subject to civil or criminal liability under the antideficiency act . others , including d.c.'s attorney general , argue that the provision does "not prevent the district from using fy15 appropriated local funds to implement initiative 71" because the marijuana law was enacted before the enactment of the 2015 consolidated and further continuing appropriations act . 2642 ) , agricultural act of 2014 . to what extent does the csa trump or preempt state medical and recreational marijuana laws ? the preemption doctrine stands at the threshold of the federal - state marijuana debate . the preemption doctrine is grounded in the supremacy clause of article vi , cl . 2 , which states that "[t]he constitution , and the laws of the united states which shall be made in pursuance thereof ; and all treaties made ... under the authority of the united states , shall be the supreme law of the land. the supremacy clause , therefore , "elevates" the u.s. constitution , federal statutes , federal regulations , and treaties above the laws of the states . as a result , where federal and state law are in conflict , the state law is generally preempted , leaving it void and without effect . preemption is a matter of congress's choice when it operates within its constitutionally enumerated powers . in some instances , congress has exercised its authority so pervasively as to preclude the possibility of state activity within the same legislative field . on the other hand , where congress prefers the co - existence of state and federal law , state law must give way only when it conflicts with federal law in either of two ways: ( 1 ) if it is "physically impossible" to comply with both the state and federal law ( "impossibility preemption" ) ; or ( 2 ) if the state law "stands as an obstacle to the accomplishment and execution of the full purposes and objectives of congress" ( "obstacle preemption" ) . what constitutes an obstacle for preemption purposes is a matter "to be informed by examining the federal statute as a whole and identifying its purpose and intended effects. when congress acts within an area traditionally within the purview of the states , it will be assumed not to have intended to give its words preemptive force unless a contrary purpose is manifestly clear . the controlled substances act contains an explicit statement of the extent of congress's preemptive intent .