2201 et seq .

 ) , the secure water act of 2009 ( 42 u.s.c . 10361 et seq .

 ) , and state revolving funds ( srfs ) administered by the environmental protection agency ( epa ) under the federal clean water act ( 33 u.s.c . 1231 et seq. ) and the safe drinking water act ( 42 u.s.c . one such provision would direct the secretary of the interior to fund or participate in pilot projects to increase water supplies in colorado river storage project reservoirs . title i of s. 2198 also would authorize federal drought planning assistance , including hydrologic forecasting and other planning or technical assistance , upon the request of cvp or klamath project contractors or other reclamation project contractors in california . title i would reauthorize funding for calfed activities through 2018 and the reclamation states emergency drought relief act through 2019 , and increase the funding ceiling for the secure water act . the bill also would expand the secure water act to include the state of hawaii . title i provisions related to california water flow , infrastructure development and operations , and environmental permitting have one overarching theme: maximization of water supplies available for general agricultural and municipal and industrial demand while an emergency drought declaration is in effect — consistent with existing law and regulations . other provisions under title i would largely modify , expand , or reauthorize existing program authorizations . title ii of s. 2198 would amend the robert t. stafford disaster relief and emergency assistance act , as amended ( 42 u.s.c . 5192 ( a ) ) , to expand the available programs under an emergency declaration to include disaster unemployment assistance ( dua ) , emergency nutrition assistance , and crisis counseling assistance . the provision would apply to emergency declarations broadly ; that is , it is not limited to drought declarations . emergency declarations are short - term and , given the immediacy of their work , include an abbreviated group of assistance programs when compared to assistance available under a major disaster declaration . title ii also includes congressional findings indicating that a major drought may be eligible for a major disaster or state of emergency declaration by the president for purposes of the stafford act . if the effects of a drought overwhelm state or local resources , the president , at the request of the state governor or tribal governing body , is authorized under the stafford act ( 42 u.s.c . a declaration of an agricultural disaster area by the secretary of agriculture triggers the availability of multiple agricultural assistance programs , most notably the programs of the farm services agency ( fsa ) , and may trigger availability of other federal programs , such as the economic injury disaster loans of the small business administration ( sba ) . 5121 et seq. ) to issue major disaster or emergency declarations resulting in federal aid to affected parties . however , requests by states for stafford act drought - related declarations and related assistance since the 1980s have been denied . the infrequency of presidential domestic drought declarations increases the uncertainty about the circumstances under which such a declaration is likely to be made .