appendix a . it really more goes the other way . at each stage we used very conservative values that multiply on each other , such that the final answer in no way represents reality. which site or sites should be chosen ? what would it cost to upgrade the site or sites for that capacity ? study of pu - 238 options: pu - 238 activities are costly given the high level of radioactivity of that material . pu - 238 work could be moved to inl , srs , a module at lanl , or perhaps other sites . doe's office of nuclear energy prepared a study on this topic . however , that study did not consider the costs and benefits to the weapons program of moving pu - 238 out of pf - 4 ; those costs and benefits might change the calculus of that move . specifically , if moving pu - 238 to another site made a major contribution toward permitting production of 80 ppy without building new buildings , the value to the weapons program would be significant , and reducing mar in pf - 4 could help extend its service life . on the other hand , while doe has estimated the cost of the inl or srs options for pu - 238 to be several hundred million dollars , other costs would be involved , as well as temporary disruption of the pu - 238 program . congress could direct nnsa to contract with an independent organization to study these costs and benefits . study of cost implications of the regulatory system: a radiological facility is able to hold 38.6 g pu - 239e ( 26 g wgpu ) . as shown by rluob , such facilities can be affordable and can be built . in contrast , the history of the past quarter - century , as discussed in " a sisyphean history: failed efforts to construct a building to restore pit production ," has been that a facility intended to hold more than 26 g wgpu has seen cost and schedule escalate to the point where it cannot be acquired . these efforts have resulted in the expenditure of billions of dollars with the net result of canceled programs , unusable buildings that had to be demolished , and continued operations in "decrepit" facilities . congress could task nnsa to report on cost implications of the current regulatory system governing nuclear facilities , focusing on tradeoffs between cost and risk . long - term planning is difficult for all parties concerned . delays and cost growth by nnsa on its major facilities reduce confidence in nnsa's cost and schedule projections , making it difficult for congress and the administration to budget for these facilities . nnsa sources say that congressional budgeting outside the regular budget process , such as sequesters and short - term continuing resolutions , and withdrawal of congressional support , such as the termination of mpf , make it difficult for nnsa to plan . changes in administration planning , such as the deferral of cmrr - nf , make it difficult for congress and nnsa to plan . long - term planning for pit production has proven particularly difficult .