to date , these legal challenges have generally failed . the one apparent exception involves challenges to recent state practices of issuing driver's licenses to some , but not all , aliens granted deferred action or employment authorization documents ( eads ) by the federal government . it is also important to note that municipal id card measures would arguably not override existing federal restrictions upon the receipt of federal , state , or local public benefits by unlawfully present aliens . these grounds can vary depending upon the specific statute or practice in question . however , the grounds most commonly asserted appear to be violations of the equal protection and supremacy clauses of the u.s. constitution . thus , these provisions are the focus of discussion in this report , and the following paragraphs provide an overview of the basic principles implicated in discussions of equal protection and preemption . this includes the police department , department of public health , public utilities commission , and child support services , among others . sometimes , the state permits such aliens to obtain a license that looks like those issued to citizens , lprs , and eligible lawful nonimmigrants , as new mexico does . at other times , the state issues licenses to unlawfully present aliens that are visually distinguishable from the licenses issued to u.s. citizens and foreign nationals with lawful immigration status , although the state does not purport to restrict their usage for identification purposes . some have suggested that such measures are per se preempted by federal law because they regulate immigration , or are impliedly preempted by the real id act or prwora . however , such claims do not appear to have resulted in any judicial holdings or findings on the issue , perhaps because of limitations on who has standing to challenge such measures . moreover , even if a plaintiff were found to have standing to challenge these measures , the argument that they are preempted by federal law could be difficult to maintain given that ( 1 ) state measures denying driver's licenses to unlawfully present aliens have generally not been viewed as regulations of immigration ; ( 2 ) the real id act contemplates states issuing driver's licenses and other id that are not recognized by federal agencies ; and ( 3 ) prowra expressly permits states to provide public benefits to unlawfully present aliens by enacting legislation that affirmatively provides for their eligibility . a few states , seeking to promote traffic safety by screening drivers , but not wishing to issue driver's licenses to unlawfully present aliens , have adopted measures that permit such aliens to obtain "certificates for driving" ( cfds ) or "driving privilege cards" ( dpcs ) , but not driver's licenses . utah is one such state , issuing dpcs to persons who cannot "provid[e] evidence of lawful presence in the united states. tennessee formerly had a similar provision that permitted "[p]ersons whose presence in the united states has [not] been authorized by the federal government" to obtain cfds . in both cases , the documents issued by the state expressly note , on their face , that they are for driving purposes only , but not for id purposes .