tpa - 2015 changes this provision to "strictly necessary or appropriate. in general , if the united states does adopt an agreement with foreign countries , it would be bound by international law under the agreement . if a federal , state , or local law is found to be in violation of the free trade agreement , then the united states could be subject to removal of some benefits under the agreement , such as an increase in tariffs on its products , through a potential dispute resolution with a challenging country . the federal , state , or local government potentially would have to amend the law that is inconsistent with the trade agreement in order for the united states to avoid removal of benefits under the international agreement , but is not required to do so . neither the 2002 tpa authority nor previous tpa / fast track authorities contained provisions addressing the issue of national sovereignty . tpa - 2015 states that no provision of any trade agreement entered into under the tpa inconsistent with any law of the united states , of any state , or any locality of the united states could have any effect . nor could any provision of a trade agreement prevent the government of the united states , of any state , or any u.s. locality from amending its laws . this provision essentially provides that , for domestic purposes , any trade agreement adopted under the tpa authority is not self - executing . therefore , any potential agreement adopted through the tpa procedures would not displace any federal , state , or local law without further action being taken by the appropriate legislature . if the implementing legislation amends or changes u.s. law , then it would supersede existing u.s. law . however , under previous grants of tpa , changes to u.s. law made by an implementing bill are to be "necessary or appropriate" to implement the commitments under the trade agreement . another tool congress has employed under tpa to ensure transparency of the negotiating process is to require the president to notify congress prior to launching trade negotiations and prior to entering into ( signing ) a trade agreement . congress has required the executive branch to consult with congress prior to and during trade negotiations , as well as upon their completion and the signing of ( entering into ) a trade agreement . tpa / fast track statutes have required the ustr to meet and consult with the house ways and means committee , the senate finance committee , and other committees that have jurisdiction over laws possibly affected by trade negotiations . the consultative , notification , and reporting requirements of tpa are designed to achieve greater transparency in trade negotiations and to maintain the role of congress in shaping trade policy .