the exact language provides a broad prohibition . it reads , "a banking entity shall not … engage in proprietary trading , ..." under the statute , "proprietary trading" covers buying and selling of "financial instruments" by banking entities as "principal" for their "trading accounts. "financial instruments" include securities , derivatives , and contracts for future sale or for options on any commodity other than foreign exchange or currency , but not loans . however , as described more fully below , certain types of financial instruments and operations are excluded . the regulation focuses on restricting short - term trades . it establishes a rebuttable presumption that any financial instrument held for fewer than 60 days is a banned proprietary trade unless all relevant facts and circumstances rebut the presumption . it defines "trading account" as any account used to buy or sell one or more financial instruments "principally" for "short - term resale," to benefit from "short - term price movements," to realize "short - term arbitrage profits," or to hedge any of these . "trading account" also covers trades by banking entities that are securities dealers and swap or swap - based securities dealers — both in the united states and abroad — as well as market risk capital transactions and hedges of such transactions by banking entities that calculate such ratios under the banking agencies' market risk capital rules . the volcker rule regulations broadly prohibit banking entities from , "directly or indirectly , acquir[ing] or retain[ing] any ownership interest in or sponsor[ing] a covered fund," as principal for its own account , rather for a customer . due to the customer focus of the following activities , the prohibition does not apply to holding an ownership interest in a covered fund , if the interest is acquired by a banking entity while "acting solely as agent , broker , or custodian," fiduciary , or trustee for a customer , as long as neither the banking entity nor its affiliates acquire a beneficial interest in the investments ; acting as a trustee for an employee compensation plan organized for the benefit of the banking entity's current and former employees ; and acting in the "ordinary course of collecting a debt," as long as the products are divested "as soon as practicable. the statute requires the federal financial regulators to issue regulations to "insure compliance with [section 619]. in response , the final regulations require banking entities to develop and maintain compliance programs , internal controls , and recordkeeping systems to control and monitor the risk of trading and investment activities . compliance requirements vary in accordance with the size of the banking entity , as well as the scope , complexity , and types of trading and investment activities . banking entities conducting no proprietary trading activity ( other than trading of federal , agency , or state and local obligations ) and having no investments in covered funds are not required to develop a volcker rule - specific compliance program but must do so if they begin to conduct such activities . similarly , banking entities with total assets below $10 billion may fold volcker rule compliance measures into existing compliance programs .