that premise is now in doubt. according to some analysts , russia's annexation of crimea validates the concerns long expressed by some nato member states , especially in central and eastern europe , regarding russia's commitment to partnership , its unpredictability , acts of hostility toward nato and its partners , and perceived attempts to sow disunity within the alliance . on the other hand , while russian actions have drawn uniform condemnation from nato and the european union , many in europe and the united states emphasize that europe's long - term security will depend on cooperative relations with russia . as noted above , some nato members in western europe have expressed concern that a military response to russian actions could significantly hinder future attempts to boost cooperation with russia . the principal institutional mechanism for nato - russia cooperation has been the nato - russia council ( nrc ) , established in may 2002 , five years after the 1997 nato - russia founding act provided the formal basis for bilateral cooperation . most observers agree that despite having advanced nato - russia cooperation in some areas — including in afghanistan — the nrc has failed to live up to its potential . these perceived shortcomings are often attributed to russian suspicion about nato's long - term intentions , including with respect to countries it long considered within its sphere of influence such as ukraine and georgia . many european allies continue to stress that they aspire to cooperation and partnership with russia . however , analysts expect ties to continue to be marked by contention and mistrust , at least for the time being . moscow has objected to nato and the united states' military responses to the crisis , calling into question the alliance's 1997 commitment — codified in the nato - russia founding act — not to permanently station substantial combat forces in countries that joined nato after the collapse of the soviet union . although nato has not as yet made decisions about permanent troop deployments , secretary general rasmussen has responded to russian complaints by noting that russia "has violated every principle and international commitment it has made. on july 29 , 2014 , eu member states ( 22 of which are also members of nato ) committed to ending all future arms sales to russia , after months of pressure from governments and analysts on both sides of the atlantic . the embargo will not , however , apply to previously agreed sales . compared to other european arms sales , sales to russia are relatively insignificant . however , over the past several years , some critics have drawn attention to several high profile deals . chief among these is a 2011 french agreement to sell russia two amphibious assault warships in a deal worth €1.2 billion ( about $1.6 billion ) — the first ever sale of a significant offensive military capability by a nato member to russia . the first of these mistral ships is scheduled to be delivered later this year . french president françois hollande has repeatedly stated that france would honor the existing contract .