the bolivian government considered mr. ostreicher a fugitive . ambassador to bolivia of supporting opposition forces and expelled him from the country . economists predict that bolivia is likely to enjoy steady economic growth averaging roughly 4% in the coming years ( 2015-2018 ) . even if prices or demand for its commodity exports were to fall , neither of which is likely , bolivia's significant reserves should cushion its economy from economic shocks . economic growth and improving social indicators should enable president morales and the mas to continue dominating the bolivian political system for the foreseeable future , despite periodic protests from disgruntled interest groups . with presidential elections expected to be held in october , the morales government is unlikely to make overtures to improve relations with the united states . at the same time , none of the issues that usually draw u.s. interest to particular latin american countries — proximity , counternarcotics concerns , or trade — are particularly salient with bolivia . bolivia is a landlocked country in south america that supplies only 1% of u.s. cocaine and whose primary trade partner is brazil . and , although bolivia is a member of the nine - member venezuelan - led bolivarian alliance of the americas ( alba ) , it does not possess the same ambitions to serve as a regional counterweight to the united states as venezuela . nevertheless , there is always a chance that president morales could change his mind regarding a desire to improve relations with the united states and eventually exchange ambassadors . he reportedly expressed a willingness to do so within an environment of "mutual respect" during a meeting with a recent u.s. senate delegation to bolivia . after two years of high - level negotiations , on november 7 , 2011 , the u.s. and bolivian governments signed a framework agreement to guide relations that said both governments looked forward to the "early return of ambassadors to both washington and la paz. however , after the united states requested bolivian approval of a nominee to serve as u.s . ambassador in la paz ( through the diplomatic procedure known as agrément ) in november 2012 , the bolivian government leaked the name of the u.s. nominee to the press . president morales then said in february 2013 that he no longer had an interest in exchanging ambassadors . two events that occurred in 2013 resulted in the end of most , if not all , u.s. foreign aid to bolivia . in may 2013 , president morales asked the u.s. agency for international development ( usaid ) to end its operations in bolivia after 52 years in the country . he claimed that usaid had funded opposition forces that had sought to undermine his government , charges that usaid vigorously denied . as usaid began shutting down its operations , the state department decided to close its international narcotics and law enforcement affairs office in bolivia in december 2013 due to a lack of adequate cooperation from bolivian authorities . another source of tension in the relationship has been the case of new york flooring contractor jacob ostreicher , who launched a rice farm in bolivia in 2008 .