first , the prism and upstream collections acquire the contents of those communications . second , as this program targets the "to / from" and "about" communications of foreigners who are abroad , the collection of internet - based communications may be considered by some to be more discriminating than the bulk collection of telephony metadata . the first is the bulk collection of telephony metadata for domestic and international telephone calls . the revised minimization procedures addressed the court's concerns by requiring the segregation of those communications most likely to involve unrelated or wholly domestic communications ; requiring special handling and markings for those communications which could not be segregated ; and reducing the retention period of upstream collection from five years to two . the second involves the interception of internet - based communications and is targeted at foreigners who are not within the united states , but may also inadvertently acquire the communications of u.s. persons . this report provides a description of these two programs and the various constitutional challenges that have arisen in judicial forums with respect to each . although a brief overview of the constitutional arguments and issues raised in the assorted cases is included , a detailed analysis or evaluation of those arguments is beyond the scope of this report . as both programs make use of authorities provided under fisa , this section provides a brief description of that statute to help inform the subsequent discussion . fisa currently provides procedures for the approval of various types of investigative methods: ( 1 ) electronic surveillance , ( 2 ) physical searches , ( 3 ) pen register / trap and trace surveillance , and ( 4 ) the use of orders compelling the production of tangible things . the fisa amendments act ( faa ) of 2008 added additional provisions for the foreign intelligence targeting of non - u.s. persons reasonably believed to be abroad and the targeting of u.s. persons reasonably believed to be located abroad . although the requirements for each category of investigative tool differ significantly from one another , all make use of the foreign intelligence surveillance court ( fisc ) , a specialized article iii court established under fisa to review and approve governmental applications seeking to use one of the aforementioned authorities . fisa also establishes a foreign intelligence surveillance court of review ( fiscr ) to provide appellate review of decisions made by the fisc . following the terrorist attacks of september 11 , 2001 , the nsa began a program in which domestic telephony metadata was collected with the goal of helping to detect and identify individuals who were part of terrorist networks . this program is frequently described as collecting telephony metadata "in bulk" to distinguish it from the narrower collection of metadata pertaining to an identified individual or group of individuals that is commonplace in both law enforcement and national security investigations . since 2006 , the collection of telephony metadata in bulk has been sanctioned by orders of the fisc issued pursuant to section 215 of the usa patriot act of 2001 .