some stakeholders have pushed for a national energy policy that moves the united states away from a reliance on fossil fuels . they see the decision to build the proposed pipeline as a 50-year - long commitment to a carbon - based economy and its resulting ghg emissions . some analysts disagree with the feis assessment and argue that there is nothing presumed or inevitable about the rate of expansion for the canadian oil sands . many secondary considerations — for which projections have even greater uncertainty — may also impact an assessment . these include projections regarding global crude oil markets , refinery inputs and outputs , transport options , policy considerations , and the end - use consumption of petroleum products . these variables include ( a ) lower global oil prices than projected ; ( b ) higher rail costs than projected ; ( c ) higher new project costs than expected ; ( d ) greater competition from shale oil and tight oil plays ; and ( e ) future carbon pricing or procurement policies in the united states or canada . they note that several of these variables have already moved against the predictions in the feis , most notably a continued period of lower oil prices . they contend that any decrease or delay in development could significantly impact the rate of growth in global ghg emissions by allowing more time for the development of energy - efficiency strategies , the promulgation of climate policies , and the deployment of lower - carbon energy technologies . beyond the debate about the proposed keystone xl pipeline's impacts on oil sands production , some stakeholders have expressed a broader concern about whether the approval or denial of the project could set a precedent for u.s. energy policy . they argue that while many of the decisions that may affect the development of the oil sands will ultimately be made by the market and the national and provincial governments of canada , the choice of whether or not to approve the permit for the project is an opportunity for the u.s. government to signal its future direction . some observers contend that with meaningful action on climate policy slowed or stalled in congress , the courts , and , to some extent , the regulatory agencies ( i.e. , local , state , and federal environmental and land - use agencies ) , the sole remaining outlet to leverage a low - carbon energy policy is single - action initiatives on such items as infrastructure permits . many have actively opposed the permit for the project , believing that it may set a precedent ; for if the pipeline is allowed to go forward , they contend , it may be the case that no future infrastructure project would be held accountable for its incremental contribution to cumulative ghg emissions . others recognize that the project could affect u.s. energy policy by setting a precedent and sending a signal , but they reach a different conclusion . many regard the project as one element of a revitalized energy production sector in north america , and urge that u.s. policy should support investment in such infrastructure for economic and national security reasons .