each of these was averted by congressional action . this has happened three times: the temporary extension act ( p.l . 111-144 ) was signed into law on march 2 , 2010 , after the prior override expired on february 28 , 2010 ; the continuing extension act ( p.l . 111-157 ) was signed into law on april 15 , after the prior override expired on march 31 , 2010 ; and the preservation of access to care for medicare beneficiaries and pension relief act ( p.l . 111-192 ) was signed into law on june 25 , 2010 , after the prior override expired on may 31 , 2010 . medicare is prohibited from paying electronic claims earlier than the 14 th day after the date of receipt and from paying non - electronic claims earlier than the 29 th day after the date of receipt . thus , the first two instances required no additional action by congress ; however , the third instance required a provision that made the sgr payment override retroactive to june 1 , 2010 . there are two primary reasons why this problem persists: ( 1 ) although a number of proposals to replace the sgr system have been proposed , there has been no consensus nor broad support for any long - run alternative until recently ( see below ) , and ( 2 ) the cost of any permanent change has been daunting because the cbo baseline must assume current law , which in recent years has estimated that a reduction in payment rates under the mpfs would occur for several subsequent years . in addition to the impact on federal outlays , any change in the payment update formula would also have implications for beneficiaries ; because part b beneficiary premiums must cover about 25% of part b program costs , any overall increase in spending results in a proportional increase in premiums . the lack of a viable alternative payment model has hampered attempts to repeal and replace the sgr system . repealing the sgr system would require the adoption of an additional method for determining how medicare physician payments would be modified from year to year . given that the sgr was created to replace another system that failed to constrain the rate of growth in medicare physician expenditures ( medicare volume performance standard , or mvps ) , attempts to create an update methodology that would successfully contain medicare growth have so far been unproven . while the sgr methodology determines the change in the medicare physician payments from year to year , it does not determine the basis for those payments . while the current mpfs is a fee - for - service based payment system ( i.e. , doctors are paid for each service they provide ) , an "sgr - type" methodology also could be applied to payments based on alternate payment systems , including bundled payments for episodes of care , capitation payments , performance - or incentive - based payments , or some other payment system .