mdrc . february 2010. http: / / www.mdrc.org / sites / default / files / transitional_jobs_background_fr.pdf . dan bloom . transitional jobs: background , program models , and evaluation evidence . these were jobs in state or local governments . ceta's public service employment program ended in 1981 . from that time until the 2007-2009 recession , subsidized employment was provided primarily in summer youth employment , and in transitional jobs demonstrations targeting very "hard - to - serve" adults . transitional jobs are usually in either state or local governments or in the nonprofit sector . partial subsidies would be payable thereafter . to offset the cost of the "pathways to jobs" fund , the budget proposes to end the current law tanf "contingency fund. the administration's "pathways to jobs" proposal comes as interest in subsidized employment for the economically disadvantaged has been rekindled by a brief experience of tanf - funded jobs during the recent recession . to help assess the proposal , this report provides background on government - funded subsidized employment programs ; discusses the history of subsidized employment within the tanf block grant ; and examines some of the policy considerations raised by the proposal . subsidized employment programs use government funds to pay all or part of the wages of those working in jobs . the job may be in either the public or the private sector . the employment subsidies are payments to employers that reduce the cost of hiring and employing a program participant . these jobs pay wages , unlike unpaid activities that are performed in exchange for receiving a cash assistance benefit ( often referred to as "workfare" ) . subsidized employment programs are also distinct from "on - the - job training," because there is no explicit requirement that employees be given training opportunities . historically , subsidized employment programs usually provided public service jobs . they began as measures to provide work and income during the mass unemployment of the great depression , as the federal government employed persons in the works progress administration ( wpa ) and civilian conversation corps ( ccc ) . beginning in the 1970s , public service jobs were also used to address unemployment during recessions . under the comprehensive employment and training act ( ceta ) , public service jobs were used both to address cyclical unemployment as well as provide employment to the economically disadvantaged . there has been limited funding for transitional jobs . in fy2011 , an appropriation of $40 million was provided for the department of labor's ( dol's ) enhanced transitional jobs demonstration program . though subsidized employment , by paying part or all of the wages to employers , has been a small part of recent policies for the economically disadvantaged , wage subsidies in general have been an important part of public policy for low - income families with children since the 1990s . the largest wage subsidies go directly to low - income workers ( rather than employers ) through the earned income tax credit ( eitc ) and child tax credit .