allies . in the post - cold war world , u.s. policy continues to support "extended deterrence," now generally understood to refer to u.s. reliance on a mix of nuclear and conventional capabilities to assure a wider array of allies and partners , and to deter nuclear and conventional attacks against them . observers agree that the global context has changed significantly since the cold war , and that cold war mental models — which persist , if subconsciously , in some quarters — require refinement . today's nuclear arena alone includes a far broader array of actors , including some nuclear states and other state and non - state entities with nuclear aspirations , who may have widely varying notions of "unacceptable costs. in non - nuclear arenas , there may be even less of a consensus regarding the combination of capabilities and demonstrated will that would be most likely to change a given potential adversary's calculus , in a given set of circumstances . at the very least , it seems unlikely that simple math — for example , counting warheads or delivery systems — is a sufficiently robust tool for calculating deterrence requirements . the 2012 dsg , while underscoring the importance of deterrence , begged more questions than it resolved . it suggested tantalizingly that "it is possible that our deterrence goals can be achieved with a smaller nuclear force," without articulating the rationale behind that possibility . and it argued more broadly that "credible deterrence results from both the capabilities to deny an aggressor the prospect of achieving his objectives and from the complementary capability to impose unacceptable costs on the aggressor," without tackling key questions including what mix of nuclear and conventional capabilities might prove sufficient , and what would , in each circumstance that might arise , constitute "unacceptable costs. key questions concerning deterrence might include the following: to what extent are current u.s. approaches to nuclear deterrence undergirded by a clear theory of deterrence ? can a single strategic logic apply to deterring use by current nuclear powers , and to deterring acquisition by aspirant states and non - state actors ? how might nuclear deterrence theory best grapple with the problems posed by the existence of more than one nuclear near - peer competitor ? or with the differences in respective u.s. , chinese , and russian "escalation ladders" ? how effective can conventional weapons be in deterring potential nuclear attacks ? to what extent , if any , has the likelihood of nuclear use , and / or the severity of impact from any such use , diminished ? would any such changes justify assuming greater risk in this arena ? how can a potential adversary's mind be changed ? what combination of military capabilities , nuclear and conventional ; economic strength ; political will ; international partnerships ; and other qualities would be required ? is u.s. understanding of the perceptions of potential adversaries sufficient to meaningfully make this calculus ? to what extent if any can a broad formula of non - nuclear deterrence be applied to all potential adversaries and sets of circumstances ? how germane if at all is the idea of a potential adversary's calculated costs ?