pursuant to 50 u.s.c . section 1803 ( c ) , records of the fisc and the fisa court of review's proceedings "shall be maintained under security measures established by the chief justice in consultation with the attorney general and the director of national intelligence. under that authority , chief justice warren burger established these measures in 1979 . in addition , 50 u.s.c . section 1803 ( g ) permits the fisa courts to individually adopt whatever security procedures "are reasonably necessary to administer their responsibilities. while the fisa court of review has not publicly released any more specific security procedures , the fisc's particular procedures took effect november 1 , 2010 , and specify that the court comply with various executive branch regulations governing classified material , in particular , executive order 13526 — "classified national security information. in sum , according to the fisc , "the collective effect of these provisions is that applications , orders , and other records ... whether in the possession of the fisc , the court of review , [or] the supreme court ... shall , as a rule , be maintained in a secure and nonpublic fashion. while the fisc usually sits ex parte , at least two exceptions apply . recipients of production orders under section 215 of the usa patriot act and directives under section 702 of fisa may petition the court . in the event of a contested hearing , fisa permits ex parte and in camera review of classified information upon motion by the government . under the fisc's procedures , disclosure of the court's opinions is permitted only in a limited number of situations , all of which require compliance with executive order 13526 . first , a judge who wrote an opinion may sua sponte or by motion of a party publish the opinion . the fisc has discretion in this situation to direct the executive branch to redact the opinion for classified information . recently , at least one fisc judge has released an opinion in this manner , "[b]ecause of the public interest" in the bulk metadata collection program . second , the presiding judge may provide copies of court records to congress on his own volition . finally , the fisc's rules also provide that the executive branch may provide copies of court records to congress without prior notification to the court . the executive branch must , however , notify the court "contemporaneously" when it does so . the executive branch recently argued that this provision prevented it from complying with freedom of information act ( foia ) requests — without fisc approval — for fisc records in the government's possession . the fisc , however , rejected this proposition , explaining that the provision was intended to "stop the government's practice of filing what the court viewed as unnecessary motions for unsealing before fulfilling its statutory obligations. the court explained that fisa regulated the disclosure of opinions "in the possession of the fisc," but did not regulate the disclosure of opinions already in the possession of the executive branch . therefore , opinions and orders in the possession of the executive branch may be released to the public without seeking the fisc's permission .