is the drought over ? the u.s. drought monitor ( figure a - 3 ) and other indicators ( eg , reservoir levels , figure a - 2 ) suggest that the drought has largely abated for most of california , and governor brown announced an end to the statewide drought state of emergency in april 2017 . figure a - 3 compares drought conditions a year apart , showing 100% of the state in drought or abnormally dry conditions on october 11 , 2016 , and 21% of the state in exceptional drought . "megadroughts. one study indicates that the drought record from 900 to 1300 a.d. shows similar variability — drought periods followed by wetter periods — compared with today , but the average climate conditions were much drier and led to more severe droughts . unlike surface water , which can recover from drought relatively quickly in a wet year , the amount of groundwater stored in many depleted aquifers likely will take much longer to recover and may never regain pre - drought levels . they are the source of a large majority of floods along the u.s. west coast , according to studies . consequently , groundwater levels in the state's central valley dropped , particularly in the san joaquin valley ( sjv ) . for example , aquifer levels in parts of the sjv experienced water - level drops of more than 50 feet between 2011 and 2016 ( figure a - 4 ) . when ars deliver above - average winter precipitation , reservoir managers must balance maintaining reservoir storage space to capture floodwaters with keeping reservoirs full ( with little flood storage capacity ) to meet water supply demands during the summer . this balancing act nearly failed in march 2017 at lake oroville , california's second - largest reservoir , as a series of storms caused the lake level to rise to 100% capacity . operators were forced to release water over a spillway , and dangerous conditions caused evacuations from downstream communities . snowpack levels over the 2017 winter and spring were well above the amounts during the 2012-2016 drought . ( see box for a description of enso. ) for example , some scientists link la niña conditions between 1998 and 2002 to the occurrence of near - simultaneous drought in the southern united states , southern europe , and southwest asia . reservoir levels have stayed at high levels into the fall of 2017 , as indicated in figure a - 2 . the land area affected by abnormally dry or drought conditions stayed at or above 65% through february 2013 . the intensity of the drought varied , with the regions of extreme and exceptional drought clustered across the midwest , great plains , southwest , and southeast , particularly georgia in 2012 ( figure a - 6 ) . figure a - 6 shows that texas and portions of florida and georgia experienced exceptional drought conditions ( the worst category of drought ) in early 2012 , while the upper midwest , including most of the mississippi valley , experienced normal conditions .