the debate over public oversight is not new . the proposed surface transportation authorization act ( staa ) of 2009 would have made p3s involving federal - aid highway funds subject to various federal requirements , including a weighing of the costs and benefits of the p3 against traditional public delivery methods . the proposal also contained requirements regarding public information and public involvement and a prohibition against non - compete clauses in p3 agreements . these requirements would have been enforced by a new office of public benefit ( opb ) within fhwa to "provide for the protection of the public interest in relation to highway toll projects and public - private partnership agreements on federal - aid highways. the requirement that the opb review and approve a p3's compliance with new public transparency provisions raised particular concern among advocates of more widespread use of p3s , who asserted that the risk of opb disapproval late in the process would discourage project partners from investing the substantial time and money required to develop projects . the more aggressive approach to p3s would provide program funding to encourage innovation and generally deregulate the use of tolling and private sector involvement , thereby letting states decide when and how to enter into agreements . the federal role in such a scenario could be limited to providing guidance about instituting good practices and avoiding common pitfalls , although it might be possible to set up a federal p3 office which , in addition to providing technical advice , could also provide consulting services in a fee - for - service arrangement , and could possibly help to develop the p3 market . such entities exist in several other countries , such as partnerships bc in british columbia , infrastructure partnerships australia , and partnerships uk . other past proposals have linked deregulation of tolling and public - private partnerships with devolution of federal responsibilities in highways and transit to the states . many parts of the interstate highway system have traffic levels that would make it financially viable to have toll - supported public - private partnerships . the need for reconstructing interstates is likely to accelerate in the years ahead as many reach their approximately 50-year design life . these are the following: o&m concession . the public agency turns over to the private sector responsibility for asset operation and maintenance , including service and management . the anton anderson memorial tunnel in alaska , a road and rail tunnel , is an example of an o&m concession . vms , the concessionaire , is responsible for toll collection , train and highway vehicle control , road and rail maintenance , and initial emergency response . long - term lease agreement . this type of partnership typically involves the leasing of an existing facility to a private company for a specified amount of time . the private partner usually pays an initial concession fee and must operate and maintain the facility to prescribed standards . the private company typically collects tolls on users and keeps the revenue to pay its bond holders and to generate a return on its equity investment . examples of this type of p3 are the chicago skyway and the indiana toll road .