some of the primary authorities are summarized in table 1 . while these tools play an important role in addressing tax evasion relating to assets held overseas ( see , for example , the ubs discussion below ) , their usefulness can be limited by information gaps , particularly when the information is held by a foreign party . for example , a whistleblower played a key role in the ubs case , thus perhaps raising the question of how the irs might have fared absent his involvement . tax treaties and tieas may be of limited use when another country's domestic laws restrict providing the information sought by the irs or the treaty partner is unable to get the information . additionally , thorny legal questions can arise when a u.s. court attempts to take action against an overseas party , for example , to enforce a subpoena . furthermore , identified limitations in the qualified intermediary program include the lack of a requirement to report foreign source income and the ability for a corporation to be treated as a beneficial owner , both of which might allow u.s. taxpayers to avoid discovery ( eg , by setting up a foreign shell corporation to receive the income ) . these shortcomings played a role in influencing fatca's reporting requirements for ffis and other foreign entities . in the 113 th congress , several bills have been introduced that are related to fatca . first , s. 887 , whose stated purpose is "[t]o repeal the violation of sovereign nations' laws and privacy matters," would repeal many of fatca's provisions . the repealed provisions would be the reporting and withholding requirements on ffis and nffes ( irc sections 1471-1474 ) ; the reporting requirement for foreign financial assets ( irc section 6038d ) ; the extension of the statute of limitations for significant omissions of income in connection with foreign assets ( irc section 6501 ( e ) ) ; the penalties for underpayments attributable to undisclosed foreign financial assets ( irc section 6662 ( b ) ( 7 ) , ( j ) ) ; the reporting requirements for activities with respect to passive foreign investment companies ( irc section 1298 ( f ) ) ; the reporting requirement for u.s. owners of foreign trusts ( irc section 6048 ( b ) ; and the minimum penalty with respect to failure to report on certain foreign trusts ( irc section 6677 ( a ) ) . several bills include a provision with the purpose of "strengthening" fatca — stop tax haven abuse act , h.r . 1554 , section 102 ; sequester delay and stop tax haven abuse act , h.r . 3666 , section 202 ; stop tax haven abuse act , s. 1533 , section 102 ; and cut loopholes act , s. 268 , section 102 . in addition to the fatca provision , these bills include numerous other provisions aimed at tax sheltering and avoidance activities .