no such legislation has been enacted by congress to date . however , several states have passed their own dream acts , which permit some dreamers to receive in - state tuition or , less commonly , state financial aid ( but cannot provide a pathway to citizenship because congress has exclusive power over naturalization ) . the obama administration also began granting deferred action — a type of relief from removal — to qualifying dreamers in 2012 . because aliens granted deferred action are generally viewed as "lawfully present" for purposes of federal immigration law , they could potentially be deemed eligible for certain educational benefits that are denied to aliens who are "unlawfully present. however , not all aliens commonly known as dreamers have been granted deferred action , and even those who have been granted deferred action are considered to be lawfully present only while they are in deferred action or other similar status . others , however , emphasize dreamers' presence in the united states in violation of federal immigration law , and seek to ensure that public benefits are made available only to u.s. citizens , lawful permanent residents ( lprs ) , and nonimmigrants with legal status . several states have , for example , adopted measures barring unauthorized aliens from attending public institutions of higher education . certain states have also reiterated , or sought to expand upon , existing federal restrictions upon unauthorized aliens' receipt of public benefits in order to ensure that they do not receive in - state tuition or state financial aid . this report surveys key legal issues pertaining to unauthorized alien students' access to higher education , in - state tuition , and financial aid . state measures that would deny or provide access to public institutions of higher education , in - state tuition , and financial aid to unauthorized aliens have been challenged on various grounds . while these grounds can vary depending upon the specific statute or practice in question , the grounds most commonly asserted appear to be violations of the equal protection and supremacy clauses of the u.s. constitution . thus , these provisions are the focus of discussion in this report , and the following paragraphs provide an overview of the basic principles implicated in discussions of equal protection and preemption . state measures that would deny unauthorized aliens access to public institutions of higher education and in - state tuition have been challenged by plaintiffs and commentators on the grounds that they violate the equal protection or supremacy clauses . however , the limited case law to date suggests that restrictions on access to higher education do not , as a general matter , deprive unauthorized aliens of equal protection . such restrictions have also not been seen as preempted by prwora as a general matter , although specific measures could potentially be found to be preempted , or otherwise impermissible , on other grounds . restrictions on access to in - state tuition have also been seen as permissible . in - state tuition has generally been considered a public benefit , and prwora and iirira restrict the circumstances in which states may provide public benefits to unauthorized aliens .