funding for many of the other fs accounts has decreased . land acquisition ( la ) . la activities allow the fs to acquire lands for conservation or ownership consolidation purposes . together , they account on average for about 12% of total agency appropriations . budget authority for these accounts is provided in authorizing laws . for several of these accounts , the budget authority is dependent on the level of receipts received for specific national forest system activities , and some may even have geographic or programmatic expenditure restrictions . for example , the timber sales pipeline restoration fund authorizes the fs to collect a portion of the revenue from a specific set of national forest timber sales . the revenue is available in the fs region where it was generated for preparing future timber sales or conducting recreation projects . another example of a permanent appropriation is the payments to states fund , which consists of several programs that are partially dependent on receipts . more specifically , the payments to states act of 1908 authorizes the fs to make payments to states — to be distributed to counties — based on a percentage of the revenue generated by activities in the national forests within those counties . the payments to states fund also consists of payments authorized under the secure rural schools and community self - determination act of 2000 , which are based on a formula dependent in part on historical receipts . the authorization for the secure rural schools act expired at the end of fy2013 , but it was reauthorized in april 2015 ( p.l . the reauthorization provided a makeup payment to be made in fy2015 for the payment missed during the period the program was expired , as well as a payment to be made in fy2016 . forest service requested and enacted discretionary appropriations and mandatory appropriations for fy2012 through fy2016 are provided in several figures and tables . specifically , figure 1 and table 1 provide fs total discretionary and mandatory appropriations in current and constant dollars ; figure 2 shows enacted discretionary appropriations by wfm , nfs , and all other fs accounts in current and constant dollars ; figure 3 and table 4 ( at the end of the report ) provide side - by - side comparisons of fs discretionary budget requests and discretionary appropriations ; figure 4 shows the difference between requested and enacted discretionary appropriations by wfm , nfs , and all other fs accounts ; table 2 contains enacted fs discretionary appropriations , listed by account , with five - year change in current and constant dollars ; and table 3 contains fs discretionary budget requests , listed by account . in fy2016 , total fs enacted appropriations ( discretionary and mandatory ) were $7.065 billion , 25% higher than the fy2012 total appropriation of $5.655 billion ( in current dollars , see table 1 and figure 1 ) . when adjusted for inflation , total fs appropriations have increased by 17% since fy2012 . the fy2016 level was also higher than the five - year average total appropriation of $6.089 billion and is the largest appropriation over the five - year period .