sec . mechanisms for strengthening budgetary integrity . ( b ) point of order with respect to advance appropriations — ( 1 ) in general — it shall not be in order in the senate to consider any bill , resolution , amendment , motion or conference report that — ( a ) provides an appropriation of new budget authority for any fiscal year after the budget year that is in excess of the amounts provided in paragraph ( 2 ) ; and ( b ) provides an appropriation of new budget authority for any fiscal year subsequent to the year after the budget year . ( 2 ) limitation on amounts — the total amount , provided in appropriations legislation for the budget year , of appropriations for the subsequent fiscal year shall not exceed $23,500,000,000 . ( d ) waiver and appeal — subsections ( b ) and ( c ) may be waived or suspended in the senate only by an affirmative vote of three - fifths of the members , duly chosen and sworn . an affirmative vote of three - fifths of the members of the senate , duly chosen and sworn , shall be required in the senate to sustain an appeal of the ruling of the chair on a point of order raised under this section . ( e ) form of the point of order — a point of order under this section may be raised by a senator as provided in section 313 ( e ) of the congressional budget act of 1974 . ( f ) conference reports — if a point of order is sustained under this section against a conference report , the report shall be disposed of as provided in section 313 ( d ) of the congressional budget act of 1974 . ( i ) sunset — except for subsection ( g ) , this section shall expire effective october 1 , 2002 . 83 ) sec . restrictions on advance appropriations in the house . ( a ) in general — ( 1 ) in the house , except as provided in subsection ( b ) , an advance appropriation may not be reported in a bill or joint resolution making a general appropriation or continuing appropriation , and may not be in order as an amendment thereto . ( 2 ) managers on the part of the house may not agree to a senate amendment that would violate paragraph ( 1 ) unless specific authority to agree to the amendment first is given by the house by a separate vote with respect thereto . ( b ) exception — in the house , an advance appropriation may be provided - ( 1 ) for fiscal year 2003 for programs , projects , activities or accounts identified in the joint explanatory statement of managers accompanying this resolution under the heading 'accounts identified for advance appropriations' in an aggregate amount not to exceed $23,159,000,000 in new budget authority ; and ( 2 ) for the corporation for public broadcasting .