the regulation of genetic testing has raised several issues . traditionally , most genetic tests have not been subject to premarket review by the fda . it has been noted that , in the past , genetic tests were developed mostly by academic or research laboratories primarily for in - house use — tests referred to as laboratory - developed tests ( ldts ) — to diagnose rare diseases and were highly dependent on expert interpretation . in january 2017 , fda released a discussion paper on ldts that included a possible approach to ldt oversight ( for more detail , see " fda's january 2017 discussion paper: a possible approach to ldt oversight " ) . the appropriate degree and extent of federal regulation of direct - to - consumer ( dtc ) genetic testing has also been a subject of debate amongst relevant federal agencies as well as the affected entities ( mostly for - profit companies , for example , 23andme , pathway genomics , or life technologies ) . genetic testing has become increasingly available for direct purchase by consumers , generally over the internet . in this type of testing — direct - to - consumer genetic testing — the consumer sends in a tissue sample , often cells from the inside of the cheek , and the results are conveyed directly to the consumer by the company that developed the test . almost a decade ago , in 2010 , the government accountability office ( gao ) testified that in its investigation of dtc genetic tests — priced from $299 to $999 — from four companies , it found the dtc genetic test results to be "misleading and of little or no practical use to consumers. however , in a reflection of evolution in both dtc genetic tests themselves and fda oversight of these tests , in april 2017 , fda approved the first dtc genetic test that provides information about the risk of developing disease ( predisposition ) . this test , 23andme's personal genome service genetic health risk , provides consumers with information about their likelihood of manifesting 10 diseases or conditions ( eg , celiac disease , parkinson's disease ) . congress and the regulatory agencies have historically been interested in balancing the goals of allowing consumers to have access , as quickly as possible , to new and improved medical devices with preventing devices that are not safe and effective from entering or remaining on the market . in the case of ivds , and specifically , ldts , congress has introduced bills that attempt to address both of these goals , that is , to support innovation and to increase or expand regulatory oversight . approaches have included , among others , streamlining regulation by concentrating it in a single federal agency or requiring the fda to assert its enforcement authority over ldts . in addition to its role as regulator , the federal government has a role as a payor for ivds , primarily through the medicare program . medicare covers outpatient clinical laboratory testing and generally reimburses for these tests based on the clinical laboratory fee schedule ( clfs ) .