agritourism . agritourism involves supplementing income from farming and natural resource activities with tourism - related activities , from harvest festivals to farm vacations . there is little authoritative information on the size of the market . according to the 2012 u.s. census of agriculture , 33,161 farms provided agritourism and recreation services valued at $704 million . space t ourism . several private spaceflight companies , including spacex and virgin galactic , are selling orbital and suborbital flights , and it is possible that the first commercial space passenger service will be launched in 2015 . the possibility of space tourism has raised a variety of legal and policy questions , some of which were addressed in a february 2014 hearing of the house committee on science , space , and technology subcommittee on space . many countries manage tourism policy at the national level , and they often have national tourism bureaus that undertake tourism advertising . some countries , such as italy , mexico , spain , south korea , and turkey , have ministers responsible for tourism management and promotion . according to oxford economics estimates produced for the u.s. travel association , europe , and the asia - pacific region spent $1.7 billion and $1.2 billion , respectively , on marketing programs that promote international travel to their regions in 2012 . australia , mexico , canada , and south africa also have large destination marketing budgets , with each investing more than $100 million annually to attract international tourists . in the united states , national support for travel and tourism consists mainly of promotional activities to encourage travel to the united states by residents of foreign countries . the department of commerce has an office of travel and tourism industries ( otti ) charged with improving the international competitiveness of the sector , among other functions . regulation of travel and tourism is dispersed among several federal agencies , including the departments of transportation , state , and labor , and the federal trade commission , although regulation of such matters as liquor licensing and casino gambling is handled at the state level . in recent congresses , lawmakers have enacted and introduced legislation to provide assistance to tourism - related industries , and have held hearings on the effects of travel and tourism on the u.s. economy . for instance , in the 113 th congress , the senate committee on commerce , science , and transportation's subcommittee on tourism , competitiveness , and innovation held a june 2014 hearing that examined the federal government's travel facilitation efforts . federal involvement in tourism promotion dates to the international travel act of 1961 ( p.l . 87-63 ) , which established the u.s. travel service , later replaced by the u.s. travel and tourism administration ( ustta ) within the department of commerce , to advertise u.s. tourism destinations to international travelers . congress steadily increased funding for ustta until 1997 , when it was dissolved . in 2003 , congress restarted funding for travel promotion through the consolidated appropriations resolution and established the u.s. travel and tourism advisory board ( usttab ) , which has been rechartered several times , most recently in september 2013 .