see the notes within the tables for more information . the third column contains explanatory notes . table 5 , table 6 , and table 7 serve as finding aids for selected resources covering news , scholarly , and policy research that may be related to congress and the legislative process . resources in these tables may contain editorial content and analysis . inclusion of these resources does not imply endorsement of the views held by the publications listed . table 2 provides information about how to access house and senate committee schedules , floor schedules , calendars , and floor proceedings , all of which can be helpful in tracking congressional activities . access to subscription resources can vary among crs , senate , and house offices . crs subscriptions can be accessed through the crs la follette congressional reading room ( locations and hours of operation are available in table 8 ) . the wide availability of such information can be daunting to those involved in policy and legislative research . table a - 1 provides additional information on the resources in table 1 , including more detailed descriptions and urls linking directly to the resources ( when available ) . table 3 serves as a reference guide for locating executive branch documents and information using freely available resources . the first column of the table lists documents or information commonly used in policy and legislative research and typical citations for such documents , where applicable . the second column lists resources where these materials can be accessed . the third column contains explanatory notes . the purpose of this report is to assist congressional staff in identifying and accessing key resources used during such research . the resources' titles and access information are presented in eight tables . the agencies each serve the congress in different ways . contact information for each agency and a description of each agency and its services is outlined in table 4 , below . please note that these tables are meant to serve as suggested starting points rather than comprehensive lists of news , scholarly , and policy resources . congressional users may also access databases subscribed to by the library of congress such as proquest , lexisnexis , factiva , ebscohost , and many others , onsite in the crs la follette congressional reading room and the public reading rooms at the library of congress . additionally , requests for literature searches and full text of specific articles can be submitted to crs . congressional users also have access to various databases through the house library and the senate library . table 8 contains a list of locations where congressional staff can obtain training and other services on capitol hill . table a - 1 provides an alphabetical listing of , and additional details about , the resources listed in table 1 , table 3 , and table 4 . the first column of the tables lists documents commonly used in policy and legislative research and typical citations for such documents . the second column lists resources where these documents can be accessed . unless otherwise indicated , all other resources are freely available .