these waters are excluded from jurisdiction under the final rule . , as a result of exemptions and exclusions ) . ( see the appendix for discussion of the connectivity report. ) a key conclusion in the science report that was also emphasized by the sab review is that streams and wetlands fall along a gradient of connectivity that can be described in terms of frequency ; duration ; magnitude ; timing ; and rates of change of water , material , and biotic fluxes to downstream waters . on june 14 , 2016 , the sixth circuit court set the briefing schedule in the litigation ; the court's schedule likely would lead to oral arguments in february 2017 or later . other legal complexities remain , however , including continuing district court cases over the rule in other circuits and pending decisions on the same issue in appeals before the u.s. courts of appeals for the tenth circuit and the eleventh circuit . as a result of the court's sixth circuit's october 2015 order and february 22 , 2016 , ruling , the corps and epa are continuing to make cwa jurisdictional determinations based on the 2008 guidance , as they did before promulgation of the 2015 rule . in september 2013 , epa released a draft report that reviews and synthesizes the peer - reviewed scientific literature on the connectivity or isolation of streams and wetlands relative to large water bodies such as rivers , lakes , estuaries , and oceans . as described below , after review and revision , this report was finalized in january 2015 . the purpose of the review , according to epa , was to summarize current understanding about these connections , the factors that influence them , and mechanisms by which connected waters affect the function or condition of downstream waters . the focus of the draft report , which was prepared by epa's office of research and development , was on small or temporary non - tidal streams , wetlands , and open waters . based on the reviewed literature , it made certain findings . all tributary streams , including perennial , intermittent , and ephemeral streams , are physically , chemically , and biologically connected to downstream rivers . wetlands and open waters in riparian areas and floodplains also are physically , chemically , and biologically connected with rivers and serve an important role in the integrity of downstream waters . in these types of wetlands , water - borne materials can be transported from the wetland to the river network and vice versa ( eg , water from a stream flows into and affects the wetland ) . wetlands and open waters where water only flows from the wetland or water to a river network , ( i.e. other benefits would include government savings on enforcement expenses , because the rule is intended to provide greater regulatory certainty , thus reducing the need for government enforcement . business and government may also achieve savings from reduced uncertainty concerning where cwa jurisdiction applies , they believe .