changes in the natural rate are not uncommon historically . for example , economists believe that it rose in the 1970s and fell in the 1990s . estimated variations in the natural rate over time are typically modest , however . cbo has estimated that it has ranged from 5.0% to 6.3% since 1949 . economists refer to this concept as "hysteresis. one reason that hysteresis might occur is because workers' skills erode during bouts of long - term unemployment , making them less employable going forward . if so , there are macroeconomic policy implications , which are discussed in the next section . reaching a consensus on whether the protracted period of high unemployment was the result of temporarily inadequate aggregate demand , an upward shift in the natural rate of unemployment unrelated to the recession , or an upward shift caused by hysteresis will require more evidence — notably , how much further unemployment falls in the current expansion before inflation rises . if the economy is getting close to full employment ( because the economy's productive potential is lower than projected ) , then continued stimulus would in theory cause inflation to rise . if policy makers were to wait to tighten policy until inflation starts rising , it might be too late to achieve full employment and maintain price stability , due to lags in the effects of policy changes on the economy . as this example illustrates , some economists see the risks of choosing an unsuitable macroeconomic policy stance based on incomplete and contradictory data as an argument against pursuing activist macroeconomic policies . in the past , there has been little evidence of hysteresis in the united states , but the phenomenon has been observed in parts of europe . that does not preclude hysteresis in this case , however , given the unusual depth and duration of the great recession and subsequent tepid recovery . cbo has estimated that the natural rate of unemployment rose to 6% in 2013 from 5% in 2007 . cbo attributed 0.5 percentage points of the increase to "the stigma of long - term unemployment," 0.5 percentage points to "a decrease in the efficiency with which employers filled vacancies," and 0.1 percentage points to "the incentives generated in 2013 by extensions of unemployment insurance benefits. cbo attributed the decrease in the efficiency of filling vacancies at least in part to mismatches between skills and openings , and expects the increase in the natural rate attributable to it to be temporary . evidence for and against a rise in the natural rate is presented in crs report r41785 , the increase in unemployment since 2007: is it cyclical or structural ? if the natural rate has increased , it would mean that the economy is closer to full employment today than estimates based on the natural rate prevailing before the recession would suggest . historically , the headline unemployment rate has been viewed as a simple , timely , and transparent indicator of the state of the economy .