appendix b . comparison of economic impact studies as debate about u.s. crude oil export policy has continued , several organizations have published analytical studies that assess the potential economic effects associated with removing crude oil export restrictions . table b - 1 compares four of the published studies in terms of major areas covered that may be of interest to congress . comparing these studies on a truly equivalent basis is difficult since each study uses a different methodology , approach , model , and set of assumptions to derive results . additionally , study results can be influenced by oil market conditions , which can change over time , at the point the study was conducted . finally , one of the unknown factors in the studies that is quite difficult to assess is how the organization of petroleum exporting countries ( opec ) might respond ( i.e. , maintaining production and accepting potentially lower prices or reducing production levels as a means of possibly maintaining oil price levels ) to additional crude oil in the international oil market . exactly how , or even if , opec might respond to a change in u.s. crude oil export policy is highly uncertain . drip gases are also included , but topped crude oil , residual oil , and other finished and unfinished oils are excluded . [emphasis added] however , the definition also includes language that may allow for processed crude oil and condensate to be exported . for example , the definition indicates that crude oil / lease condensate processed through a distillation tower is export eligible . as a result , the regulation allows for some degree of interpretation with regard to the amount of processing necessary to qualify as an exportable product . lease condensate , typically produced with natural gas , is one aspect of the crude oil export debate with several complexities and considerations ( i.e. , no common definition , limited production and price data , and regulatory inconsistencies ) . additionally , lease condensate has physical / chemical characteristics similar to exportable hydrocarbons such as naphtha , natural gasoline , and plant condensate . bis commodity classification restrictions on crude oil exports required by the energy policy and conservation act ( p.l . 94-163 ) and other statutes are administered by bis through short - supply controls . under the export administration regulations ( ear ) , exporters must obtain a license to export crude oil . some exports permitted by the regulations may be available for a license exception , under which the exporter certifies that a lawful transaction is taking place . for goods subject to the ear , if an exporter is unsure about an item's classification and the resulting controls on that item , the exporter may request a commodity classification from bis . commodity classifications generally are used to determine the control status of sensitive or strategic "dual - use" products controlled for national security or foreign policy reasons . however , these procedures are available to classify any product subject to the ear , including crude oil . to obtain a commodity classification , an exporter would provide bis specifications for the good / technology , including blueprints , sales brochures , and catalogs .