it will be updated as warranted . "chief of mission," or com , is the title conferred on the principal officer in charge of each u.s. diplomatic mission to a foreign country , foreign territory , or international organization . usually the term refers to the u.s. ambassadors who lead u.s. embassies abroad , but the term also is used for ambassadors who head other official u.s. missions and to other diplomatic personnel who may step in when no ambassador is present . the u.s. constitution authorizes the president to appoint ambassadors with the advice and consent of the senate , that is to say , subject to senate confirmation . in circumstances where no presidentially appointed ambassador is currently serving at a u.s. mission abroad , legislation further authorizes the president to appoint a career u.s. foreign service officer as a chargé d'affaires or "otherwise as the head of a mission ... for such period as the public interest may require. an ambassador or other foreign service official may hold the com position within a given u.s. mission abroad . appointed by the president , each com serves as the president's personal representative , leading diplomatic efforts for a particular mission or in the country of assignment under the general supervision of the secretary of state and with the support of the regional assistant secretary of state . the role of the com has expanded considerably since world war ii . with the postwar expansion of u.s. foreign assistance around the world , coms assigned to head u.s. embassies or other country - based diplomatic missions abroad have been charged with responsibility for overseeing nearly all u.s. government activities in their country of assignment , with the primary exception of military operations . most often , they exercise this authority through their leadership of the embassy's "country team," the membership of which includes the chief representative of each u.s. government agency undertaking activities in a host country or other mission . the state department / usaid 2010 quadrennial diplomacy and development review ( qddr ) casts ambassadors as chief executive officers or "ceos" of multi - agency missions , not only conducting traditional diplomacy , but also leading and overseeing civilians from multiple federal agencies in other work . the qddr highlights the key role of country teams and ambassadors in the conduct of foreign policy and assistance , and sets forth ways in which the obama administration would try to improve the knowledge and skills of coms and their ability to lead country teams . civilian agencies "possess some of the world's leading expertise on issues increasingly central to our diplomacy and development work," the qddr states . "the united states benefits when government agencies can combine their expertise overseas as part of an integrated country strategy," when "implemented under chief of mission authority , and when those agencies build lasting working relationships with their foreign counterparts. at the time of the qddr's release , then - secretary of state clinton also announced that chiefs of mission were to play a role in integrating country - level strategic plans and budgets . the authorities and responsibilities of coms are explained primarily in the foreign service act of 1980 , as amended ( fsa 1980 ; p.l .