36 ) on may 22 . this bill was passed by the full senate on july 31 , 2014 . the research reactor was shut down during the vietnam war . after north vietnam defeated the south in 1975 and reunified the country , the vietnam atomic energy commission ( vaec ) was established in 1976 for civilian nuclear research . the international atomic energy agency ( iaea ) has provided technical cooperation ( tc ) assistance to vietnam since it joined the agency in 1978 . in the early 1980s , the soviet union helped vietnam restore and upgrade the research reactor to a 500 kw russian vvr - m design . this research reactor was powered with highly enriched uranium , weapons - usable material which is considered to be a potential nuclear security risk . with u.s. assistance under the department of energy's global threat reduction initiative , since 2007 , vietnam has converted the dalat research reactor from heu to low enriched uranium ( leu ) fuel , and returned the heu fresh and spent fuel to russia . the shipments , which removed a total of 11 kg of heu , were completed in july 2013 . this activity advanced u.s. - vietnam cooperation in the nuclear nonproliferation sphere . as vietnam's economy has grown , so have its energy demands , which , according to one source , grew by 15% annually in the first decade of the 2000s . the vietnamese government issued a master plan in july 2011 that called for two additional reactors to be constructed at phuoc dinh by 2025 and two more at vinh hai by 2027 , plus two larger reactors , possibly korean , at another site to begin operating by 2029 . another 4,000 megawatts of planned capacity would bring the country's generating capacity to 14,800 megawatts by 2030 . however , vietnam's prime minister announced in january 2014 that it might delay construction of the first plant , at phuoc dinh , until 2020 , potentially pushing back the planned completion of the first reactor to the mid - 2020s . difficulties in training staff for the planned nuclear power program have been mentioned by news reports as a possible reason for the delay . the russian firm atomstroyexport is to build two 1,200 mwe light - water reactors ( standard commercial reactors ) at the ninh thuan 1 power plant at phuoc dinh . they will be built on a turnkey basis , and will be operated by state - owned utility electricity of vietnam ( evn ) . as with other russian - built nuclear power plants in non - nuclear weapon states , the contract includes a provision to both supply fuel and take back spent ( used ) fuel . the russian atomic energy agency , rosatom , will set up a training center in vietnam to help prepare nuclear specialists . cost estimates for the power plants vary ; rosatom reportedly has forecast the cost of the first two - reactor plants as up to $8 billion , but some press reports that included related infrastructure development estimate a total of $10 billion . russia's ministry of finance is expected to finance the majority of these costs .