specifically , p.l . 104-188 provided that the employer minimum would be 50% of the minimum wage at the time that the legislation was enacted ( $4.25 ) . the most recent change was enacted in 2007 ( p.l . 110-28 ) to increase the minimum wage to $7.25 per hour by july 2009 . congress amended the flsa in 1966 to add a "tip credit" provision to the minimum wage provisions . under section 203 ( m ) of the flsa , a "tipped employee" — a worker who "customarily and regularly receives more than $30 a month in tips" — may have his or her cash wage from an employer reduced to $2.13 per hour , as long as the combination of tips and wages from the employer equals the federal minimum wage ( currently $7.25 per hour ) . that is , the "credit" is the amount from employee tips that an employer may count against its liability for the required payment of the full federal minimum wage . under the current federal minimum wage and the current required minimum employer cash wage , the maximum tip credit is $5.12 per hour ( i.e. , $7.25 minus $2.13 ) . thus , all workers covered under the tip credit provision of the flsa are guaranteed the federal minimum wage . the tip credit provisions of the flsa do not mean that a tipped worker may earn a subminimum wage ; rather the tip credit provisions change the composition of a worker's earnings . specifically , the key concepts that comprise the tip credit provisions are the following: the "employer cash wage" is the minimum amount that an employer is required to pay a tipped worker . currently , the flsa sets this amount at $2.13 per hour , which is 29% of the current federal minimum wage of $7.25 per hour . an employer of a tipped employee , just like an employer of any flsa - covered employee , is ultimately responsible for the payment of the full minimum wage to that employee . the "tip credit" is the amount of earnings from tips that an employer may count against its liability for the full minimum wage . under current law and at the current rate of $7.25 per hour , the maximum tip credit is $5.12 per hour , which means employers may take a credit of up to 71% of their required obligation to pay a minimum wage . a higher tip credit means that an employer may count more in tips toward the employer liability for the minimum wage . a lower tip credit means that employers must provide a greater share of an employee's compensation in direct cash wages . no tip credit means that an employer must pay direct cash wages equal to the minimum wage and the tipped worker does not have to credit any tip income toward the total minimum wage . the existence of a tip credit thus means there are two components of the minimum wage for tipped workers — employer cash wage and tips . the combination of the employer cash wage and the tips must equal the required minimum wage .