but we're not doing what we did during the cold war . our broadcasting board of governors is practically defunct in terms of its capacity to be able to tell a message around the world . so we're abdicating the ideological arena , and we need to get back into it . we have the best values , we have the best narrative . most people in the world just want to have a good , decent life that is supported by a good , decent job and raise their families . and we're letting the jihadist narrative fill a void . we need to get in there and compete — and we can do it successfully . several issues and recommendations for reform have been put forward to make the bbg more effective . on may 14 , 2015 , house foreign affairs committee chairman edward royce , with committee ranking member eliot engel and 12 other co - sponsors , introduced the united states international communications reform act of 2015 ( h.r . the committee voted to report the bill favorably to the house on may 21 . the bill in its findings provision states that the bbg operates poorly under a flawed structure , that the bbg's internal operations and personnel decision making have deficiencies , and that u.s. international broadcasters lack clearly defined missions , leading to duplicative services and a lack of focus on maintaining the division between the "public diplomacy" mission of voa and the "surrogate" mission of rfe / rl , rfa , mbn , and ocb . the bill seeks to restructure the whole of u.s. international broadcasting in order to address these problems . the following sections highlight some of the central provisions of this bill . the house version of the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2017 ( h.r . 4909 ; ndaa ) includes two sections , sections 1259d and 1259e , that would accomplish a number of reforms to the structure of u.s. international broadcasting and the bbg . the senate version , s. 2943 , did not initially include similar provisions . after s. 2943 passed the senate , the house adopted an amended version of s. 2943 , which included the provisions from h.r . on december 2 and 8 , 2016 , respectively , the house and senate approved the conference report accompanying s. 2943 , containing a similar version of certain of these bbg reform provisions in section 1288 . the provisions ultimately included in the enacted 2017 ndaa would significantly broaden the role of the bbg ceo , and provide authority to the ceo to direct broadcasting and reform efforts in the bbg .