this provision is permanent . in the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 ( p.l . 111-5 ) , an exclusion of 75% was allowed . the small business jobs act of 2010 ( p.l . 111-240 ) increased the exclusion to 100% . subsequent extensions and modifications of the provision allow for a full exclusion of any gain for stock acquired after september 27 , 2010 , and before january 1 , 2015 . to be eligible , the taxpayer must acquire the stock at its original issue and hold it for a minimum of five years . there is an annual limit on the exclusion for gains on the sale of qsbs issued by the same firm: the exclusion cannot exceed the greater of $10 million , less any cumulative gain excluded by the taxpayer in previous tax years , or 10 times a taxpayer's adjusted basis in the stock . the original provision was adopted when capital gains were taxed as ordinary income . part of the reason for adopting the increased exclusion was that the benefit was lessened or disappeared with the lower tax rates on capital gains . the special benefit for this small business stock appears to have been intended to facilitate the formation and growth of small firms organized as c corporations involved in developing new manufacturing technologies . the provision provides investors an incentive to acquire a sizable equity stake in small firms . an exclusion of part ( or all ) of the gain from small business stock allows for investors in firms of different sizes to face different effective tax rates . along with the effect on equity , the provision may also reduce economic efficiency through its distortionary effect on the allocation of capital . the provision could , however , increase economic efficiency if it were to correct for capital market imperfections and allow for optimal small business formation and growth . the section 199 domestic production activities deduction reduces tax rates on certain types of economic activity , primarily domestic manufacturing activities . qualified domestic manufacturing activities qualify for a deduction equal to 9% of the lesser of taxable income derived from qualified production activities or taxable income . the effect of the deduction is to reduce the effective tax rate on income from qualified activities by 3.15 percentage points , from 35% to 31.85% . the section 199 domestic production activities deduction is a permanent part of the internal revenue code ( irc ) . when the section 199 deduction was enacted as part of the american jobs creation act of 2004 ( ajca ; p.l . 108-357 ) , the term "united states," as used for the purposes of determining eligible domestic activities , included the 50 states and the district of columbia , but not u.s. possessions or territories . in 2006 , as part of the tax relief and healthcare act ( p.l . 109-432 ) , special rules that allowed puerto rico to be considered a part of the united states for the purposes of the section 199 domestic production activities deduction were temporarily enacted . this temporary provision has recently been extended as part of "tax extenders" legislation .