rehab . single room occupancy units for homeless individuals to convert ( they are not currently included ) ; and allow units eligible to convert under the second rad component to convert to pbra in addition to pbv . the house - passed thud bill ( h.r . 4745 ) included neither funding for rad nor changes to the way it operates . the senate committee - passed bill ( s. 2438 ) included $10 million for the conversion of public housing units and proposed to raise the cap on units that can convert under the first rad component to 185,000 ; extend the authorization dates for both rad components ( through fy2018 and december 31 , 2016 , respectively ) ; allow mod . rehab . single room occupancy units for homeless individuals to convert under the first rad component ; and allow units eligible to convert under the second rad component to convert to pbra in addition to pbv . the final fy2015 hud appropriations law includes the rad provisions from s. 2438 , with two exceptions: ( 1 ) no funding is provided for rad ; and ( 2 ) the deadline for conversion under the second component of rad is eliminated . the community development fund ( cdf ) funds several community development - related activities , including the community development block grant ( cdbg ) program . cdbg is the federal government's largest and most widely available source of financial assistance supporting state and local government - directed neighborhood revitalization , housing rehabilitation , and economic development activities . these formula - based grants are allocated to approximately 1,196 entitlement communities ( metropolitan cities with populations of 50,000 , principal cities of metropolitan areas , and urban counties ) , the 50 states , puerto rico , and the insular areas of american samoa , guam , the virgin islands , and the northern mariana islands . grants are used to implement plans intended to address housing , community development , and economic development needs , as determined by local officials . ( for a detailed review of recent cdf funding issues and a detailed description of cdbg , see crs report r43208 , community development block grants: funding issues in the 113 th congress , by [author name scrubbed] . and for related programs see crs report r43520 , community development block grants and related programs: a primer , by [author name scrubbed]. ) the obama administration's budget request for fy2015 included $2.870 billion for activities funded under the cdf account . the requested amount represented 6.1% of the total budget authority requested by the agency for fy2015 . as shown in table 5 , the administration's fy2015 budget proposed to decrease total funding for cdf account activities by 7.4% , or $230 million .