section 433 . enhanced energy efficiency underwriting requires hud to develop and issue updated underwriting and appraisal guidelines for borrowers who voluntarily submit a qualified home energy report . the provision would cover any loan issued , insured , purchased , or securitized by the federal housing administration ( fha ) and other federal agencies , or their successors . the updated guidelines would adjust underwriting criteria and valuation guidelines to account for expected energy cost savings as an offset to other expenses and to account for present value of expected energy savings . that effort was apparently unsuccessful . in floor action on may 12 , 2014 , the bill was called up for a cloture vote to close debate . the initial tally ( 56-35 ) failed to reach the required 60-vote threshold , whereupon the majority leader changed his vote in order to reserve the right to move for reconsideration . thus , the final vote tally was 55-36 , and the majority leader entered a motion to reconsider the vote by which cloture was not invoked on s. 2262 . title i: buildings subtitle a: building energy codes section 101 . greater energy efficiency in building codes strengthens national model building codes for new homes and commercial buildings by requiring the department of energy ( doe ) to support their development , including the setting of energy savings targets and providing of technical assistance to the code - setting and standard development organizations . doe , in consultation with building science experts and institutions of higher learning , will produce a report on the feasibility , impact , economics and value of code improvements . section 304 of the energy conservation and policy act ( ecpa , p.l . 94-163 ) is amended to change the state certification process so that within two years after model building codes are updated , states are to certify whether or not they have updated their building codes , and demonstrate if the building codes have met or exceeded energy savings targets . the legislation reserves adoption and enforcement of model building codes to the states , but empowers doe to offer technical assistance . section 307 of ecpa is amended to direct doe to support the updating of model building energy codes by independent codes and standards developers , and to utilize the 2009 international energy conservation code ( iecc ) for residences and the ashrae 90.1-2010 for commercial buildings as the baseline . authorizes $200 million in funding to incentivize and assist states to meet the goals and requirements of the bill through the use of model codes . subtitle b: worker training and capacity building section 111 . building training and assessment centers establishes a doe program for university - based building training and assessment centers , modeled after the existing industrial assessment centers ( iacs ) . authorizes $10 million in programmatic funding to train engineers , architects and workers in energy - efficient commercial building design and operations . section 112 . career skills training creates a doe career skills program to provide grants to nonprofit partnerships for worker training in for the construction and installation of energy - efficient building technologies .