changing aip requirements . reducing the percentage match private operators must provide to obtain aip grants to the level of comparable public operators would make privatization more attractive to private investors , but would increase the share of federal funding . relaxing aip grant assurances . if private investors were freed from some of the requirements agreed to by the public owner in order to obtain aip funds , privatization might become more attractive to investors . however , some of the changes that might be most attractive to investors , such as allowing the sale of airport property , might interfere with the federal interest in maintaining aviation system capacity and safety . liberalizing rules governing fees . allowing privatized airports more flexibility to impose passenger facility charges and to raise rents and landing fees would make privatization more attractive to investors . however , this might increase airline opposition to privatization and could lead to higher costs for passengers and air cargo shippers . easing limits on use of privatization revenue . reducing the obstacles for public - sector owners to use privatization revenue for non - airport purposes would stimulate local and state government interest in privatization . on the other hand , it could potentially lead to a lower level of investment in aviation infrastructure . the following types of airports are discussed in this report: commercial service airports publicly owned airports that receive scheduled passenger service and board at least 2,500 passengers each year . there are 509 commercial service airports . primary airports commercial service airports that board more than 10,000 passengers each year . large hub airports board 1% or more of system - wide passengers ( 30 airports , 72% of all enplanements ) . medium hub airports board 0.25% but less than 1% of system - wide passengers ( 31 airports , 15% of all enplanements ) . small hub airports board 0.05% but less than 0.25% of system - wide passengers ( 72 airports , 8% of all enplanements ) . participation in the appp has been very limited . only two airports have completed the privatization process , and one of them later reverted to public ownership . owners of other airports considered privatization , but eventually chose not to proceed . the lack of interest in privatization among u.s. airports could be the result of ( 1 ) readily available financing sources for publicly owned airports ; ( 2 ) barriers or lack of incentives to privatize ; ( 3 ) the potential implications for major stakeholders ; and ( 4 ) satisfaction with the status quo . privatization refers to the shifting of governmental functions , responsibilities , and sometimes ownership , in whole or in part , to the private sector . with respect to airports , "privatization" can take many forms up to and including the transfer of an entire airport to private operation and / or ownership . in the united states , most cases of airport privatization fall into the category of "partial privatization" ; full privatization , either under or outside the appp , has been very rare . the federal aviation reauthorization act of 1996 ( 49 u.s.c . ยง47134 ; section 149 of the federal aviation reauthorization act of 1996 , p.l .