the drf is also used to fund mission assignments . mission assignments are used by fema to task and reimburse other federal entities that provide direct assistance during emergency and major disaster declarations . the drf functions as a reserve for potential , future incidents , as well as an account to pay for ongoing projects to recover from past disasters . since the 1950s , the level of financial assistance given to states for disaster relief by the federal government has steadily increased . in light of stated concern with the federal deficit , the increased federal involvement has raised policymaking questions concerning how disaster relief should be equitably funded . while the current system does use a per capita amount , that level could be increased . as another example , the total amount of federal relief for an event could be capped at a certain amount . after this level has been reached , the state would then be responsible to pay for the rest of recovery . should the state's fiscal capability factor into disaster relief ? some of these questions include the following: the model for emergency and disaster response is built on the premise that emergencies and disasters are local . requests for assistance from the next level of government are made only if the lower unit of government is overwhelmed . some would argue that some incidents funded by the federal government do not meet this requirement . an example might be snow removal or repairs after minor flooding . some may argue that federal funding for disaster relief through regular annual appropriations has become entrenched to the point that it has contributed to unintended consequences . for example , it has been argued that some states do not properly fund mitigation measures because there is a presumption that federal funding is virtually guaranteed should an emergency or major disaster occur . those advocating this position could arguably point out that federal involvement in disaster relief will continue to increase and that in order to be fiscally responsible , changes should be made in the way in which disaster relief is funded . others may claim the function of the federal government is to help states in their time of crisis . from this perspective , withholding or limiting the amount of funding a state could receive for an incident would be neglectful of that state's needs . as mentioned earlier , funding the drf at a higher level through annual appropriations may give some the perception that the funds are not being used and could therefore be subject to rescissions or transfers . if larger appropriations for the drf witnessed since the enactment of the bca continue , will there be a temptation to transfer unobligated funds to other disaster assistance programs not authorized by the stafford act ? for example , could the funds from the drf be used to fund drought relief programs provided by the united states department of agriculture , or to fund fire assistance provided by the department of the interior ? would subsidizing other assistance programs negate the benefit of having a larger appropriation ? these and other questions may be raised should congress elect to debate the past and future funding of disaster relief .