dot . congress has continued to support the tiger program through annual dot appropriations . there have been five rounds of tiger grants ( from arra funding , and from fy2010-fy2013 annual appropriations ) , with the sixth round ( fy2014 ) in process . after the restructuring of dot programs in the map - 21 reauthorization , the tiger program is virtually the only remaining discretionary grant program for surface transportation ( other than the fta's capital investment grant program , popularly referred to as new starts , discussed below ) . it is heavily oversubscribed ; for example , dot has announced that it received a total of $9.5 billion in applications for the $600 million available for fy2014 grants . the u.s. government accountability office ( gao ) has reported that , while dot has selection criteria for the tiger grant program , it has sometimes awarded grants to lower - ranked projects while bypassing higher - ranked projects , without explaining why it did so , raising questions about the integrity of the selection process . dot has responded that its project rankings are based on transportation - related criteria ( eg , safety , economic competitiveness ) , but that it must sometimes select lower - ranking projects over higher - ranking ones to comply with other selection criteria established by congress , such as geographic balance and a balance between rural and urban awards . the administration requested $1.25 billion for the tiger program for fy2015 , roughly double the $600 million congress provided in fy2014 . the fy2015 house bill would provide $100 million for the program , far less than the amount requested and $500 million ( 83% ) less than provided in fy2014 , while retaining the provisions requiring an equitable distribution of funds geographically and between urban and rural areas , and with a maximum grant size of $15 million . the senate committee on appropriations recommended $550 million , far less than the amount requested and $50 million ( 8% ) less than provided in fy2014 . the eas program seeks to preserve commercial air service to small communities by subsidizing the cost of service that would otherwise be unprofitable . the costs of the program doubled between fy2008 and fy2012 , in part because route reductions by airlines resulted in new communities being added . congress made changes to the program in 2012 , including allowing no new entrants , capping the per passenger subsidy for a community at $1,000 , limiting communities less than 210 miles from a hub airport to a maximum average subsidy per passenger of $200 , and allowing smaller , less expensive planes to be used for communities with few daily passengers . supporters of the eas program contend that preserving airline service to small communities was a commitment congress made when it deregulated airline service in 1978 , anticipating that airlines would reduce or eliminate service to many communities that were too small to make such service economically viable . supporters also contend that subsidizing air service to smaller communities promotes economic development in rural areas .