v. chadha . the court in chadha declared that that legislative acts , which have the "purpose and effect of altering the legal rights , duties , and relations of persons" outside the legislative branch , must satisfy the bicameralism and presentment requirements of the constitution . accordingly , congressional designation made to the judiciary by the leadership of each house without the approval of the other , or the president , would seem to implicate the principles established in chadha . such an arrangement would abide by the strictures of the appointments clause . however , a separate constitutional appointment could call into question the fisa courts' status as article iii courts . generally , these types of proposals would appear to be potentially problematic under the appointments clause and general separation - of - powers principles . while congress has authority to select individuals to serve on entities that aid congress in its legislative function , congress has no authority under the appointments clause to directly select appointees that exercise significant authority pursuant to the laws of the united states . secondly , congressional designations may raise legal concerns under the principles announced in i.n.s . this report first briefly reviews the constitutional method for appointing article iii judges . it then surveys the process of "designation," an alternative method used by congress that allows current federal judges to serve temporarily on another federal court without undergoing a separate constitutional appointment . lastly , the report explores how a reviewing court might assess the constitutionality of some of these proposals that shift designation authority away from the chief justice alone and vest it in other officials within the judicial , executive , and legislative branches . accordingly , the initial appointment of an article iii judge generally must adhere to the strictures of the appointments clause because he is a principal officer exercising "significant authority pursuant to the laws of the united states. however , if congress subsequently expands the duties of an office for which one must be constitutionally appointed , the court has concluded that it may not be necessary for an incumbent to receive a second appointment , if the additional duties are germane to the official's original government post . for instance , in weiss v. united states , the supreme court held that military officers , who must be appointed by the president with the advice and consent of the senate , could be designated to serve on a military court without a second constitutional appointment . guided by the principle of "germaneness" established in shoemaker v. united states , the weiss court reiterated "[i]t cannot be doubted ... that congress may increase the power and duties of an existing office without thereby rendering it necessary that the incumbent should again be nominated and appointed. based on this precedent , it appears there is generally no violation of the appointments clause when congress permits the designation of an existing federal judge to serve in a separate position in a related article iii capacity . the supreme court also has had occasion to specifically address the constitutionality of the designation process within the judicial branch .