the total number of circuit court judges included in the analysis is 163 . figure 1 provides statistics related to the two most common types of professional experiences of u.s. circuit court judges who are currently serving on the bench — prior judicial experience and experience working as an attorney in private practice . the percentages reported for the two types of experiences are not mutually exclusive , meaning that there is some overlap between the two categories . for example , 47.9% of all active circuit court judges have both prior judicial experience as well as experience as an attorney in private practice ( while 9.0% have neither prior judicial nor private practice experience ) . altogether , 54.6% of u.s. circuit court judges who are currently serving had prior experience as another type of judge before their appointment to a circuit court ( and 45.4% had no such experience ) . of the judges with prior judicial experience , 22.7% served solely as another type of federal judge ( eg , a u.s. district court judge ) , while 20.9% served solely as a state judge and another 11.0% had both prior federal and state judicial experience . of the 74 circuit judges with no prior judicial experience , 81.8% had worked as attorneys in private practice , including 39.2% who worked in private practice for 15 or more years ( and another 14.9% who worked in private practice for 10 to 14 years ) . although over half of active circuit court judges have prior judicial experience ( 54.6% ) , a greater percentage have at least some prior experience as attorneys in private practice ( 84.7% ) . similarly , while 45.6% of active circuit judges do not have prior judicial experience , a much smaller percentage , 15.3% , have no prior experience in private practice . figure 1 also shows that of active circuit court judges with private practice experience , a plurality ( 26.4% ) had 15 or more years of experience as attorneys in private practice . another 21.5% had less than 5 years of experience , while 17.2% had 5 to 9 years of experience and 19.6% had 10 to 14 years of experience . altogether , 46.0% of active circuit court judges had 10 or more years of experience as attorneys in private practice ( while 54.0% had less than 10 years of experience or no private practice experience ) . figure 2 reports the percentage of active u.s. circuit court judges who had a particular type of position or occupation immediately prior to their appointment as a circuit court judge . so , for example , a plurality of active circuit court judges , 27.0% , were u.s. district court judges immediately prior to being appointed as circuit court judges . altogether , half ( 50.3% ) of all active circuit court judges were serving as another type of judge ( either a u.s. district court judge , another type of federal judge , or a state judge ) . judicial nominees are evaluated by the aba's standing committee on the federal judiciary . the committee's evaluation criteria focus "strictly on professional qualifications: integrity , professional competence and judicial temperament.