the former would not . section 4105 of the federal acquisition reform act ( fara ) of 1996 generally requires agencies to use "two - phase selection procedures" when contracting for the design and construction of public buildings or works , provided certain conditions are met . in the first phase , the agency solicits information about offerors' technical approaches and qualifications , without considering cost or price . based on these submissions , the agency then selects the "most highly qualified" offerors from the first phase and invites them to submit proposals for a second phase of the competition that considers cost or price , among other things . section 4105 further provides that the first - phase solicitation must state the maximum number of offerors who will be selected for consideration in the second phase , and that this number cannot exceed five unless the contracting agency determines , on a case - by - case basis , that a "specified number greater than 5 is in the federal government's interest and is consistent with the purposes and objectives of the two - phase selection process. however , concerns have been raised that agencies select more than five offerors in too many cases , thereby imposing the costs of competing on firms — particularly small businesses — that are progressively less likely to be selected as the number of competitors increases . at least one measure introduced in the 113 th congress would have responded to these concerns by amending the codification of section 4105 ( i.e. nor does it discuss all provisions of bills that are included . rather , its focus is upon legislation that reflects distinctive approaches to issues in small business contracting ( eg , increasing goals , authorizing set - asides or sole - source awards ) . the report will be updated as additional legislation is enacted or introduced . government - wide and agency - specific goals for the percentage of contract and / or subcontract dollars awarded to small businesses have long been part of the federal procurement process . congress amended section 15 ( g ) of the small business act in 1978 to require that agency heads , in consultation with the sba , set agency - specific goals for the percentage of federal contract and subcontract dollars awarded to small businesses each year . ten years later , in 1988 , congress further amended section 15 ( g ) to require the president to set government - wide goals for the percentage of federal contract and / or subcontract dollars awarded annually to various categories of small businesses . these government - wide goals must equal or exceed certain percentages specified in statute ( currently , 23% of federal contract dollars awarded to small businesses ( of any type ) ; 5% of federal contract and subcontract dollars awarded to women - owned small businesses ; 5% to small businesses owned and controlled by "socially and economically disadvantaged" individuals and groups ; 3% to hubzone small businesses ; and 3% to service - disabled veteran - owned small businesses ) . individual contracts may be counted toward multiple goals .