if so , for how long and at what cost ? how can u.s. counternarcotics programs in afghanistan be appropriately monitored and evaluated , given security constraints on u.s. personnel mobility ? the fy2014 appropriations ( p.l . 113-76 ) further emphasized the importance of adequate monitoring and oversight , stipulating , among other provisions , that economic support fund ( esf ) and international narcotics control and law enforcement ( incle ) , two primary funding vehicles for counternarcotics assistance , may not be used to initiate new programs , projects , or activities for which regular oversight is not possible . as congress continues to evaluate counternarcotics policy options and programs in afghanistan , key questions for consideration include the following: how can the u.s. government preserve the counternarcotics gains it has achieved over the past 12 years in afghanistan and prevent backsliding following transition to a reduced u.s. security presence ? what is the risk and potential scale of increased cultivation and production of opium and heroin in afghanistan in 2015 and beyond ? how will the illicit narcotics industry affect overall economic growth and development in afghanistan ? should the u.s. government remain one of afghanistan's primary donors of counternarcotics assistance ? what metrics and benchmarks should be used to evaluate success or failure of u.s. counternarcotics efforts in afghanistan ? creation of the regional narcotics and analysis and illicit trafficking task force ( rnait - tf ) . in its post - 2014 counternarcotics strategy for afghanistan , submitted to congress in late 2013 , dod proposes the establishment , by the end of fy2014 , of a new interagency and international coordination mechanism for counternarcotics - related threats , including counter - threat finance . according to dod , it is intended to be a "bridge" between current counternarcotics activities inside afghanistan and more regionally focused efforts following the transition and drawdown of u.s. and coalition forces from afghanistan . in the context of a growing drug problem in afghanistan and diminished coalition participation in counternarcotics operations , some observers have questioned whether the drug issue will be an afghan policy priority following the transition — and whether the u.s. government will lose its ability to exert pressure for counternarcotics actions , including corruption investigations that target high - level officials . others question whether policy makers are sufficiently prepared for the consequences that the transition may bring to counternarcotics efforts in afghanistan , including a reduced security forces presence in key drug producing provinces and potentially declining resources for counternarcotics programming , such as alternative development . the transition may also reignite policy debates on the impact and consequences associated with previously controversial policy ideas , including aerial eradication of opium poppy crops , alternative development programming linked to eradication commitments , and the licensing of medical - grade opium production for legal export and sale . the following sections describe key u.s. counternarcotics programs in afghanistan and identify related policy issues .