security. as previously noted , the emphasis of the administration's fy2015 foreign aid budget request for latin america and the caribbean would shift slightly toward development assistance and away from security assistance , as compared to the fy2014 estimate . given constraints on the overall aid budget , some members of congress have criticized the administration for dedicating some funding to clean energy and climate change mitigation programs , maintaining the assistance would be better spent supporting security efforts . as u.s. assistance to latin america and the caribbean has declined , administration officials have emphasized other forms of engagement to advance u.s. policy priorities . for example , the administration is currently focused on concluding the trans - pacific partnership ( tpp ) trade negotiations , which include countries such as chile , mexico , and peru . many other countries in the region benefit from trade preference programs like the generalized system of preferences ( gsp ) and the caribbean basin initiative ( cbi ) . the administration has also emphasized initiatives such as 100,000 strong in the americas , which is designed to increase the number of latin american students studying in the united states and the number of u.s. students studying in latin america , and connecting the americas 2022 , which is designed to ensure universal access to reliable , clean , and affordable electricity . to date , few u.s. government resources have been dedicated to initiatives such as these , which rely on private sector funding . some questions members of congress might consider include: how do u.s. policy priorities in the western hemisphere compare to u.s. priorities elsewhere in the world , and are u.s. priorities properly reflected in the foreign aid budget ? does the foreign aid budget adequately reflect u.s. interests and objectives in latin america and the caribbean , and is it balanced appropriately among these myriad interests and objectives ? what are the potential effects of foreign aid reductions on political , economic , and security conditions in the region ? how might cuts in assistance affect u.s. bilateral relations and influence in the region ? if additional cuts are to be made to foreign aid to the region , which areas can be identified for reduction with the least harm to u.s. interests or objectives ? are there other forms of engagement the u.s. government could use to advance its policy priorities in latin america and the caribbean , and should more resources be dedicated to those initiatives as u.s. relations with the region become less defined by the provision of foreign assistance ? a 2010 study of counternarcotics programs found that several countries in the region were unable to use u.s. - provided boats for patrol or interdiction operations due to a lack of funding for fuel and maintenance . even millennium challenge corporation ( mcc ) - funded projects , in which assistance is contingent on partner nation actions , have run into problems with program sustainability . a 2011 study of the mcc compact in honduras found that the lifespan of roads built to improve small farmers' access to markets may be relatively limited , as the municipalities where they were constructed lack the equipment , expertise , and funding for road maintenance .