the fy2014 bill , p.l . the energy policy act of 2005 permanently extended a requirement that 90% of nrc's budget be offset by fees on licensees . not subject to the offset are expenditures from the nuclear waste fund to pay for waste repository licensing , spending on general homeland security , and doe defense waste oversight . the offsets in the fy2015 budget request would have resulted in a net appropriation of $124.2 million . net funding in the final bill was $119.8 million . 83 explanatory statement . 113-76 , appropriated $27.3 billion for doe . the fy2013 continuing resolution , p.l . 113-6 , funded doe programs at $25.1 billion , including the sequestration requirements of the budget control act . corps appropriations are generally authorized in water resources development acts . most recently , congress enacted a new water resources development act in june of 2014 , the water resources reform and development act of 2014 ( wrrda , p.l . this bill authorized new corps projects and studies and altered numerous corps policies and procedures . in most years , the president's budget request for the corps is below the agency's enacted appropriation . for fy2015 , congress appropriated $5.454 billion for the corps in p.l . the president's fy2015 budget request for the corps was $4.561 billion . the house approved $5.557 billion for the corps , and the senate appropriations subcommittee recommended $5.162 billion . for fy2014 , congress had provided $5.468 billion in the agency's annual civil works appropriations in p.l . for more on the evolution of corps civil works funding in recent years , see crs in focus if00012 , army corps civil works funding: a primer ( in focus ) , by [author name scrubbed] . no further action on the senate draft bill was taken . table 1 indicates the status of the fy2015 funding legislation . the energy and water development bill includes funding for civil works projects of the u.s. army corps of engineers ( corps ) , the department of the interior's central utah project ( cup ) and bureau of reclamation ( reclamation ) , the department of energy ( doe ) , and a number of independent agencies , including the nuclear regulatory commission ( nrc ) and the appalachian regional commission ( arc ) . the energy and water development bill provides funding for the civil program of the u.s. army corps of engineers ( corps ) , an agency in the department of defense with both military and civilian responsibilities . under its civil works program , the corps plans , builds , operates , and maintains a wide range of water resources facilities . the corps attracts congressional attention because its projects can have significant local and regional economic benefits and environmental effects , in addition to their water resource development purposes . additionally , in recent years riverine and coastal flooding resulted in the agency receiving supplemental funds . for more on the recent history of corps civil works supplemental appropriations , see crs report r42841 , army corps supplemental appropriations: recent history , trends , and policy issues , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] .