a brief summary of each is listed below . section 4 ( a ) raises the question of how agencies would provide the "maximum quantity of water supplies possible" to cvp and other contractors and , relatedly , how they would make such a determination consistent with laws and regulations . implementation of the provision could be difficult and possibly contentious . for example , while "take" limits under the federal or state endangered species acts may be possible to monitor , the effects of providing maximum water supplies on species survival and viability and water quality may not be apparent , quantifiable , or known for several years into the future . conversely , agencies and water users may not agree that particular actions are providing maximum water quantities . some observers already believe the agencies are maximizing water supplies to the detriment of species , while others believe the agencies are not doing enough and are advocating relaxation of some laws and regulations . some may respond that if the bill is enacted , agency actions specified under this section would be directed to maximize water supplies for contractors as a priority over other considerations ( eg , water quality or habitat conservation ) . in response to this concern , others might contend that other factors such as water quality and species needs are addressed in laws and regulations that would prevent harm . essentially , agencies would have to balance the new directives with parameters prescribed in existing law and regulations , thus making it difficult to estimate what effect the provision would have on projects , project operations , and the multiple interests that rely upon water supplies through project operations . projects or operations that would be authorized under this section are to provide maximum quantities of water by approving projects and operations to provide "additional water supplies as quickly as possible" ; however , there is no definition for additional water supplies in s. 2198 . the lack of specificity raises the question of whether the language is meant to apply to water supplies during parts of the year , the entire year , or several years . the broad variety of potential projects that could be authorized under this section is tempered by language stating that projects and actions must be consistent with applicable law . it appears that projects could be conducted throughout the state and not just limited to the cvp or swp service areas . projects and operational changes would have to be consistent with state and federal endangered species laws and regulations , as well as with the national environmental policy act ( nepa ; 42 u.s.c . ยง4321 , et seq .

 ) , california environmental quality act ( ceqa ) , and water quality laws and regulations , among other laws and regulations . this provision by itself raises the question of how the term "consistent with the law" might be interpreted as opposed to "pursuant to" or "in compliance with" applicable laws . some might question if the phrase "consistent with law" would allow for more agency discretion or flexibility than other phrases .