ch . 109a , and the production of child pornography . unlike the "travel with a purpose" prohibition , the violation of §2423 ( c ) is not complete until illicit sexual activity occurs . travel or reside : section 2423 ( c ) originally outlawed illicit sexual activity by a defendant who had travelled from the united states . although the travel and illicit sexual activity did not have to closely coincide , the section did not reach travel occurring prior to enactment even if the illicit sexual activity occurred thereafter . the section now provides a residential alternative to the travel element . a u.s. citizen who resides overseas and engages in illicit sexual activity violates §2423 ( c ) regardless of when he travelled abroad . there may be some doubt whether §2423 ( c ) covers overseas illicit sexual activity other than child prostitution . age of the victim : section 2423 ( g ) provides a limited affirmative defense to prosecution under §2423 ( c ) , where the defendant can prove by clear and convincing evidence that he reasonably believed that he was engaging in commercial sex with an adult . attempt , conspiracy , aiding and abetting : attempting to violate §2423 ( c ) or conspiring to do so subjects the offender to the same consequences as flow from the breach of the underlying offense . the same can be said of one who aids and abets commission of the underlying offense . conspiracy is complete once the corrupt agreement is joined ; no further step or overt act is required . attempt is complete when a substantial guilty step is taken . aiding and abetting is complete only when someone else has committed the underlying offense . consequences of convict i on : the consequences under §2423 ( c ) are the same as those under §2423 ( b ) : imprisonment for not more than 30 years ( not more than 60 years for repeat offenders ) ; a mandatory term of supervised release of not less than 5 years ; a fine of not more than $250,000 ( not more than $500,000 for an organization ) ; and unless indigent , to a special assessment of $5,000 . the offender may be ordered to pay restitution as well . property generated by the offense or used to facilitate its commission may be forfeited to the united states . section 2423 ( d ) creates a separate offense for a profiteer who arranges the travel outlawed in §2423 ( b ) or §2423 ( c ) : "whoever , for the purpose of commercial advantage or private financial gain , arranges , induces , procures , or facilitates the travel of a person knowing that such a person is traveling in interstate commerce or foreign commerce for the purpose of engaging in illicit sexual conduct shall be fined under this title , imprisoned not more than 30 years , or both.