non - practitioners ( i.e. pharmacists are prohibited from refilling prescriptions for schedule ii substances . pharmacists may fill or refill prescriptions for controlled substances in schedules iii and iv up to five times within six months after the date on which the prescription was issued , unless the prescribing practitioner authorizes a renewal of the prescription . furthermore , all practitioners are prohibited from hiring employees who have been convicted of a drug - related felony or who have had a dea registration denied or revoked . efforts to increase awareness and education about prescription drug abuse may focus on health care providers , patients , or the general public . although federal agencies do not generally regulate the practice of medicine , they may convene expert panels or encourage state - level activities to explore clinical decision support tools ( eg , electronic alerts or treatment guidelines ) . in conjunction with a rems specifically for extended - release and long - acting opioid analgesics , fda has published a "blueprint" for prescriber education and has established a searchable on - line repository for educational activities that comply with the rems . the rems also includes development of materials to educate patients when the prescription is written and when it is filled . samhsa offers reports , pamphlets , and continuing medical education about prescription drug abuse at no cost . in addition to federal efforts , state or local governments and private entities may also engage in awareness and education activities . several states have produced or sponsored public service announcements to raise public awareness of prescription drug abuse . the federation of state medical boards has published a model policy to encourage state medical boards to adopt guidelines for use of prescription pain relievers in treating chronic pain . prescription drug abuse may be prevented in some cases through choices in treatment of underlying conditions ( eg , pain ) , and it may be treated effectively through pharmacologic or non - pharmacologic interventions . new products may be developed for treating both underlying conditions and prescription drug abuse . decisions about how to treat underlying conditions ( eg , pain , adhd , or insomnia ) might be made with attention to minimizing the risk of prescription drug abuse . also , as required under the controlled substances act and dea regulations , registrants have several options for proper disposal of medication . congress may have an interest in monitoring the effectiveness of existing safe storage and disposal activities to determine whether additional legislative action ( eg , changes in authorizations or funding ) is warranted . for the purposes of ensuring the secure storage and distribution of controlled substances and listed chemicals , all applicants and registrants must generally "provide effective controls and procedures to guard against theft and diversion of controlled substances. dea regulations further require all applicants and registrants to substantially comply with specific security standards for storage of controlled substances ( and other specified chemicals ) . applicants and registrants must also be prepared to make adjustments to their security systems in the event that a controlled substance is transferred to another schedule or removed from control under the csa .