appendix a . complexity of the acquisition process until world war ii , the regulations and rules governing government contracting in general , and defense contracting in particular , were minimal . after world war ii , the growth in defense acquisition regulations was so rapid and uncoordinated that an office of federal procurement policy study from the late 1970s found that dod had 79 different offices issuing procurement regulations and that these offices had developed a procurement process that consisted of some 30,000 pages of regulations . concerned that the defense acquisitions process was overly complex and unwieldy , congress enacted the federal acquisition streamlining act of 1994 to overhaul the process . despite this act and other congressional and executive branch efforts , contracting with the federal government remains a highly regulated process governed by a myriad of statutes and regulations . these regulations govern such issues as how dod solicits , negotiates , and awards a contract ; what costs dod will reimburse and how contractors account for those costs ; the information systems used by contractors ; and how contractors must comply with such rules as combatting trafficking in persons , maintaining a drug - free workplace , and other public policy goals . factors contributing to the increased complexity of the acquisition system include past reform efforts , increased complexity of technology and weapon systems , and inclusion of public policy goals into the acquisition process . examples of regulations that reflect public policy goals include the requirement to purchase certain goods from domestic suppliers ( such as the berry amendment and buy american act ) , preferences for buying goods and services in afghanistan to support campaign objectives in theatre , requirements to take steps to combat trafficking in persons , set asides to promote small businesses and other entities perceived as disadvantaged , and the international traffic in arms regulations . in some instances , conflicts arise between obtaining the best value for the government and promoting public policy goals . some analysts debate the value of regulations requiring certain defense items to be manufactured domestically . others argue these requirements are necessary to ensure domestic sources of supply during war time . some analysts argue domestic sourcing regulations unnecessarily increase the cost to government , that the regulations could be implemented in a more cost - efficient manner , and that some items are on the list for protectionist reasons , not to preserve military capabilities . the complexity of the regulations can make it difficult for some companies to enter the government contracting arena . many analysts believe that the rules and regulations governing defense acquisitions need to be further streamlined and simplified in a manner that reduces the burden on private industry and controls the increase in costs while preserving sufficient oversight . appendix b . constantly changing acquisition rules some analysts believe that the successive reform efforts have discouraged some companies from seeking government contracts out of concern that the rules could be changed in the middle of the game .