new commemorative . periodically , congress authorizes a new memorial outside of the district of columbia . on these occasions , legislation is required to statutorily authorize a group — either federal or nonfederal — to design , construct , and maintain the memorial . for example , during the 107 th congress ( 2001-2002 ) , legislation was enacted to authorize a memorial at the crash site in shanksville , pa , for "a national memorial to commemorate the passengers and crew of flight 93 who , on september 11 , 2001 , courageously gave their lives thereby thwarting a planned attack on our nation's capital. during debate on the bill ( h.r . 3917 ) , representative william shuster summarized the importance of congress creating a national memorial and making it part of the national park service . as we debate this measure , in this most revered of halls , i cannot help but contemplate the possibility that flight 93 was headed to a target here in the nation's capitol — quite possibly right here to the capitol itself . we will , however , never know for sure where that doomed flight was headed . we will never know , because men and women , put love of country ahead of self preservation . these were not super heros [sic] , but individuals just like you and me . individuals with families and loved ones anxiously awaiting their return , who put aside their own desirers [sic] and stood up to combat terrorism and save countless lives... . the legislation before us today lays out a fair and balanced approach for construction of a memorial for these brave individuals . the legislation calls for the creation of the flight 93 advisory commission which would be composed of representatives from the families of victims , the local community , the state of pennsylvania and the united states government . the commission would then submit their recommendations to the secretary of the interior . in authorizing the flight 93 memorial , congress also created an advisory committee to make recommendations to the secretary of the interior and congress on the design , construction , and management of the memorial . creation of such a commission is not uncommon and can aid government agencies with the planning and execution of commemorations . official recognition of existing commemoratives . instead of authorizing the creation of a completely new memorial , congress has also considered legislation to recognize existing works as national monuments or memorials . enacting legislation to provide national recognition of a monument or memorial , but maintaining local operation and maintenance , generally requires no federal oversight or funds . for example , p.l . 113-132 designated a memorial in riverside , ca , as the "distinguished flying cross national memorial. the memorial honors military aviators who have received the "distinguished flying cross [which] is the oldest military award for aviation" with a national memorial , which does not already exist . commemorative commissions are entities established to oversee the commemoration of a person or event . these commissions typically coordinate celebrations , scholarly events , public gatherings , and other activities , often to coincide with a milestone anniversary .