, 4 tracks ) . in their meta - analysis of studies on year - round school found that the "cumulative results of past studies is so close to a chance outcome that the argument that poor designs have led to random findings remain plausible. they also note , however , that there is some evidence that suggests that year - round schools may improve academic achievement for economically disadvantaged students . a second aspect of year - round education that researchers have sought to examine is whether year - round schools affect the cost of education . based on a review of the literature conducted by the education commission of the states ( ecs ) , schools operating on multi - tracks experience reduced capital expenditures ( i.e. , facility costs ) , but do not tend to achieve savings with respect to operating expenditures ( eg , personnel costs , electricity ) . however , the savings from capital expenditures outweigh any increases in operating expenditures . it is less clear , however , whether schools operating on a single - track experience cost savings . a more recent study of year - round schools in one setting , clark county , nv , generally supports the conclusions noted by ecs , finding significant cost savings as a result of the implementation of multitrack year - round schools . the researchers concluded that savings were largest with respect to real estate and operations . based on reviews of the literature conducted by cooper et al. , wu and stone , and ecs , as well as arguments put forth by proponents of year - round education , including nayre , and opponents of year - round education , including the coalition for the traditional school year and summer matters , this section provides an overview of some of the arguments made in favor of or against year - round education . the use of year - round schools can prevent the loss of learning over the summer , which may be a particular problem for children with special educational needs ( eg , english learners ) and addresses the uneven effects of the summer break on students based on socioeconomic status . using a modified school calendar creates opportunities to provide remediation and enrichment activities to students during the school year rather than waiting to provide these activities during summer school . proponents of year - round education often argue that the use of a balanced calendar increases student achievement , but as previously discussed , the research in this area is inconclusive . there may be cost savings realized when operating multitrack year - round schools , particularly with respect to capital expenditures . the use of a balanced calendar could help to prevent staff burnout by providing more frequent breaks for staff . in addition , teachers could choose to substitute teach during breaks to earn additional money while providing students with a teacher with greater knowledge of the curriculum than a substitute teacher that did not regularly work at the school .