the relationship between the united states and malaysia is a complex one . bilateral ties are considerably closer than they may appear to some observers , but political sensitivities in malaysia as well as concerns related to allegations of corruption and mistrust lingering from less amicable periods constrain the establishment of a deeper strategic relationship . malaysia , a majority muslim nation of 31 million people , is a partner in numerous u.s. security and economic initiatives in southeast asia . among other important issues for malaysia in its relations with neighboring countries are managing relations with singapore , with which malaysia has a deep economic interdependency ; dealing with the sometimes - violent separatist insurgency in southern thailand , along thailand's borders with malaysia ; combatting piracy in the straits of malacca along with indonesia and singapore ; repelling philippine armed groups that claim parts of malaysian territory in sabah ; and managing immigration and migrant labor communities from burma , indonesia , and other neighbors . following mahathir's retirement as prime minister in 2003 , some of the barriers to warmer bilateral ties eased , although malaysia continues to oppose u.s. support for israel . on the other hand , dissatisfaction with government inefficiency and corruption could give the opposition enough popular support to improve its electoral standing . najib could be seen by some as a political liability for umno if the taint from 1mdb scandal lingers . corruption allegations against the prime minister add a layer of complexity to possible struggles for control of the party that remains malaysia's dominant political institution . some observers believe the nep's set of ethnic preferences also will be a key issue for malaysia in the years ahead . on one hand , the distribution of seats in favor of rural constituencies and the deference of the mainstream press to government narratives will continue to favor the umno - led coalition . although the nep has been given some credit in addressing malaysia's income disparities and maintaining peaceful relations among ethnic groups , it also has fostered resentment among malaysia's chinese and indian minorities . some analysts see the nep as a bedrock of the malaysian political economy and believe that any move strongly to scale back preferences for bumiputra would face deep opposition from many members of the malay ethnic majority . former prime minister mahathir long promoted a "vision 2020," which sought to make malaysia into a developed country by that year , and the 2020 goal has been taken up by subsequent umno - led governments . although malaysia's gdp has grown steadily in the last decade , several challenges remain . within southeast asia and worldwide , malaysia faces stiff competition from low - wage countries attempting to promote their manufacturing sectors and grow exports . some observers argue that the quality of the education system is not sufficient for development of a high - technology economy . many of malaysia's top students go abroad for higher education , or find work overseas after graduation . many of malaysia's challenges in the years ahead will mirror those of other southeast asian nations .