this design was included in the final three kaiser class oilers . production readiness the program office has largely kept to its construction schedule to date for the first ship , but a flooding incident at a nassco graving dock in july 2018 has affected the delivery of future ships . the program office stated that this incident has not affected current ship fabrication activities . however , the dock's unavailability while repairs are planned and implemented has disrupted the contractor's schedule for future ships . according to the program office , the incident has resulted in some delays to certain delivery dates for ships two through six . other program issues as part of the navy's plan to expand the fleet , the navy concluded that it would need an additional three lewis class ships . the navy's budget request for fiscal year 2019 increased its planned one - ship - per - year buy to two for fiscal years 2019 , 2021 , and 2023 . the congress provided appropriations for the additional fiscal year 2019 ship in support of the navy's request . to account for the additional ships in fiscal years 2019 and 2021 , the navy plans to add two more ships to the low - rate initial production phase . subsequently , program officials stated that they plan to compete a new contract for the remaining 12 ships using the construction knowledge gained from efforts under the existing contract . program office comments we provided a draft of this assessment to the program office for review and comment . the program office provided technical comments , which we incorporated where appropriate . the program office stated that it continues to follow gao shipbuilding best practices and has leveraged commercial vessel design practices to minimize risk . the program office also stated that it is currently revising its acquisition baseline to reflect the update in total quantities to 20 ships . in addition , the program office noted that , in fiscal year 2019 , it fully funded the third and fourth ships and funded advance procurement for the fifth ship . the navy also leveraged commercial vessel designs to minimize design and construction risks . the lewis class features a modern double - hull construction , an environmental - based design standard for commercial tankers , to ensure the ships can dock at ports - of - call . the navy had intended to use this system to deliver f - 35 lightning ii power modules . the navy subsequently decided to deliver these by air , which precluded any need for the heavy system . lead ship construction began in september 2018 with 95 percent of the ship's total design effort complete . program officials stated that this figure meant that 100 percent of the ship's basic and functional design were by then complete — an approach consistent with best practices . throughout detail design and now into construction , the navy has not changed the lewis class program's performance requirements . decisions that congress makes regarding the program could affect navy capabilities and funding requirements and the u.s. shipbuilding industrial base .