multifamily . the multifamily system created by the johnson - crapo gse reform proposal would have affordability requirements intended to increase the supply of affordable rental housing . each approved guarantor would ensure that at least 60% of the rental housing units in the mortgage loans that collateralize the fmic - guaranteed multifamily mbs would be affordable to low - income families at the time the mortgages were originated . the fmic may suspend or adjust the 60% level during a period of unusual and exigent market conditions , during adverse market conditions , or pursuant to a request made by an approved guarantor . comparison to the gses' three channels . the proposal would repeal the gses' affordable housing goals with the only remaining numerical target being the affordability requirement for multifamily . the 60% target is similar to the affordability levels currently provided for multifamily by the gses . the proposal does not have the same duty to serve requirement to "provide leadership to the market... for very low - , low - , and moderate - income families" in specific underserved markets . but the fmic does have as one of its listed purposes and principal duties to "facilitate the broad availability of mortgage credit. the fmic would also identify underserved market segments , which could be a broader group of segments than in the gses' duty to serve requirement , and would require certain approved entities to submit an annual report on the actions it has taken to provide credit to the underserved market segments . the proposal would keep in a modified form the housing trust fund and capital market fund , establish the market access fund , and increase the contributions to the funds to an average of 10 basis points ( from 4.2 basis points under current law ) . the funding would come from incentive based fees rather than the flat fee charged to the gses . although the average fee would be higher under the johnson - crapo reform proposal than under current law , the total amount of money allocated to the affordable housing funds would depend on the dollar volume of mortgages that would be guaranteed by the fmic . the home forward act would wind down fannie mae and freddie mac and would replace fhfa with a new agency , the national mortgage finance administration ( nmfa ) . the nmfa would be an independent agency charged with providing access to affordable mortgage credit and protecting taxpayers from absorbing losses . the nmfa would provide reinsurance and an explicit government guarantee on mbs issued by a new entity , the mortgage securities cooperative ( msc ) , using a common securitization platform . the nmfa would only pay out on its guarantee after a significant amount of private capital absorbed the first losses , including the capital held by the msc . in addition , the nmfa would regulate aspects of the mortgage market related to its guaranteed mbs and would establish a new multifamily housing finance system as well . the proposal also contains multiple provisions , some of which are described below , related to affordable housing . housing funds .