ยง635 et seq. ) a fy2015 continuing resolution ( ยง147 of p.l . 113-164 ) includes a provision extending ex - im bank's authority through june 30 , 2015 . ex - im bank previously was authorized through september 30 , 2014 ( p.l . the 114 th congress may debate whether to renew ex - im bank's authority and , if so , for how long and under what terms ; and if not , the possibility of other policy options . this report provides ( 1 ) a general background of ex - im bank ; ( 2 ) a discussion of the international context of the bank ; ( 3 ) analysis of key issues that congress may consider in a reauthorization debate ; and ( 4 ) the congressional outlook on ex - im bank . other crs resources on ex - im bank include crs report r43671 , export - import bank reauthorization: frequently asked questions , coordinated by [author name scrubbed] ; crs report if10017 , export - import bank ( ex - im bank ) reauthorization , by [author name scrubbed] ; and crs report if00039 , export - import ( ex - im ) bank and the federal budget ( in focus ) ( pdf ) , by [author name scrubbed] . on a demand - driven basis , ex - im bank seeks to provide financing ( 1 ) when the private sector is unwilling , or unable , to undertake alone such financing at commercially viable terms ; and / or ( 2 ) to meet foreign competition by countering government - backed financing offered by other countries to their companies . the rationales behind ex - im bank's activities are subject to congressional debate . as international trade has grown , trade finance has expanded . some 80% - 90% of world trade relies on trade finance , and the global market for trade finance is estimated to be at around $10 trillion a year . in addition to financing through government - backed ecas , the private sector also provides export financing , including through commercial backs , capital markets , lessors , and manufacturing self - financing . while the private sector is the leading source of export finance , ecas are considered in the trade finance community to play an important role in certain niches . most developed countries and many developing countries have ecas . an estimated 60 ecas exist worldwide . the relative attractiveness of seeking export financing through the private sector , ecas , or a combination of both can change depending on credit market conditions in the private sector , as well as how eca financing terms may change or respond to these market conditions . the role of ecas may be more prominent , in part , due to tight credit market conditions associated with the 2008-2009 international financial crisis and the regulatory impact of basel iii on commercial banks . private lenders and insurers conduct the majority of short - term export financing , though ecas may play an active role in supporting certain sectors , such as taking on risks of financing small business exports .