appendix a . states' current medicaid income eligibility levels the three major categories of non - elderly adults that would receive medicaid coverage under the aca medicaid expansion are adults without dependent children , parents with dependent children , and adults with disabilities . prior to the implementation of the aca medicaid expansion , only a few states provided medicaid coverage to adults without dependent children , and in general , the medicaid income eligibility level for parents and disabled adults was significantly lower than 133% of fpl ( i.e. , the aca medicaid expansion eligibility level ) . state - by - state medicaid income eligibility levels and private health insurance exchange eligibility for subsidized coverage for non - elderly adults without dependent children , parents with dependent children , and non - elderly adults with disabilities as of january 1 , 2014 are provided in figure a - 1 , figure a - 2 , and figure a - 3 ( respectively ) . these figures show the coverage gaps in states , which means individuals with incomes that fall in the coverage gap do not have access to full medicaid coverage or exchange subsidized coverage . states that have implemented the aca medicaid expansion do not have coverage gaps , while most states that have not implemented the expansion have coverage gaps for all three populations . figure a - 1 shows the coverage for adults without dependent children . most states that have implemented the aca medicaid expansion provide medicaid eligibility up to 133% of fpl ( effectively 138% of fpl with the 5% income disregard ) . of the states that have implemented the expansion , only the district of columbia and minnesota have higher income eligibility levels at 210% of fpl ( effectively 215% of fpl ) and 200% of fpl ( effectively 205% of fpl ) , respectively . except for wisconsin , the states that have not implemented the expansion do not have medicaid coverage for adults without dependent children . wisconsin provides medicaid coverage to adults without dependent children up to 95% of fpl ( effectively 100% of fpl ) . figure a - 2 shows the coverage for parents with dependent children . all states provide medicaid coverage to this population through the mandatory medicaid eligibility pathway of section 1931 coverage , which requires states to provide medicaid coverage for parents ( and their dependent children ) , at a minimum , at the aid to families with dependent children ( afdc ) eligibility levels in place on july 16 , 1996 . section 1931 of the social security act also gives states the option to cover parents with incomes above the 1996 minimum levels and most states do . under section 1931 coverage , parents receive traditional medicaid coverage . the income eligibility level for section 1931 coverage is less than 133% of fpl for most states . for states that have implemented the aca medicaid expansion and did not have medicaid coverage for parents up to 133% of fpl ( effectively 138% of fpl ) , parents with incomes above the pre - expansion level up to 133% of fpl ( effectively 138% of fpl ) receive coverage under the expansion rules ( eg , alternative benefit plan coverage ) .