outputs . policing outputs have been defined as the "concrete activities and services" produced by a law enforcement agency . quantifiable items such as investigations , arrests , convictions , the number of intelligence products disseminated , and the number of kilograms of cocaine seized can be seen as measurable law enforcement outputs . how many seizures or arrests have resulted from the increased access to information ? how has such access improved law enforcement's overall understanding of the threat posed by drug traffickers ? task forces impacting strategies . ideally , task forces somehow reflect the goals established in broad federal priorities or strategies . at one level , it is readily apparent how task forces relate to specific strategies . for example , a task force focusing on counternarcotics may appear inherently designed to support the southwest border counternarcotics strategy or the national drug control strategy . at another level , what is less clear is exactly how effectively a task force supports a given strategy . policy makers may consider , for instance , whether or not federal agencies involved in southwest border task forces and intelligence sharing centers should establish metrics for success that can evaluate not only output but outcome as well . while some metrics can be clearly delineated as output or outcome , others may be more difficult to categorize . why , might one ask , is it necessary to determine whether a given metric is truly a measure of output or an outcome , particularly at the task force level ? from a policy perspective , this may be an important distinction when aiming to evaluate the effectiveness of task forces in meeting the goals of specific strategies , particularly if the strategies themselves clearly establish outcomes and outputs . for example , how do one agency's task force activities affect the overarching goals of the national drug control strategy — the nation's plan to reduce ( 1 ) illicit drug consumption in the united states and ( 2 ) the consequences of such use ? ondcp has detailed initiatives in five broad policy areas , including disrupting domestic drug trafficking and production , aimed at achieving these two goals . moreover , ondcp has developed a performance reporting system ( prs ) , "a performance and assessment mechanism for gauging the effectiveness of this strategy . the prs is "designed to appraise the performance of the large and complex interagency federal effort set forth in the strategy , as required by ondcp's 2006 reauthorization act [p.l . these three measures may factor into a reduction in domestic drug trafficking and production ; however , it is not clearly articulated how changes in a specific measure , such as the number of cpot - linked organizations disrupted or dismantled , are indicative of changes in the drug trafficking and production threats . there appears to be an assumption that improved / enhanced output at the law enforcement level ( i.e. , an increase in cpot - linked disruptions ) is indicative of a reduction in the threat . this may or may not be true .