§§1801 et seq. ) governs the management and conservation of commercial and recreational fisheries in u.s. federal waters ( 3-200 nautical miles from shore ) . although the msfcma has been amended a least 30 times since it was enacted in 1976 , the act has retained many of its original elements . appendix c. acronyms acls – annual catch limits aff – asset forfeiture fund ams – accountability measures eez – exclusive economic zone esa – endangered species act fmp – fishery management plan ifqs – individual fishing quotas itqs – individual transferable quotas iuu – illegal , unreported , and unregulated lapps – limited access privilege programs msy – maximum sustainable yield nepa – national environmental policy act nrc – national research council oy – optimum yield rfmc – fishery management council rfmo – regional fishery management organization ssc – scientific and statistical committe . when fisheries were being developed fishermen often had flexibility to target different species or move to different areas if resource abundance decreased . as limits to natural production were reached and most fish stocks become fully or overexploited , regulations become more rigid and complex . fishery managers and fishermen have little or no control over natural production except to change fishing effort and associated fishing mortality . these regulatory efforts can increase fish population abundance and production in some fisheries , but with timing and outcomes that are often uncertain . in the agricultural sector , programs have been developed to help farmers manage financial risks caused by variations in the natural environment such as drought , floods , or disease . to some degree the well - being of producers , communities , lending institutions , and other input sectors are protected by programs such as crop insurance and other types of disaster relief . some have questioned whether similar programs are needed for the fishing industry , albeit with refinements that consider the unique nature of fisheries . many agree that more resources for data collection and stock assessments are needed to improve the understanding of marine ecosystems and marine populations . they reason that through more precise information and by reducing the risk of overfishing , the need for precautionary measures could be lessened and fishing could be increased while remaining within biological limits . however , the benefits associated with marginal improvements in information will decrease with increasing investments in this area . at some point the costs associated with collecting more information become greater than the associated benefits . regardless of how much data , assessments , and management are improved , constraints to fishing associated with limits to natural production and unpredictable variations in the natural environment will still occur . managers must also contend with environmental factors over which they have no control such as climate change and the loss and degradation of fish habitat . environmental degradation reduces the resiliency of marine and coastal ecosystems and the productivity of marine resources . it also decreases or shifts the geographic range and size of marine populations such as fish and protected species ( marine mammals and endangered species ) . managers are challenged to find ways to maintain the productivity and health of marine systems and associated populations while minimizing constraints on a variety of economic activities .