however , the estates of nonresident aliens are taxed differently . this report will focus on the estate tax rules for this particular group of taxpayers . the result is the decedent's estate tax which , after the reduction for certain allowable credits , is the amount of tax paid by the estate . the federal gift tax is a tax imposed on an annual basis on all gratuitous transfers of property made during life . the tax seeks to account for transfers of property that would otherwise reduce the estate and accordingly estate tax liability at death . the donor's tax liability on the gift depends upon the value of the "taxable gift. the deduction is available for gifts to a u.s. government entity for exclusively public purposes ; a u.s. corporation organized exclusively for religious , charitable , scientific , literary , or educational purposes ; or a charitable trust that uses the gift for its charitable purposes within the united states , certain u.s. fraternal societies , and u.s. war veterans' organizations . a nonresident alien donor follows the same guidelines for determining gift tax liability as citizen / resident alien donors . an individual who is present in the united states on a nonimmigrant visa can be considered a resident for estate and gift tax purposes if the individual wants to permanently remain in the united states even though the visa does not allow permanent residence . because the determination of a person's "domicile" relies upon the intent of an individual , a bright - line test to determine if an individual is a resident for federal estate and gift tax purposes is not available . therefore , the courts consider the following factors in making such a determination: visas , work permits , location of business and property interests , family immigration history , residential property , individual testimony , motivation , duration of stays in the united states , and community group affiliations . the federal estate tax is a tax on the estate of a decedent , levied against and paid by the estate . the determination of federal estate tax liability involves a series of adjustments and modifications of a tax base known as the "gross estate. certain allowable deductions reduce the gross estate to the "taxable estate. then , the total of all lifetime taxable gifts made by the decedent is added to the taxable estate before tax rates are applied . the taxable gift is determined by reducing the gross value of the gift by the available deductions and exclusions . the gift tax liability created on the basis of the donor's taxable gifts may be reduced by the available unified transfer tax credit . nonresident aliens are subject to the federal gift tax only on gifts of their interest in u.s. real estate and tangible personal property situated in the united states . generally , gifts of intangible property , regardless of the location of the property , made by a nonresident alien are not subject to the federal gift tax . citizen , resident alien , and nonresident alien donors calculate gift tax liability by first determining the amount of the taxable gift .