a few things should be noted about this provision . first , the "shall" language removes discretion from the judge ; if the judge finds the government has made the required certification , he must issue the order . second , while the court must ensure that the government has made the proper certification , ecpa does not require an "independent judicial inquiry into the veracity of the attested facts. this means that the judge will not make an independent assessment whether the relevancy standard has been met , but only that the government has made the proper certification . one district court has noted that "the extremely limited judicial review required by [the pen register statute] is intended merely to safeguard against purely random use of this device. one magistrate judge went so far as to describe his role under the pen register statute as a "rubber stamp" limited to "proofreading errors," and that "without independent judicial review , the authorization of pen registers is subject to misuse and abuse. third , the relevancy standard , which again the government , and not the court , determines if it has been met , is a "far from burdensome" legal standard . the supreme court has held , at least in the subpoena context , that information sought is not relevant only if "there is no reasonable possibility that the category of materials the government seeks will produce information relevant to the general subject" of the investigation . another possibility is for congress to act . in light of this relatively lax standard , several prominent commentators on privacy and technology have suggested that congress should increase the evidentiary threshold under section 3123 from mere relevance to at least a reasonable suspicion standard similar to that used for accessing certain stored communications . also included in ecpa is the stored communications act ( sca ) , in which congress provided varying degrees of protection to information historically subject to the third - party doctrine and , thus , outside the reach of the fourth amendment . § 2703 ( c ) , service providers must hand over "records or other information pertaining to a subscriber" so long as the government can establish "specific and articulable facts" that the records are "relevant and material" to an ongoing criminal investigation . this is akin to the terry reasonable suspicion standard — it is lower than probable cause but does require the government to articulate its basis to believe that the information is connected to criminal activity . congress provided statutory protection for telephone toll records in the pen register / trap and trace statute ; for internet metadata in the stored communications act ; and for video customer records in the video privacy protection act . it could enact similar protection for other subject areas where non - content information is shared with companies as a necessary part of doing business . this standard has been applied to data such as the to / from address line in an email or the ip addresses of websites a person has visited . some courts have construed section 2703 ( d ) in conjunction with the pen register statute to allow the government access to cell site location information .